Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume XIX, South Asia (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1996)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1961-63v19).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

South Asia (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume XIX)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963

Volume XIX

South Asia

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 30, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

South Asia (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume XIX)Contents

Preface

List of Sources

List of Abbreviations

List of Persons

South Asia (Documents 1-351)

Index

Preface Preface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The series documents the facts and events that contributed to the formulation of policies and includes evidence of supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.

The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. This documentary editing proceeds in full accord with the generally accepted standards of historical scholarship. Official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series were first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.

A new statutory charter for the preparation of the series was established by Public Law 102-138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by President George Bush on October 28, 1991. Section 198 of P.L. 102-138 added a new Title IV to the Department of State's Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 USC 4351, et seq.).

The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the series should include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government, including facts that contributed to the formulation of policies and records that provided supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.

The statute confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purposes of concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded.

The editor of this volume, which was compiled in 1992, is convinced that it meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selection and editing. Although this volume records policies and events of more than 30 years ago, the statute of October 28, 1991, allows the Department until 1996 to reach the 30-year line in the publication of the series.

Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series

This volume is part of a subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the 3 years (1961-1963) of the administration of John F. Kennedy. The subseries presents in 25 print volumes and 5 microfiche supplements a documentary record of major foreign policy decisions and actions of President Kennedy's administration. The record of U.S. foreign policy with respect to South Asia from January 1961 through December 1963 comprises one print volume.

Sources for the Foreign Relations Series

The Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation on major foreign policy decisions and actions of the U.S. Government. It further requires that government agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. The editor believes that in terms of access this volume was prepared in accordance with the standards and mandates of this statute, although access to some records was restricted, as noted below.

The editor had complete access to all the retired records and papers of the Department of State: the central files of the Department; the special decentralized files (“lot files”) of the Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the Department's Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of international conferences and high-level official visits, correspondence with foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and memoranda of conversations between the President and Secretary of State and foreign officials; and the files of overseas diplomatic posts. Certain intelligence-related files maintained in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research became available to the Department historians only after this volume was compiled. Arrangements have been made for Department historians to have access to these records for future volumes.

The editors of the Foreign Relations series also have full access to the papers of President Kennedy and other White House foreign policy records. Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Presidential libraries include some of the most significant foreign affairs-related documentation from other federal agencies including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. All of this documentation has been made available for use in the Foreign Relations series thanks to the consent of these agencies and the cooperation and support of the National Archives and Records Administration.

Department of State historians also have access to records of the Department of Defense, particularly the records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretaries of Defense and their major assistants, and to material at the National Defense University, particularly the Maxwell Taylor Papers and the Lyman Lemnitzer Papers.

Since 1991, the Central Intelligence Agency has provided steadily expanding access to Department historians to high-level intelligence documents from those records still in the custody of that Agency. Department of State historians' access is arranged by the History Staff of the Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency. Department of State and CIA historians continue to work out the procedural and scholarly aspects of the access. The editor determined that the publication of this volume should not be postponed because of the possible discovery of additional important documentation at the Central Intelligence Agency. If such documentation is found by Department of State historians, it will be included in a subsequent Foreign Relations volume.

The List of Sources, pages XIII-XVIII, lists the particular files and collections consulted and cited in this volume.

Principles of Document Selection for the Foreign Relations Series

In preparing each volume of the Foreign Relations series, the editors are guided by some general principles for the selection of documents. Each editor, in consultation with the General Editor and other senior editors, determines the particular issues and topics to be documented either in detail, in brief, or in summary. Some general decisions are also made regarding issues that cannot be documented in the volume but will be addressed in a microfiche supplement or in bibliographical notes.

The following general selection criteria are used in preparing volumes in the Foreign Relations series. Individual compiler-editors vary these criteria in accordance with the particular issues and the available documentation. The compiler-editors also tend to apply these selection criteria in accordance with their own interpretation of the generally accepted standards of scholarship. In selecting documentation for publication, the editors gave priority to unpublished classified records, rather than previously published records (which are accounted for in appropriate bibliographical notes).

Selection Criteria (in general order of priority): 1. Major foreign affairs commitments made on behalf of the United States to other governments, including those that define or identify the principal foreign affairs interests of the United States;

2. Major foreign affairs issues, commitments, negotiations, and activities, whether or not major decisions were made, and including dissenting or alternative opinions to the process ultimately adopted;

3. The decisions, discussions, actions, and considerations of the President, as the official constitutionally responsible for the direction of foreign policy;

4. The discussions and actions of the National Security Council, the Cabinet, and special Presidential policy groups, including the policy options brought before these bodies or their individual members;

5. The policy options adopted by or considered by the Secretary of State and the most important actions taken to implement Presidential decisions or policies;

6. Diplomatic negotiations and conferences, official correspondence, and other exchanges between U.S. representatives and those of other governments that demonstrate the main lines of policy implementation on major issues;

7. Important elements of information that attended Presidential decisions and policy recommendations of the Secretary of State;

8. Major foreign affairs decisions, negotiations, and commitments undertaken on behalf of the United States by government officials and representatives in other agencies in the foreign affairs community or other branches of government made without the involvement (or even knowledge) of the White House or the Department of State;

9. The main policy lines of intelligence activities if they constituted major aspects of U.S. foreign policy toward a nation or region or if they provided key information in the formulation of major U.S. policies;

10. The role of the Congress in the preparation and execution of particular foreign policies or foreign affairs actions;

11. Economic aspects of foreign policy;

12. The main policy lines of U.S. military and economic assistance as well as other types of assistance;

13. The political-military recommendations, decisions, and activities of the military establishment and major regional military commands as they bear upon the formulation or execution of major U.S. foreign policies;

14. Documentation that illuminates special decisionmaking processes that accomplished the policies recorded in particular volumes;

15. Diplomatic appointments that reflect major policies or affect policy changes.

Scope and Focus of Documents Researched and Selected for Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, Volume XIX

The volume focuses upon the Kennedy administration's efforts to reorient U.S. policy with respect to South Asia by improving relations with India while maintaining the established alliance relationship with Pakistan. It includes documentation on the impact of the Kashmir dispute between India and Pakistan, the Indian invasion of Portuguese Goa, and the impact of the Pushtunistan dispute between Pakistan and Afghanistan. It documents U.S. efforts to counter Soviet influence in Afghanistan and India, as well as the attempt to take advantage of the border war between India and China that developed in 1962 in order to forge a closer relationship between the United States and India. In general, the emphasis is on political developments, but documents are included on significant economic concerns, including the use of developmental economic assistance as an important element in the revised policy approach to South Asia. The primary issues, interests, and factors in U.S. policy toward South Asia during this period were often interwoven and affected each other subtly or in clear linkages. The editor determined that a chronological compilation offered a more accurate, comprehensible, and economical presentation of the relevant documentation than a division of the official record according to bilateral relations with particular governments.

In selecting documents to be included in the volume, the editor gave primary consideration to the formulation of policy within the U.S. Government, with emphasis on the highest level at which policy on a particular subject was determined. The issues involved also generated numerous high-level exchanges with foreign governments, which are documented insofar as possible. Space constraints precluded any attempt at full documentation of internal developments in South Asia, but the editor included a selection of Embassy reportage and intelligence estimates, with emphasis on documents that were seen by high-level policymakers.

President Kennedy made the major foreign policy decisions during his Presidency, and the editor has attempted to document his role as much as possible. White House and National Security Council staff members played an expanded role in overseeing the traditional national security affairs agencies and providing Kennedy with additional information, and that increased role is reflected in this volume, as in others for this period. The Department of State was responsible for the implementation of policy, and Department officials were involved in the genesis of most policy decisions. The documentation selected for the volume reflects that central role.

The policymaking process under President Kennedy was much less structured and formal than that under President Eisenhower, and the documentation differs accordingly. Formal approved policy papers were rare, and internal discussions between Kennedy and his advisers were not always recorded, especially in the early months of 1961. Sometimes the only available record of a Presidential decision is a Department of State telegram transmitting instructions to overseas posts, which states that the instructions represent a decision reached at a White House meeting or by “highest authority.” Insofar as possible, the editor has sought to document such decisions by drawing upon whatever records are available.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time or, in the case of conferences, in the order of individual meetings. Incoming telegrams from U.S. Missions are placed according to time of receipt in the Department of State or other receiving agency, rather than the time of transmission; memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents in the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the source text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the source text are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the source text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume.

Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after declassification review (in italic type). The amount of material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source text that were omitted. Entire documents withheld for security reasons have been accounted for and are listed by headings, source notes, and number of pages not declassified in their chronological place. The amount of material omitted from this volume because it was unrelated to the subject of the volume, however, has not been delineated. All brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes.

An unnumbered source note to each document indicates the document's source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. This note also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates if the President or his major policy advisers read the document. Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published, and this information has been included in the source footnote.

Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts have been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record.

Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation

The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established under the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the preparation and declassification of the series. Although the Advisory Committee does not attempt to review the contents of individual volumes, it does monitor the overall process and makes recommendations on particular problems that come to its attention.

Declassification Review

The final declassification review of this volume, completed in 1994, resulted in the decision to withhold 2.6 percent of the documentation originally selected; 12 documents were not declassified. Eleven documents were withheld by the Indian Government and one document relating to intelligence matters was denied. The remaining documents provide an account of the major foreign policy issues confronting and the policies undertaken by the U.S. Government concerning South Asia during this period.

The Division of Historical Documents Review of the Office of Freedom of Information, Privacy, and Classification Review, Bureau of Administration, Department of State, conducted the declassification review of the documents published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12356 on National Security Information, which was superseded by Executive Order 29528 on April 20, 1995, and applicable laws.

Under Executive Order 12356, information that concerns one or more of the following categories, and the disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause damage to the national security, requires classification: 1) military plans, weapons, or operations;

2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects, or plans relating to the national security;

3) foreign government information;

4) intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence sources or methods;

5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States;

6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national security;

7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities;

8) cryptology; or

9) a confidential source.

The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security as embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific documents of those governments.

Acknowledgements

The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the John F. Kennedy Library, in particular Suzanne Forbes; the National Archives and Records Administration; and other specialized repositories who assisted in the collection of documents for this volume. Kevin Ruffner of the Central Intelligence Agency History Staff assisted in arranging access to that agency's materials. Officials at the Department of Defense, especially Sandra Meagher, and officials at the National Defense University also deserve special thanks.

Louis J. Smith collected, selected, and edited the material presented in this volume under the supervision of General Editor Glenn W. LaFantasie. Nina J. Noring planned the volume, and Harriet Dashiell Schwar conducted the initial review. Gabrielle S. Mallon prepared the lists of sources, persons, and abbreviations. Deb Godfrey and Rita M. Baker did the copy and technical editing and Barbara-Ann Bacon of the Publishing Services Division oversaw the production of the volume. Max Franke prepared the index.

William Z. Slany
The Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

May 1996

List of Sources List of Sources

Unpublished Sources

Department of State Decimal Central Files. Through January 1963, the Department of State continued to use the decimal central file system familiar to users of previous volumes of the Foreign Relations series. The following files were most useful in compiling this volume for the period through January 1963: 123 Bowles, Chester: Bowles visits to South Asia

123 Harriman, W. Averell: Harriman visits to South Asia

123 Merchant, Livingston: Merchant visit to South Asia

120.1590: Special missions to South Asia

120.1591: Special missions to India

602.8990D: Transit dispute between Afghanistan and Pakistan

611.89: U.S. relations with Afghanistan

611.90D: U.S. relations with Pakistan

611.91: U.S. relations with India

689.90D: Relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan

690D.91: Relations between Pakistan and India

690D.91322: Relations between Pakistan and India concerning Indus waters issues

691.93: Relations between India and China

711.11-KE: President Kennedy's correspondence

753D.00: Portuguese India

790D.00: Political affairs and conditions in Pakistan

790D.5-MSP: Mutual security program in Pakistan

790D.11: President of Pakistan

790D.5612: Pakistan air ordnance

790D.5622: Pakistan aircraft

791.00: Political affairs and conditions in India

791.5: Indian military affairs

791.5-MSP: Mutual security program in India

791.13: Indian cabinet

791.56: Military equipment and supplies for India

791.5622: Indian air defense issues

889.00: Economic affairs and conditions in Afghanistan

890D.00: Economic affairs and conditions in Pakistan

891.00: Economic affairs and conditions in India

891.331: Bokaro steel mill issue

Subject-Numeric Central Files. In February 1963, the Department adopted a subject-numeric central file system. The following files for the period February through December 1963 were most useful in compiling this volume: DEF 1-4 INDIA: Indian air defense

DEF 7 INDIA-US: U.S. military visits and missions to India

DEF 12 INDIA: Military equipment and supplies for India

DEF 19 US-INDIA and DEF 19-3 US-INDIA: Military assistance to India

DEF 19-3 US-PAK: Military assistance to Pakistan

INCO IRON-INDIA: Bokaro steel mill issue

ORG 7 JCS: Visits abroad by the Joint Chiefs of Staff

POL AFG-PAK: Relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan

POL PAK-US: Relations between Pakistan and the U.S.

POL 7 INDIA: Visits by and meetings with Indian officials

POL 7 US/BALL: George Ball's visit to South Asia

POL 15 AFG: Afghan government

POL 15-1 AFG: Afghan head of state/executive branch

POL 15-1 US/JOHNSON: President Johnson's correspondence

POL 15-1 US/KENNEDY: President Kennedy's correspondence

POL 27 CHICOM-INDIA: Military conflict between China and India

POL 32-1 AFG-PAK: Border dispute between Afghanistan and Pakistan

POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK: Border dispute between India and Pakistan

POL 33-1 INDIA PAK/INDUS: Relations between India and Pakistan concerning Indus waters issues

Lot Files. Documents from the central files have been supplemented by lot files of the Department, which are decentralized files created by operating areas. A list of the principal lot files cited in this volume follows: Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366 Collection of documentation on official visits by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States and on major international conferences attended by the Secretary of State, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat

Confererence Files: Lot 66 D 110 Collection of documentation on international conferences abroad attended by the President, the Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials, May 1961-December 1964, as maintained by the Executuve Secretariat

NEA/INC Files: Lot 66 D 415 Miscellaneous Kashmir file for the years 1952-1964, as maintained by India, Nepal, and Ceylon Affairs, Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

NEA/INC Files: Lot 67 D 68 India political files for the year 1963, as maintained by India, Nepal, and Ceylon Affairs, Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

NEA/INC Files: Lot 67 D 71 India political files for the year 1962, as maintained by India, Nepal, and Ceylon Affairs, Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

NEA/SOA Files: Lot 64 D 240 India political files for the year 1961, as maintained by India, Nepal, and Ceylon Affairs, Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

NEA/SOA Files: Lot 64 D 566 Pakistan political files for the year 1961, as maintained by Afghanistan-Pakistan Affairs, Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

NEA/SOA Files: Lot 64 D 571 Pakistan political files for the year 1962, as maintained by Afghanistan-Pakistan Affairs, Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

NEA/SOA Files: Lot 66 D 7 Office Director files for Afghanistan, Ceylon, India, Nepal, and Pakistan for 1961, Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

NEA/SOA/E Files: Lot 65 D 115 Economic papers for India for the year 1961, as maintained by Economic Affairs, Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204 Exchanges of correspondence between the President and Secretary of State and heads of foreign governments and foreign ministers for the years 1953-1964, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat

Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 476 Correspondence of the President with various heads of state for the years 1961-1966, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat

Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149 Memoranda of Presidential conversations with foreign visitors, 1956-1964, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat

Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192 Files of Secretary of State Dean Rusk, 1961-1969, including texts of speeches and public statements, miscellaneous correspondence files, White House correspondence, chronological files, and memoranda of telephone conversations

Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330 Memoranda of the Secretary's and Under Secretary's conversations for the years 1961-1964, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat

Secretary's Staff Meetings: Lot 66 D 147 Records of the Secretary of State's Staff Meetings, 1961-1963, and additional ad hoc meetings, reports, papers, and memoranda of Chester Bowles' telephone conversations

S/P Files: Lot 67 D 548 Subject files, country files, chronological files, documents, drafts, and related correspondence of the Policy Planning Staff, Department of State, for the years 1957-1961

S/S Files: Lot 67 D 396 Master file of documents entitled Guidelines for Policy and Operations which were promulgated from November 1961 to May 1966, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat

S/S-NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351 Serial master file of National Security Council documents and correspondence, and related Department of State memoranda for the years 1947-1966, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat

S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265 Master set of papers pertaining to National Security Council meetings, including policy papers, position papers, administrative documents, but not minutes of the meetings themselves, for 1961-1966, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat

S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316 Master file of National Security Action Memoranda (NSAMs), 1961-1968, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat

S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95 Administrative and miscellaneous National Security Council files, including NSC Records of Action, for the years 1947-1963, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat

Central Intelligence Agency Files of John A. McCone, 1962-1965

National Intelligence Estimates Files

Lyndon B. Johnson Library, Austin, Texas Papers of President Lyndon B. Johnson, National Security File Country File: Afghanistan, India, Pakistan

International Meetings and Travel File

Rusk Appointment Book

Vice Presidential Security File

John F. Kennedy Library, Boston, Massachusetts Papers of President John F. Kennedy, National Security Files Countries Series: Afghanistan, India, Kashmir, Pakistan

Chester V. Clifton Series

Departments and Agencies Series: AID, CIA, JCS

Meetings and Memoranda Series: National Security Council Meetings, Standing Group Meetings, Staff Memoranda, NSAMs

Regional Security Series: South Asia

Trips and Conference Series

Papers of President John F. Kennedy, President's Appointment Books

Papers of President John F. Kennedy, President's Office Files Countries: Afghanistan, India, Pakistan

Special Correspondence

Staff Memoranda

Papers of George W. Ball

Papers of Harlan Cleveland

Papers of Roger Hilsman

Papers of Arthur Schlesinger, Jr.

Papers of Theodore C. Sorensen

Washington National Records Center, Suitland, Maryland Record Group 84, Records of Foreign Service Posts of the United States Karachi Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 1814 Classified files of the Embassy in Karachi, 1962-1964, formerly Lot 67 F 74

Record Group 330, Records of the Office of the Secretary of Defense OASD/ISA Files: FRC 64 A 2382 General and country files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs for 1961

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501 General and country files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs for 1962

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 67 A 4564 General and country files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs for 1963

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926 Top Secret and sensitive material of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1961-1964

OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464 Records of the Secretary of Defense, the Deputy Secretary, and their Special Assist-ants, 1961

OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542 Files of the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense and their Special Assistants for 1962

OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131 Official records of the Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and Special Assistant to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary for 1963

National Defense University, Fort McNair Lemnitzer Papers Papers of General Lyman L. Lemnitzer, Chief of Staff of the Army, 1959-1960; Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1960-1962

Taylor Papers Papers of General Maxwell D. Taylor, Chief of Staff of the Army, 1955-1959; President's Military Representative, 1961-1962; Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1962-1964

Published Sources

U.S. Government Documentary Collections U.S. Department of State. Department of State Bulletin, 1961-1963 (Volumes XLIV-XLIX). Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1961-1964

————. American Foreign Policy, Current Documents, 1961-1963. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1965-1967

U.S. National Archives and Records Administration, Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961-1963. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1962-1964

————. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963-64. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1965

Published Sources

Galbraith, John Kenneth. Ambassador's Journal. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1969

Gopal, Sarvepalli. Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography. London: Jonathan Cape, 1984

List of Abbreviations List of Abbreviations

AEC, Atomic Energy Commission

Af, Afghanistan

AFI, Office of Inter-African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AID, Agency for International Development

Amb, Ambassador

ASW, anti-submarine warfare

B/FAC, Office of the Deputy Coordinator for Foreign Assistance, Office of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs

BNA, Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

CENTO, Central Treaty Organization

Chicom, Chinese Communist(s)

CHMAAG, Chief, Military Assistance Advisory Group

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

CINCEUR, Commander in Chief, Europe

CONUS, Continental United States

CPI, Communist Party of India

CRO, Commonwealth Relations Office

DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission

DefMin, Defense Minister

del, delegation

Deptel, Department of State telegram

DLF, Development Loan Fund

DOD, Department of Defense

Embtel, Embassy telegram

EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EUR/WE, Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

FE, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

FE/EA, Office of East Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

FinMin, Finance Minister

FonSec, Foreign Secretary

FRC, Federal Records Center

FY, fiscal year

FYI, for your information

GER, Office of German Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

GNP, Gross National Product

GOA, Government of Afghanistan

GOI, Government of India

GOP, Government of Pakistan

govt, government

G/PM, Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs

GTI, Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State

HICOM, High Commissioner

IAF, Indian Air Force

IBRD, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank)

ICA, International Cooperation Administration

Icato, series indicator for telegrams from the International Cooperation Administration to its offices in the field

ICC, International Control Commission

IDA, International Development Association

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

IO, Indian Ocean; also, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

ISA/NESA, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Near East and South Asia Region

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

L, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

M, Office of the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

MAAG, Military Assistance Advisory Group

MAP, Military Assistance Program

MEA, Minister of External Affairs

memcon, memorandum of conversation

MIG, A.I. Mikoyan i M.I. Gurevich (Soviet fighter aircraft named for designers Mikoyan and Gurevich

mil, military

Min, Ministry

MNA, Member of the National Assembly (Pakistan)

MP, Member of Parliament

MSP, Mutual Security Program

NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NEA, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State

NEA/NR, Office of Near Eastern, South Asian Regional Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State

NEA/SOA, Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State

NEFA, Northeast Frontier Agency

Niact, night action, immediate reply

NIE, National Intelligence Estimate

NR, Office of Near Eastern, South Asian Regional Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State

NSA, National Security Agency

NSAM, National Security Action Memorandum

NSC, National Security Council

OASD/ISA, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

OCJCS, Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Pak, Pakistan

P.L., Public Law

pol, political

PriMin, Prime Minister

R & D, research and development

RAF, Royal Air Force

Reps, representatives

RG, Record Group

RGA, Royal Government of Afghanistan

RPM, Office of Atlantic Political and Military Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

SC, Security Council

SEATO, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization

SecDef, Secretary of Defense

Secto, series indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State or his party to the Department of State

SNIE, Special National Intelligence Estimate

SOA, Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State

Sov, Soviet(s); also Office of Soviet Union Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department of State

Tosec, series indicator for telegrams from the Department of State to the Secretary of State or his party

UAR, United Arab Republic

UK, United Kingdom

UN, United Nations

UNCIP, United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan

UNICEF, United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund

UNP, Office of United Nations Political Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

U/PR, Office of the Chief of Protocol, Department of State

urtel, your telegram

USAF, United States Air Force

USG, United States Government

USIA, United States Information Agency

USIB, United States Intelligence Board

USIS, United States Information Service

USMSMI, United States Military Supply Mission to India

USOM, United States Operations Mission

USRO, United States Mission to European Regional Organizations

USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

USUN, United States Mission to the United Nations

VOA, Voice of America

List of Persons List of Persons

Ahmed, Aziz, Ambassador of Pakistan to the United States until August 1963; thereafter Secretary of the Foreign Ministry

Ahmed, Ghulam, Secretary of the Planning Commission, Government of Pakistan, until August 1963; thereafter Ambassador to the United States

Ali, Mohammed, Foreign Minister of Pakistan, June 1962-January 1963

Aram, Abbas, Foreign Minister of Iran

Ayub Khan, Mohammed, President of Pakistan and Minister of Defense

Ball, George W., Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, February-December 1961; thereafter Under Secretary of State

Battle, Lucius D., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State and Executive Secretary until May 1962

Bell, David E., Director of the Bureau of the Budget, January 1961-December 1962; thereafter Administrator of the Agency for International Development

Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali, Minister for Industries, Natural Resources and Works of Pakistan until January 1963; Foreign Minister from February 1963

Black, Eugene, President of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank)

Bowles, Chester B., Under Secretary of State, January-December 1961; Special Represent-ative and Adviser on African, Asian, and Latin American Affairs, December 1961-May 1963; Ambassador to India from July 1963

Brubeck, William H., Deputy Executive Secretary of the Department of State, August 1961-May 1962; Special Assistant to the Secretary of State and Executive Secretary, May 1962-July 1963; thereafter Member of the National Security Council Staff

Bundy, McGeorge, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Bundy, William P., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs until November 1963; thereafter Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Byroade, Henry A., Ambassador to Afghanistan until January 1962

Cameron, Turner C., Jr., Director, Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State, from April 1962

Chagla, Mohammed Ali Currim, Indian Ambassador to the United States until June 1961

Chavan, Yeshwantrao B., Defense Minister of India from November 1962

Chayes, Abram J., Legal Adviser of the Department of State from February 1961

Cleveland, J. Harlan, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs from February 1961

Clifton, Brigadier General Chester V., USA, Military Aide to the President

Dungan, Ralph A., Special Assistant to the President

Daud, Sarder Mohammed, Prime Minister of Afghanistan until March 1963

Dayal, Rajeshwar, High Commissioner of India in Pakistan after May 1961

Dehlavi, S. K., Foreign Secretary of the Foreign Ministry of Pakistan until August 1963

Desai, M. J., Foreign Secretary of the Ministry of External Affairs of India after April 1961

Desai, Morarji, Minister of Finance of India until August 1963

Etemadi, Nur Ahmed, Director General of the Political Division of the Foreign Ministry of Afghanistan until March 1963; thereafter Deputy Foreign Minister

Galbraith, J. Kenneth, Ambassador to India, March 1961-July 1963

Gaud, William S., Assistant Administrator, Bureau for Near East and South Asia, Agency for International Development, from November 1961

Gilpatric, Roswell L., Deputy Secretary of Defense from January 1961

Gore-Booth, Sir Paul Henry, British High Commissioner in India

Grant, James P., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs from January 1962

Hamilton, Fowler, Administrator of the Agency for International Development, September 1961-December 1962

Harriman, W. Averell, Ambassador at Large, February-December 1961; Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, December 1961-April 1963; thereafter Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Hilaly, Aghampuakha, High Commissioner of Pakistan in India

Hilsman, Roger, Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research until April 1963; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Home, Lord (Alexander Frederick Douglas), Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom until October 1963

Hughes, Thomas L., Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, until April 1963; thereafter Director

James, Sir Morrice, British High Commissioner in Pakistan

Johnson, Lyndon B., Vice President of the United States, January 1961-November 22, 1963; thereafter President

Johnson, U. Alexis, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs from April 1961

Jones, G. Lewis, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs until April 1961

Kaul, General B. M., Chief of the General Staff of the Indian Army

Kaysen, Carl, Member of the National Security Council Staff, June-December 1961; thereafter Deputy Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Kelly, Major General John, USA, Chief of the U.S. Military Supply Mission to India

Kennedy, John F., President of the United States, January 1961-November 22, 1963

Komer, Robert W., Member of the National Security Council Staff from January 1961

Krishna Menon. See Menon, V.K. Krishna.

Krishnamachari, T. T., Minister of Economic and Defense Coordination of India from November 1962

Laise, Carol C., Deputy Director, Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State, from June 1962

Macmillan, Harold, British Prime Minister until October 1963

Maiwandwal, Mohammed Hashim, Afghan Ambassador to the United States until June 1963

Majid, Abdul, Afghan Ambassador to the United States from August 1963

McCone, John A., Director of Central Intelligence from November 1961

McConaughy, Walter P., Ambassador to Pakistan from March 1962

McGhee, George C., Counselor of the Department of State and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council, February-December 1961; Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, December 1961-March 1963

McNamara, Robert S., Secretary of Defense from January 1961

Menon, V. K. Krishna, Minister of Defense of India until November 1962

Merchant, Livingston T., Ambassador to Canada; President's Personal Envoy to South Asia, October-November 1961

Meyer, Armin H., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, March-October 1961

Naim, Prince Mohammed, Deputy PrimeMinister and Foreign Minister of Afghanistan until March 1963

Nehru, Braj Kumar, Indian Ambassador to the United States from September 1961

Nehru, Jawaharlal, Prime Minister of India and Minister for External Affairs

Nitze, Paul H., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, January 1961-November 1963

Pahlavi, Mohammed Reza, Shah of Iran

Qadir, Mansur, Foreign Minister of Pakistan until June 1962

Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli, President of India from May 1962

Read, Benjamin H., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State and Executive Secretary from August 1963

Rostow, Walt W., Deputy Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs until December 1961; thereafter Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council of the Department of State

Rountree, William M., Ambassador to Pakistan until February 1962

Rusk, Dean, Secretary of State from January 1961

Sandys, Duncan, British Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations and Colonies

Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr., Special Assistant to the President

Shoaib, Mohammed, Minister of Finance of Pakistan until January 1962, and after December 1962

Singh, Swaran, Indian Minister for Railways

Smith, Bromley, Acting Executive Secretary of the National Security Council until August 1961; thereafter Executive Secretary until July 1963

Steeves, John M., Ambassador to Afghanistan from January 1962

Stevenson, Adlai E., Representative to the United Nations

Talbot, Phillips, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs from April 1961

Taylor, General Maxwell D., USA, President's Military Representative until October 1962; thereafter Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Weil, T. Eliot, Director of the Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State, until April 1962

Yusuf, Dr. Mohammed, Prime Minister, Foreign Minister, and Minister of Mines of Afghanistan from March 1963

Zahir Shah, Mohammed, King of Afghanistan

South AsiaSouth Asia

1. Editorial Note

2. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Jones) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, January 31, 1961.

Source: Department of State, NEA/SOA Files: Lot 66 D 7, Pakistan, 1961. Secret. Drafted by Theodore E. Weil (NEA/SOA).

3. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 8, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5-MSP/2-861. Official Use Only. Drafted by J. Wesley Adams (NEA/SOA) on February 13 and approved in B on February 20.

4. Letter From the Ambassador to Pakistan (Rountree) to the Director of the Office of South Asian Affairs (Weil)

Karachi, February 8, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/2-861. Secret; Official-Informal.

5. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, February 16, 1961, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90/2-1661. Secret.

6. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, February 16, 1961, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90/2-1661. Secret; Presidential Handling.

7. Airgram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State

Kabul, February 21, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 789.5-MSP/2-2161. Confidential.

8. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 7, 1961, 11-11:45 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 4/59-4/61. Confidential. Drafted by Jones. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held in the White House. (Ibid.) Shoaib visited Washington February 24-March 11. Additional documentation on the Shoaib visit is in Department of State, Central Files 611.90D, 790D.00, and 890D.00.

9. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State

Kabul, March 14, 1961, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/3-1461. Secret; Priority. Also sent Niact to Tehran for Harriman. Repeated to Moscow, Karachi, and London for Harriman. Harriman was en route from Europe to the Middle East at the time.

10. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, March 15, 1961, 1:04 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90D/3-1561. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution; Verbatim Text. Drafted by G. Lewis Jones, cleared by Dungan (White House) and in draft by Office of Soviet Union Affairs Director McSweeney, and approved in S/S by Walter J. Stoessel.

11. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi,March 22, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90D/3-2261. Secret; Limit Distribution. Harriman visited Pakistan March 19-22 as part of a fact-finding trip for President Kennedy, which included stops in Europe, Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia.

12. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, March 24, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.13/3-2461. Secret; Priority.

13. Editorial Note

14. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Ball) to President Kennedy

Washington, April 19, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 4/16/61-4/30/61. Confidential.

15. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, April 20, 1961, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/4-2061. Secret. Repeated to Kabul and Peshawar.

16. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, April 24, 1961, 8:13 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5-MSP/4-2361. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Adams, cleared by Talbot and Battle and in substance by Dungan at the White House, and approved by Cottam (NEA).

17. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, April 25, 1961, 10:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790D.5-MSP/4-2561. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Adams, cleared by Talbot and in substance with Dungan, and approved by Cottam.

18. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Ball) to President Kennedy

Washington, May 1, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 5/1/61-6/15/61. Confidential. The memorandum was sent under cover of note from Executive Secretary Battle to the President's Special Assistant, Ralph A. Dungan.

19. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy

New Delhi, May 13, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Countries Series, India, 1961. No classification marking.

20. Memorandum of Conversation

New Delhi, May 18, 1961.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Vice President Johnson's Trip to the Far East, May 61. Confidential. Vice President Johnson left Washington on May 10 for a 2-week tour of South and Southeast Asia, which included stops in Vietnam, the Philippines, the Republic of China, Thailand, India, and Pakistan.

21. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, May 18, 1961, 8:12 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 789.5-MSP/5-1361. Confidential. Drafted in NEA/SOA by Robert J. Carle and Adams, cleared in draft by Weil and with B/FAC and ICA, and approved by Armin H. Meyer (NEA).

22. Memorandum of Conversation

Karachi, May 20, 1961, 12:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Vice President Johnson's Trip to the Far East, May 61. Top Secret. Drafted by Rountree. The meeting was held at the President's House in Karachi.

23. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to Department of State

Kabul, May 22, 1961, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 789.5-MSP/5-2261. Confidential; Priority.

24. Editorial Note

25. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, June 2, 1961, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/6-261. Secret.

26. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 8, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 398.14/6-861. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Adams on June 12 and approved in B on June 21.

27. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the Under Secretary of State (Bowles)

Washington, June 12, 1961.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 64 A 2382, India 400-702. Secret. Drafted on June 6 in ISA/NESA by Colonel Charles Rousek.

28. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, June 28, 1961, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/6-2861. Confidential. Repeated to Karachi.

29. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, July 5, 1961.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 79 R 01012A, ODDI Registry of NIE and SNIE Files, Box 184. Secret. A note on the cover sheet reads: “Submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence. The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff.” All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in this estimate on July 5, except the Atomic Energy Commission representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

30. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 11, 1961, 3-5 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, Subjects, Ayub Visit, 7/61. Secret. Drafted by Talbot. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.)

31. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 21, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790D.00/7-2161. Confidential. Drafted by Talbot and approved by the White House on July 31. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Kennedy Library)

32. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, July 22, 1961, 6:16 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 789.5-MSP/6-2161. Secret. Drafted in SOA by Carle, cleared by Talbot and Perkins (S/S) and with B/FAC and ICA, and approved by Bowles.

33. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Ambassador to India (Galbraith)

Washington, July 31, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 6/16/61-7/31/61. Secret.

34. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, August 4, 1961, 1:09 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790D.5622. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Meyer (NEA), cleared by Kitchen and U. Alexis Johnson, William Bundy (DOD), and Rostow (White House), and approved by Acting Secretary Ball. Rostow sent a copy of this telegram to the President, under cover of a handwritten note that reads: “This is how the Department is handling Ken Galbraith's great blast on the F-104's.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 8/1/61-8/31/61)

35. Memorandum of Conversations

New Delhi, August 8 and 9, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.91/8-961. Secret. Drafted by Bowles and approved in U on August 17. Bowles was in New Delhi August 7-10 to chair a regional conference of U.S. Ambassadors accredited to South Asian countries.

36. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State

Kabul, August 22, 1961, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 789.5-MSP/8-2261. Confidential.

37. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, September 2, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 9/1/61-9/14/61. No classification marking. A marginal notation on the source text, in an unknown hand, reads: “Pres. noted. Sept 4, 1961.”

38. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, September 3, 1961, 7:19 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-361. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Weil and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi.

39. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, September 6, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-661. Confidential. Drafted by Weil.

40. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 12, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-1261. Secret. Drafted by Spielman on September 14 and approved in U on September 19.

41. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State

Kabul, September 13, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-1361. Secret; Niact; Eyes Only.

42. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the Under Secretary of State (Bowles)

Washington, September 13, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/9-1361. Secret.

43. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, September 16, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Subjects, King Zahir Correspondence, 1961-1963. No classification marking. Rostow noted on the source text that he concurred, and Kennedy initialed his approval.

44. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, September 17, 1961, 2:29 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-1761. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Meyer, cleared by Spielman and Deputy Director of the Office of Soviet Union Affairs David H. Henry II and by Komer in substance, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi and Moscow.

45. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, September 17, 1961, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-1761. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved by Meyer and cleared by Weil, by Bowles in substance, and by Bromley Smith at the White House. Repeated to Karachi.

46. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, September 17, 1961, 2:31 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-1761. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved by Meyer and cleared by Weil, by Bowles in substance, and by Smith at the White House. Repeated to Kabul.

47. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State

Kabul, September 20, 1961, 11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-2061. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Karachi.

48. Letter From the Ambassador to India (Galbraith) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot)

New Delhi, September 21, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 9/1/61-9/13/61. Secret; Official-Informal.

49. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State

Kabul, October 3, 1961, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/10-361. Secret: Niact. Repeated to Karachi.

50. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 4, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Memoranda of Conversation, 7/61-9/62. Secret. Drafted by Gatch. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.)

51. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, October 4, 1961, 3:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/10-461. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Gatch and Weil, cleared by Meyer, and approved by Rusk. Also sent to Karachi.

52. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 16, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/10-1661. Secret. Drafted by Merchant and approved at the White House on October 19. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting took place at the White House. (Kennedy Library)

53. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, October 26, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert W. Komer. Secret.

54. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, October 27, 1961, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/10-2761. Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Also sent to Kabul.

55. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, November 3, 1961, 12:25 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/11-361. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted and approved by Veliotes (S/S). A note on the source text indicates that the text of the letter was received from Bromley Smith at the White House. Also sent to Kabul.

56. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State

Kabul, November 3, 1961, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/11-361. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Karachi.

57. Letter From the Pakistani Ambassador (Ahmed) to President Kennedy

Washington,November 4, 1961.

Source: Department of State, NEA/SOA Files: Lot 64 D 566, The President. No classification marking. The salutation and closing are handwritten.

58. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, November 7, 1961, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 120.1590/11-761. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Kabul.

59. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, November 7, 1961, 6:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 120.1590/11-761. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Meyer and Gatch, cleared by Weil and Manfull, and approved by Meyer. Also sent to Kabul.

60. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 7, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/21/61-11/31/61. Secret. Drafted by Talbot; approved in S on November 26; and approved in the White House by Rostow according to a note on a November 29 covering memorandum from Battle to Bundy. The meeting was held at the White House.

61. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 10, 1961, 4:30 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Trips and Conferences, Merchant Trip to Pakistan and Afghanistan, 10/61-11/61. Confidential. Drafted by Merchant on November 13. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.)

62. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, November 13, 1961, 7:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/11-1361. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Meyer; cleared by Merchant and Gaud, and McGeorge Bundy in substance; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi.

63. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 21, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/21/61-11/31/61. Secret. Drafted by Talbot on November 24 and approved in the White House on November 30, according to a note on a November 29 covering memorandum from Battle to Bundy. The meeting was held at the White House.

64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, November 29, 1961, 7:14 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/11-2161. Secret. Drafted by Meyer and Gatch; cleared by Gaud and William R. Polk of the Policy Planning Council; and approved by Meyer. Also sent to Karachi, Jidda, and Tehran and repeated to London.

65. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of South Asian Affairs (Weil) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot)

Washington, December 6, 1961.

Source: Department of State, NEA/SOA Files: Lot 64 D 240, Goa-Internal Memoranda. Secret. Drafted by Weil and Rogers B. Horgan.

66. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, December 8, 1961, 8:28 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-561. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Horgan, cleared with EUR/WE, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Lisbon, Paris for the Embassy and USRO, London, and USUN.

67. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, December 8, 1961, 10:24 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/12-861. Secret; Priority; No Distribution Outside Department. Drafted in NEA/NR by Marvin C. Kettelhut and Edward A. Padelford on December 6; cleared by Weil and with G/PM and AID; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to New Delhi.

68. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, December 10, 1961, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-1061. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to USUN, Lisbon, London, and Paris (USRO for Finletter; Embassy pass Dean Brown).

69. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot) to Acting Secretary of State Ball

Washington, December 12, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-1261. Secret. Drafted in NEA by Horgan and in EUR by Starrs.

70. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, December 12, 1961, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-1261. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Paris for Secretary Rusk and USRO, London, Lisbon, and USUN.

71. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, December 13, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-1361. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Paris and Lisbon.

72. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, December 14, 1961, 5:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-1461. Secret; Niact. Drafted by U. Alexis Johnson and McGeorge Bundy; cleared by Talbot, Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs William R. Tyler, Director of the Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs Joseph J. Sisco, and President Kennedy; and approved by Johnson. Repeated to Paris for the Secretary, to Lisbon, and to London.

73. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, December 13, 1961, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-1361. Secret; Limited Distribution. Received in the Department of State on December 14 at 7:15 p.m. Repeated to New Delhi.

74. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, December 15, 1961, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-1561. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Lisbon, London, and Paris for the Secretary.

75. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, December 17, 1961, 11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-1761. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Lisbon, USUN, and London.

76. Editorial Note

77. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, December 23, 1961, 2:21 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-2361. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Talbot and approved by Ball. Repeated to Lisbon.

78. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 28, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert W. Komer, 11/61-12/61. Secret. Copies were sent to Schlesinger and Rostow.

79. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, December 28, 1961, 11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-2861. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Karachi and USUN.

80. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, December 29, 1961, 9:58 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-2861. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted in SOA by Weil, Horgan, and Henry W. Spielman; cleared with Sisco and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Talbot.

81. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State

Kabul, December 30, 1961, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/12-3061. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Karachi and Tehran.

82. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, December 31, 1961, 7:46 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/12-3161. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Talbot, cleared in substance by Gaud in AID, and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to Tehran.

83. Letter From President Ayub to President Kennedy

Rawalpindi, January 2, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-262. No classification marking. The salutation and closing of the letter are handwritten.

84. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 3, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Weil and approved in S on January 15.

85. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State

Kabul, January 3, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-362. Secret; Niact. Received in the Department of State on January 4 at 12:41 a.m. Repeated to Karachi and Tehran.

86. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, January 5, 1962, 2:03 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-362. Secret; Niact. Drafted in SOA by Gatch, Naas, and Metcalf; cleared by Gaud; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi and Tehran.

87. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, January 6, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert Komer, 1/62. Secret. Copies were sent to Kaysen and Rostow.

88. Paper Prepared by the Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

Washington, undated.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90/1-1062. Secret. The paper was transmitted to the White House under cover of a memorandum from Battle to Bundy dated January 10. The Secretary approved the paper for discussion with the President on January 11 at 5 p.m.

89. Editorial Note

90. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, January 12, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Regional Security Series, South Asia, 1961-963. Secret.

91. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, January 12, 1962, 9:47 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-1262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Weil and Naas; cleared by Talbot, McGeorge Bundy, Assistant Legal Adviser for Near East and South Asian Affairs Warren E. Hewitt, and with AID; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Karachi and Tehran. An attached handwritten note from the Secretary's Special Assist-ant Emory Swank to Rusk indicates that this telegram arose out of the previous evening's meeting with President Kennedy.

92. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, January 12, 1962, 10:56 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.9OD/1-1262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Talbot and Weil; cleared by Hewitt, Gaud, and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Karachi and Tehran.

93. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, January 15, 1962, 6:14 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-1562. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Talbot, cleared by Ball and McGeorge Bundy, and approved in S/S by Melvin L. Manfull. Repeated to Karachi.

94. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, January 15, 1962, 8:09 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-1462. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Naas, Gatch, and Talbot; cleared by Hewitt, Gaud, Ball, and Bromley Smith; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Karachi.

95. Letter From President Kennedy to Prime Minister Nehru

Washington, January 18, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 1/15/62-3/31/62. No classification marking.

96. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State

Kabul, January 18, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-1862. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Karachi and Tehran.

97. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, January 18, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-1862. Secret; Niact; Eyes Only; Limit Distribution. Repeated to New Delhi and USUN.

98. National Security Action Memorandum No. 125

Washington, January 22, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 125. No classification marking. Copies were sent to the Secretary of State, the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, and the President of the Export-Import Bank.

99. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, January 26, 1962, 2:46 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-2662. Confidential. Drafted by Talbot, cleared by Kaysen, and approved by Talbot. Also sent to New Delhi.

100. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, January 26, 1962, 6:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.11-KE/1-2662. Secret; Niact; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Gatch; cleared by Hewitt, McGhee (in substance), and Bromley Smith; and approved by Talbot.

101. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, January 27, 1962, 2:57 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-2762. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Gatch, cleared by Bromley Smith and with AID, and approved by Talbot.

102. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, January 29, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-2962. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution.

103. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, January 31, 1962, 12:42 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-3162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Talbot and Horgan, cleared by Bromley Smith, and approved by Manfull (S/S). Also sent to Karachi and USUN.

104. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, February 23, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.00/2-2362. Confidential. Repeated to Karachi and USUN.

105. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 28, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 3/1/62-3/31/62. Secret. Drafted by Grant. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.)

106. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State

Kabul, March 3, 1962, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 789.5/3-362. Secret. Repeated to Karachi, Tehran, and Manila for Bowles.

107. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, March 3, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.00/3-362. Secret. Repeated to New Delhi.

108. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, March 4, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/3-462. Secret. Repeated to New Delhi and USUN.

109. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, March 7, 1962.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 79 R 01012A, ODDI Registry of NIE and SNIE Files, Box 212. Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet: “The following organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency, and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff.” All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in this estimate on March 7, except the Atomic Energy Commission representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

110. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 13, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert W. Komer, 3/62. Secret.

111. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot) and the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Acting Secretary of State Ball

Washington, March 16, 1962.

Source: Department of State, NEA/INC Files: Lot 66 D 415, Kashmir, January-April 1962 (Miscellaneous Papers). Secret. Drafted in NEA by Horgan, Grant, and James M. Ludlow, and in IO/UNPby Michael Newlin.

112. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 19, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert W. Komer, 3/62. Secret.

113. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State

Kabul, March 28, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 869.90D/3-2862. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Karachi, Tehran, and Jidda.

114. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 12, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/4-1262. Secret. Drafted by Gatch and approved in S on April 18.

115. Letter From President Ayub to President Kennedy

Rawalpindi, April 20, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/4-3062. No classification marking. The salutation and closing of the letter are handwritten. The letter was forwarded to McGeorge Bundy on April 30 under cover of a memorandum from Lucius Battle stating that it was received from the Embassy of Pakistan.

116. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 27, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90D/4-2762. Secret. Drafted by Naas on May 2.

117. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 8, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, 5/1/62-5/15/62. Secret.

118. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, May 8, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/5-862. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Canberra for the Secretary and to London. Relayed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Army, Navy, Air Force, and the CIA.

119. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 9, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert Komer, 5/62. Secret.

120. Memorandum of Discussion

Washington, May 13, 1962.

Source: Department of State, NEA/SOA Files: Lot 64 D 571, United States, Jan.-July. Secret. Drafted by Naas on May 19.

121. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, May 13, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/5-1362. Secret; Niact.

122. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, May 18, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.00/5-1862. Secret; Limit Distribution.

123. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, May 19, 1962, 5:15 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.11-KE/5-1962. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Cameron and approved by Grant. Repeated to New Delhi.

124. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, May 22, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/5-2262. Secret; Priority. Repeated to New Delhi and USUN.

125. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 25, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert Komer, 5/62. Secret.

126. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 28, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/5-2862. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Gatch on May 31 and approved in S on June 12.

127. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, May 31, 1962.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 79 R 0102A, ODDI Registry of NIE and SNIE Files, Box 212. Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, The Joint Staff, AEC, and NSA.” All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in this estimate on May 31, except the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

128. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, June 1, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-162. Secret. Drafted by Cameron and Horgan and cleared in BNA by Milton G. Rewinkel. A typed notation on the source text indicates that the enclosed telegram was approved as amended and sent on June 1.

129. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 1, 1962, 8:52 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-162. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Grant and Cameron, cleared by Rewinkel and Bromley Smith, and approved by Rusk.

130. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 4, 1962, 5:17p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-462. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Cameron, cleared by Bromley Smith, and approved by Talbot.

131. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 4, 1962, 8:29 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-462. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Cameron, cleared by U. Alexis Johnson in draft and with the White House, and approved by Talbot.

132. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, June 6, 1962.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 79 R 01012A, ODDI Registry of NIE and SNIE Files, Box 212. Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force.” All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in this estimate on June 6, except the Atomic Energy Commission representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

133. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 9, 1962, 4:08 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-962. Top Secret. Drafted by Cameron, cleared by Rewinkel and Bromley Smith, and approved by Grant.

134. Telegram From the White House to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 9, 1962, 5:44 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-962. Secret; Niact. Repeated to the Department of State and to the Department of Defense for William Bundy. The source text is the Department of State copy.

135. Telegram From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Kennedy

London, June 13, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 204, Macmillan Correspondence with Kennedy, 1962, Vol. III. Top Secret; Eyes Only. The telegram apparently was sent to the British Embassy to be conveyed to the White House.

136. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 14, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 6/11/62-6/16/62. Secret. Drafted on June 15 by Komer. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.)

137. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 14, 1962, 8:58 p.m.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 204, Kennedy Correspondence with Macmillan, 1962-1963, Vol. II. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Grant, William Bundy, and Komer; cleared by McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Grant. Repeated to Karachi and New Delhi.

138. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, June 15, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90D/6-1562. Secret. Drafted by Gatch and McGhee and cleared by Grant, Cameron, McGhee, and McConaughy.

139. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, June 19, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 6/20/62-6/24/62. Secret. Drafted by Komer on June 20. The time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is taken from the President's Appointment Book. (Ibid.)

140. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 19, 1962, 8:52 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-1962. Top Secret; Niact; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Cameron and Komer, cleared by McGhee, and McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Grant. Repeated to Karachi, New Delhi, and Paris eyes only for Rusk.

141. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, June 20, 1962, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-2062. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to Paris eyes only for the Secretary and to London and Karachi for the Charge and/or Ambassador only.

142. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, June 21, 1962, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-2162. Top Secret; Niact.

143. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 21, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-2162. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted on July 3 by Gatch and approved in M on July 11.

144. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot) to Acting Secretary of State Ball

Washington, June 22, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/6-2262. Confidential.

145. Editorial Note

146. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, June 24, 1962, 1:31 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/6-2462. Secret; Priority. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy and approved in S/S by Rogers.

147. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, June 25, 1962, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/6-2562. Secret; Priority.

148. Telegram From the Consulate General at Calcutta to the Department of State

Calcutta, July 1, 1962, 10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/7-162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution.

149. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, July 2, 1962, 8:49 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/7-162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted in NEA by Cameron and Ludlow, cleared by Cleveland and Kaysen, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Calcutta.

150. Editorial Note

151. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 5, 1962, 6:31 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/7-562. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted by Cameron, cleared by Rewinkel and Bromley Smith, and approved by Cameron. Repeated to New Delhi and Karachi eyes only Ambassadors.

152. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 6, 1962, 10:41 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/7-662. Secret; Niact; Verbatim Text. Drafted in the White House; cleared by Komer, Kaysen, and by Talbot in substance; and approved in S/S by Slater. Repeated to New Delhi.

153. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, July 12, 1962, 11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/7-1262. Secret. Repeated to Kabul and Tehran.

154. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, July 13, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/7-1362. Secret.

155. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 19, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90D/7-1962. Confidential. Drafted by Talbot and approved in S on August 13.

156. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 19, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert Komer, 7/62. Secret.

157. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 24, 1962, 8:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/7-2462. Top Secret; Verbatim Text. Drafted and approved by Cameron and cleared with BNA and the White House. Repeated to New Delhi and Karachi eyes only Ambassadors.

158. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 24, 1962, 10:12 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/7-2462. Top Secret; Verbatim Text. Drafted in the White House and approved by Charles K. Johnson (S/S). Repeated to New Delhi and Karachi.

159. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, July 25, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/7-2562. Secret; Niact. A handwritten notation indicates that the telegram was repeated to Karachi and London.

160. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, July 27, 1962, 8:43 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/7-2562. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Cameron on July 26; cleared by U. Alexis Johnson, INR, and DOD/ISA, and with the President; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi and London.

161. Editorial Note

162. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, August 5, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/8-562. Confidential. Drafted in SOA by Carle and Laise on August 4 and cleared with GTI.

163. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy

New Delhi, August 5, 1962.

[Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 4/1/62-8/31/62. No classification marking. This letter has not been declassified by the Indian Government. The substance of the letter is summarized in Sarvepalli Gopal, Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography (London: Jonathan Cape, 1984), Vol. 3, pp. 217-218, as follows: “In the same spirit, Nehru wrote to Kennedy thanking him for all the sympathy and friendship he had shown to India, more particularly in regard to aid for development. The United States had not only given India generous assistance but had taken the trouble to induce other countries also to do so. However, it was the friendly and sympathetic attitude, even more than the aid, for which India was grateful. ‘My colleagues here and I are particularly anxious to have the friendship of the United States in the great tasks that confront us. I believe that this friendship is good not only for our two countries, but also for the world.' This had little to do with aid and, even if circumstances arose which might make it difficult for the United States to help India in her development, the Indian Government would still value the friendship of the United States and work for close relations between the two countries. Differences of viewpoint should not affect this friendship. ‘I can assure you, therefore, that whatever might happen, our attitude will continue to be to encourage friendly relations between our two countries.'”]

164. Letter From the Ambassador to India (Galbraith) to President Kennedy

New Delhi, August 6, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Special Correspondence, John Kenneth Galbraith. Confidential.

165. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, August 10, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 8/1/62-8/21/62. Confidential.

166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, September 13, 1962, 2:07 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790D.11/9-1362. Confidential. Drafted by Naas on September 12 and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi, Kabul, and London.

167. Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

Washington, September 19, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 9/14/62-9/21/62. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. Transmitted to the White House on September 19 under cover of a memorandum from Brubeck to Bundy noting that the paper was sent at Komer's request.

168. Memorandum of Conversation

Newport, Rhode Island, September 24, 1962, 12:30-2:45 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 10/62. Secret. Drafted by McConaughy on October 1 and approved by the White House on October 15. Kennedy's meeting with Ayub at Hammersmith Farm in Newport, Rhode Island, grew out of a request by Ayub for an informal visit to the United States following a State visit to Canada. (Memorandum from Rusk to Kennedy, August 15; ibid., 7/62-8/62)

169. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, September 26, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Security, 1961-1963. Secret.

170. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, September 27, 1962, 5:46 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790D.11/9-2762. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Gatch; cleared by Kettelhut, Cameron, and William Bundy; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to New Delhi and USUN for the Secretary.

171. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 27, 1962, 11 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Memoranda of Conversation, 7/61-9/62. Secret. Drafted by Grant. Naim was in the United States as head of the Afghan Delegation to the U.N. General Assembly.

172. Memorandum of Conversation

New York, September 27, 1962.

173. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

New York, September 29, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 602.8990D/9-2962. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Tehran, Kabul, and Karachi.

174. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 15, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 10/15/62-10/20/62. Secret.

175. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, October 15, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-1562. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Hong Kong.

176. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, October 16, 1962, 8:24 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790D.11/10-1662. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Gatch, cleared by Laise, and approved by Talbot.

177. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, October 18, 1962, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-1862. Secret. Repeated to Hong Kong.

178. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, October 22, 1962, 5:13 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/10-762. Confidential. Drafted by Gatch on October 19; cleared by Laise, Bromley Smith, and with GTI; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to London, Tehran, and USUN.

179. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, October 22, 1962, 9:56 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Gatch, cleared by Cameron and by Jeffrey C. Kitchen, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

180. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, October 25, 1962, 11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/10-2562. Secret; Niact. Relayed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the White House.

181. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy

Washington, October 26, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 10/26/62-10/27/62. Secret.

182. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, October 27, 1962, 2:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2762. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cameron, cleared by McGeorge Bundy and Kaysen, and approved by Grant. Repeated to London and Karachi.

183. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, October 27, 1962, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2762. Secret; Niact. Received in the Department of State at 3:09 p.m. Repeated to New Delhi.

184. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, October 27, 1962, 8:44 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2762. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Talbot, cleared in substance by Kaysen, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

185. Telegram From the White House to the Embassy in India

Washington, October 27, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Ambassador Galbraith, Special File, Miscellaneous Messages, 10/62-12/62. Top Secret; Sensitive. No time of transmission appears on the source text, nor does it indicate the channel through which it was sent.

186. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, October 28, 1962, 2:42 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2862. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cameron, cleared by Kaysen, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

187. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, October 28, 1962, 3:01 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2862. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cameron, cleared by Kaysen, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi and London.

188. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, October 29, 1962, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/10-2962. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and Karachi.

189. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, November 1, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/11-162. Secret.

190. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy

Washington, November 3, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/3/62-11/4/62. Secret.

191. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, November 5, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-562. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to New Delhi.

192. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy

Washington, November 9, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, Security, 1962. Secret.

193. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, November 12, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 11/62. Secret.

194. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, November 12, 1962, 8:34 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/11-1262. Secret. Drafted by Talbot, cleared by Kaysen in substance, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and to London for Grant, Gaud, and Bundy.

195. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, November 13, 1962, 5:37 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/11-1362. Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Drafted by Naas, cleared by Cameron, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and to London for Grant, Bundy, and Gaud.

196. Letter From the Ambassador to India (Galbraith) to President Kennedy

New Delhi, November 13, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/11/62-11/13/62. Confidential. A handwritten note on the source text indicates that it was taken from the President's weekend reading file, dated November 17.

197. Editorial Note

198. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy

Washington, November 16, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/16/62. Secret.

199. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, November 17, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/11-1762. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and Karachi.

200. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, November 18, 1962, 2:03 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/11-1762. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Rusk, cleared by Talbot, and approved by Rusk. A handwritten note by Rogers on the attached telegram distribution sheet prepared in S/S reads: “Secretary requested specifically that this message not be repeated to London and Karachi.”

201. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, November 18, 1962, 8:46 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/11-1862. Secret. Drafted by Naas and approved by Talbot and Rusk. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

202. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, November 19, 1962, 4:15-5:15 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/26/62-11/27/62. Secret. Drafted by Komer on November 27.

203. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, November 19, 1962, 20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-1962. Secret; Niact. Received in the Department of State at 4:47 p.m. and relayed to the White House at 5:30 p.m.

204. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, November 19, 1962, 22:01 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-1962. Top Secret; Niact; Verbatim Text. Drafted in S by William E. Knepper and approved by Breisky (S/S).

205. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, November 19, 1962, 11:06 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/11-1962. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Kaysen and approved by Talbot and Rusk. Repeated to London and Karachi.

206. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, November 20, 1962, 12:50 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-2062. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by Rusk, cleared by the President, and approved by Talbot.

207. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, November 20, 1962, 22 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/11-2062. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Received at 2:37 p.m. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

208. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, November 20, 1962, 22:31 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-2062. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Komer, cleared by Talbot and Rusk, and approved by the President.

209. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, November 21, 1962, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-2162. Secret; Niact.

210. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, November 23, 1962, 6:09 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-2362. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy, cleared by the President and Talbot, and approved by Rusk.

211. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, November 25, 1962, 10:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-2562. Secret; Niact; Eyes Only. Repeated to Karachi and London eyes only for the Ambassadors. A note on the source text indicates that the approved text of the telegram was supplied to the Department of State for transmission by the White House. Komer, Talbot, Rusk, and the President are listed as having cleared it. White House telegram CAP 5551-62, November 25, from Komer to the President at Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, transmitted the text to the President for approval. Komer noted that the telegram was drafted on instructions from Bundy, who had cleared an earlier draft. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/24/62-11/25/62)

212. Memorandum of Conversation

Rawalpindi, November 28, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/11-2862. Secret. Drafted by Harriman. The meeting was held at President Ayub's residence.

213. Memorandum of Conversation

Rawalpindi, November 29, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/11-2962. Secret. Drafted by Harriman on January 8, 1963.

214. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, November 30, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 120.1591/11-3062. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Karachi, Hong Kong, London, and Moscow.

215. Memorandum of Meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council

Washington, December 3, 1962, 10 a.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, McCone Files, Job 80 B 01285A, Box 6, DCI Meetings with the President, 1 July 1962-3 December 1962. Top Secret. Drafted by McCone.

216. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, December 5, 1962, 8:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 204, Kennedy Correspondence with Macmillan, 1962-63. Secret. Drafted in S/S by Benjamin Weiner, cleared by Bromley Smith, and approved by Weiner.

217. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, December 5, 1962, 8:58 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790D.11/12-562. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Cameron; cleared by Talbot, Harriman, Rusk, and with the White House; and approved by Cameron. Repeated to New Delhi.

218. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, December 6, 1962, 11:08 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-662. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Cameron; cleared with BNA and by Harriman, Rusk, and Bromley Smith; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi and London.

219. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, December 8, 1962, 1:41 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-862. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Schneider and Cameron; cleared with BNA, IO, and FE, and by Ludlow in NEA in substance; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi, London, and USUN.

220. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic Posts

Washington, December 8, 1962, 5:44 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 120.1591/12-862. Secret. Drafted by Schneider, cleared in substance with FE, and approved by Talbot. Sent to Kabul, Kathmandu, Colombo, Karachi, New Delhi, Moscow, Rangoon, London, Paris, Hong Kong, Djakarta, Phnom Penh, Cairo, and Accra.

221. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, December 8, 1962, 5:44 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/12-862. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Schneider, cleared in substance by Komer, and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to London.

222. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy

New Delhi, December 8, 1962.

[Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 11/20/62-12/14/62. No classification marking. Galbraith transmitted the text of this letter to Washington in telegram 2303 from New Delhi, December 9. At the request of the Indian Foreign Ministry, he brought the letter with him when he returned to Washington on December 10 for consultations and home leave, and gave it to Ambassador Nehru for delivery to President Kennedy. (Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/12-962) This letter has not been declassified by the Indian Government.]

223. National Security Action Memorandum No. 209

Washington, December 10, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Memoranda, NSAM 209. Secret. Signed by President Kennedy. Copies were sent to the Director of Central Intelligence and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget.

224. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Paris

Washington, December 13, 1962, 9:56 p.m.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 204, Macmillan Correspondence with Kennedy, 1962. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted in S/S by Johnson and approved by Bromley Smith. Rusk was in Paris December 11-16 for the NATO Ministerial Meeting.

225. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, December 14, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Subcommittee on South Asia. Top Secret.

226. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, December 16, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 12/16/62. Secret.

227. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, December 17, 1962.

Source: Department of State, NEA/INC Files: Lot 66 D 415, Kashmir, May-December 1962 (Miscellaneous Papers). Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text, but it was apparently drafted by Talbot. According to the President's Appointment Book, the conversation took place in the White House. (Kennedy Library)

228. Letter From President Ayub to President Kennedy

Karachi, December 17, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-2262. No classification marking. Forwarded from the Department of State to McGeorge Bundy at the White House on December 22 under cover of a memorandum from Brubeck. The covering memorandum indicated that this letter, and an accompanying December 17 letter dealing with the Tarbela Dam project were delivered to Rusk on December 20 by Amjad Ali, a special emissary of Ayub. Both letters are ibid.

229. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State

Kabul, December 19, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/12-1962. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Karachi and Tehran.

230. Memorandum of Conversation

Nassau, December 20, 1962, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/12-2062. Secret. Drafted by Talbot and approved by the White House on January 28, 1963. The meeting was held at Taylor House in Nassau where Kennedy and Macmillan met from December 18-21. Their talks covered a range of issues, but focused upon nuclear defense systems. Additional documentation on the Nassau talks is printed in vol. XIII, pp. 1091-1128.

231. Memorandum of Conversation

Nassau, December 20, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/12-2062. Secret. Drafted by Talbot and approved by the White House on January 30, 1963. The meeting was held at Taylor House.

232. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, December 22, 1962, 11:35 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-2262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Grant and Gatch; cleared with FE, EUR, U. Alexis Johnson, and Komer; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

233. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, December 22, 1962, 11:35 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/12-2262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Grant and Schneider; cleared with FE, EUR, U. Alexis Johnson, and Komer; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi and London.

234. Telegram From the Embassy Office in Pakistan to the Department of State

Murree, December 27, 1962, 2 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/12-2762. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to New Delhi and London. McGeorge Bundy sent a copy to the President in Palm Beach, Florida, on December 28. (White House telegram CAP 5665-62; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 12/62)

235. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, January 4, 1963, 8:12 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-463. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Schneider; cleared by NEA, FE, and with USIS, AID, and DOD/ISA; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to London.

236. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, January 11, 1963, 12:52 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/1-1163. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Cameron, cleared with BNA and by Komer, and approved by Cameron. Repeated to New Delhi and Karachi.

237. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, January 11, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 1/11/63-1/15/63. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Received in the Department of State at 12:54 p.m. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

238. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, January 12, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 1/11/63-1/15/63. Secret.

239. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, January 15, 1963, 8:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-1563. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Ludlow and Schneider and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to London.

240. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, January 17, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Staff Memoranda Series, R. Komer Security. Confidential.

241. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, January 17, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Staff Memoranda Series, R. Komer Security. Secret.

242. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, January 19, 1963, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D. 91/1-1963. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Karachi and London.

243. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, January 21, 1963, 6:23 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/1-2163. Secret. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy and approved in S/S by Edward S. Little. Repeated to New Delhi and Karachi.

244. Notes by Director of Central Intelligence McCone

Washington, January 22, 1963.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 80 B 01285A, Box 6, McCone Files, DCI Meetings with the President, 1 January-31 March 1963. Top Secret. According to the President's Daily Appointment Book, the NSC meeting was held from 11 to 11:50 a.m.

245. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, January 22, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/1-2263. Confidential; Limit Distribution.

246. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, January 25, 1963, 8:12 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.89/1-2563. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Carle and Steeves; cleared with SOV, GTI, U/PR, Cameron, U. Alexis Johnson, Gaud, and Bromley Smith; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi, Tehran, London, and Bonn.

247. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, January 26, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 1/24/63-1/29/63. Secret. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Taken from Pres. week-end reading dtd 1/26-27/63.”

248. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, January 30, 1963, 7:29 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.89/1-3063. Secret. Drafted by Carle, cleared with GTI, and approved by Grant. Also sent to Karachi and Tehran and repeated to London and Bonn.

249. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 4, 1963, Noon.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 2/63. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Grant on February 8 and approved by the White House on February 18. The time of the meeting is taken from the President's Appointment Book.

250. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, February 6, 1963, 10:34 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution, Drafted by Gatch; cleared by BNA, Ludlow, Grant, Harriman, McGhee, and Komer; and approved by Cameron. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

251. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, February 6, 1963, 10:39 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret: Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider; cleared by BNA, Grant, Harriman, McGhee, and Komer; and approved by Cameron. Repeated to Karachi and London.

252. Letter From the Ambassador to Pakistan (McConaughy) to President Ayub

Karachi, February 7, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Karachi Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 1814, Item 63, 361.1 Kennedy-Ayub, Secret, 1962-1963. Secret.

253. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, February 16, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 2/14/63-2/17/63. Secret.

254. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, February 16, 1963, 8:13 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider, Cameron, and Gatch; cleared with BNA and FE; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to London.

255. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy

New Delhi, February 16, 1963.

[Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 2/11/63-3/31/63. No classification marking. According to a February 27 memorandum from William Brubeck to McGeorge Bundy, the letter was delivered to the White House on February 18 by Ambassador B.K. Nehru. (Ibid.) This letter has not been declassified by the Indian Government. In his biography of Prime Minister Nehru, Gopal states regarding this letter: “It was now Nehru's turn to complain that Pakistan was not wholly serious and not anxious to come to an agreement.” (Gopal, Jawarharlal Nehru, Vol. 3, p. 258)]

256. Letter From the Pakistani Ambassador (Ahmed) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, February 18, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 2/63. Secret. A copy of the letter was sent from the Department of State to the White House under cover of a February 20 memorandum from Brubeck to McGeorge Bundy. (Ibid.)

257. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, February 20, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Staff Memoranda Series, R. Komer Security. Secret.

258. Notes on Discussion

Washington, February 21, 1963, 5:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret. Drafted by Schneider on February 23. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Kennedy Library)

259. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 23, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret. Drafted by Gatch and approved in S on March 2.

260. National Security Action Memorandum No. 223

Washington, February 26, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAMs 215-240. Secret.

261. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, March 2, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Kashmir, 3/63. Secret. A note on the source text reads: “Taken from the Pres. week-end reading dtd 3/2/63.”

262. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, March 5, 1963, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1-4 INDIA. Top Secret; Operational Immediate.

263. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate at Dacca

Washington, March 9, 1963, 6:17 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Gatch; cleared by BNA, Harriman, McGhee, Rusk, and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi, London, Karachi, and Calcutta.

264. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, March 9, 1963, 6:17 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider; cleared by BNA, Laise, Harriman, McGhee, and McGeorge Bundy, and in draft by Rusk; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Dacca, Karachi, London, and Calcutta.

265. Editorial Note

266. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, March 12, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, India, 091.3 (26 Oct 1962), 1963 Papers. Secret.

267. Telegram From President Kennedy to the Ambassador to India (Galbraith)

Washington, March 22, 1963, 10:45 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Ambassador Galbraith, Special File, Miscellaneous Messages, 1/63-7/63. Secret; Eyes Only. Handwritten notes on the source text read: “Send via CIA channel,” and “cite CAP 63143.”

268. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, March 23, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 3/22/63-3/31/63. Secret.

269. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, March 25, 1963, Midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and Karachi.

270. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, March 31, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Countries Series, India, Security, 1963. Secret.

271. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 1, 1963, 4:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret. Drafted by Elmore Jackson on April 3. The meeting was held at the White House.

272. Memorandum From the Department of State Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to President Kennedy

Washington, April 8, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 4/12/63-4/23/63. Secret.

273. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, April 10, 1963, 8:23 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AFG-PAK. Secret. Drafted by Carle, Naas, and Gatch; cleared by Cameron and with GTI and AID; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Tehran and Karachi.

274. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State

London, April 11, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1-4 INDIA. Secret. Repeated to New Delhi for USMSMI, Karachi, and CINCEUR.

275. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, April 13, 1963, 5:32 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AFG-PAK. Secret. Drafted by Carle and Cameron and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to Tehran.

276. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, April 15, 1963, 11 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Kashmir, 4/63. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Karachi and London. A copy of this telegram was attached to White House telegram CAP 63197, April 16, from Bromley Smith to the President's Naval Aide, Captain Tazewell T. Shepard, Jr., for transmission to President Kennedy, who was vacationing in Palm Beach, Florida. A handwritten note on the source text, in an unknown hand, reads: “President read.”

277. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, April 16, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AFG-PAK. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Kabul, Tehran, and New Delhi.

278. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, April 19, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Kashmir, 4/63. Secret.

279. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy

New Delhi, April 21, 1963.

280. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, April 24, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Staff Memoranda Series, R. Komer Security. Secret.

281. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, April 24, 1963, 8:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-INDIA. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Naas and Cameron and approved by Cameron. Repeated to New Delhi.

282. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, April 25, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 4/24/63-4/27/63. Secret.

283. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, April 25, 1963, 5:30-6:30 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings with the President, 4/63. Secret. Drafted by Komer on April 29. The time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is from the President's Appointment Book. (Ibid.) Copies were sent to Bundy and Kaysen.

284. Note From the Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington, April 25, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15 UK-US. Secret. Drafted in G/PM on April 18 by Winston Lord.

285. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, April 26, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 4/24/63-4/27/63. Top Secret. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy.

286. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Karachi, May 2, 1963, Midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Operational Immediate; No Other Distribution. Received in the Department of State on May 2 at 8:54 a.m. Relayed to the White House.

287. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 2, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 5/63-6/63. Secret.

288. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

New Delhi, May 4, 1963, 4 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Received in the Department of State on May 3 at 9:53 p.m. Repeated to Karachi and London.

289. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, May 4, 1963, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Received in the Department of State at 5:03 a.m. Repeated to Karachi and London.

290. Notes by Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, May 5, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-INDIA. Secret. The notes were not signed or initialed by Rusk, but a notation on the source text indicates that he drafted them. Another copy is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 4/28/63-5/5/63. A May 7 memorandum from Komer to McGeorge Bundy indicates that Rusk prepared the notes for the President. (Ibid., Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert Komer, 3/63-5/63)

291. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, May 6, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and New Delhi.

292. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, May 8, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1-4 INDIA. Secret. Drafted in SOA on May 4 by Carleton S. Coon and cleared by Grant, Cameron, L, BNA, SOV, FE/EA, NR, and G/PM. An enclosure, a 3-page assessment of the legal implications of the recommendations, prepared by Department of State Legal Adviser Abram Chayes, is not printed.

293. Summary Record of the 514th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, May 9, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC Meetings, 1963, Meeting No. 514. Top Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House. Additional records of this meeting, prepared on May 10 by CIA Director McCone, and on May 11 by Acting Assistant Secretary of State James Grant, are in Central Intelligence Agency, Job 80 B 01285A, Box 6, DCI Meetings with the President, 1 April-30 June 1963, and Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK, respectively.

294. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, May 10, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC Meetings, 1963, Meeting No. 514. Top Secret. The substance of this memorandum is drawn from NSC Action No. 2467, May 9, which is the only record of the 514th meeting of the NSC that has been found. (Ibid.) The memorandum was mistakenly sent to Secretaries Rusk and McNamara as NSAM No. 243. NSAM No. 243 had been issued on May 9 and dealt with a survey mission for the U.S. Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.

295. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 13, 1963, 10:42 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-2 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Cameron; cleared with BNA and by Grant, Harriman, William Bundy, and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Rusk. Also sent to Karachi and New Delhi.

296. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 16, 1963, 3:23 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 US/Kennedy. Secret. Drafted in the White House by Bundy and approved in S/S by Executive Secretary Benjamin Read.

297. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, May 17, 1963, 1-1:35 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meeting with the President, 5/63-7/63. Secret. Drafted by Komer on May 23. The time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is taken from the President's Appointment Book. (Ibid.)

298. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, May 17, 1963, Midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Emergency; Limit Distribution. Received in the Department of State on May 17 at 3:49 p.m. Repeated to New Delhi and London. Relayed to the White House.

299. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, May 18, 1963, 3:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1-4 INDIA. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider, cleared by Talbot, and approved by Rusk. Repeated to London and Karachi.

300. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, May 20, 1963, 5:45-6:30 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Krishnamachari Visit. Secret. Drafted by Komer on May 22. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.)

301. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan

Washington, May 27, 1963, 7:12 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Subjects, King Zahir Correspondence, 1961-1963. Secret; Emergency; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Gatch, cleared with GTI and by the President, and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Tehran and repeated to Karachi.

302. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of State

Tehran, May 28, 1963, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AFG-PAK. Confidential; Operational Immediate. Repeated to Kabul and Karachi.

303. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 29, 1963, 8:23 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1-4 INDIA. Secret. Drafted in S/S by Grant G. Hilliker, cleared by McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Hilliker. Repeated to Karachi and New Delhi.

304. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 3, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Subjects, Radhakrishnan Visit. Secret. Drafted by Talbot and approved in S on June 18 and by the White House on June 20. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House.

305. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, June 18, 1963, 6:55 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-INDIA. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider and William Bundy; cleared with L, BNA, AID, and by Harriman and Komer; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi, London, Ottawa, and Canberra.

306. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, June 19, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert W. Komer 6/63-11/63. Secret. The source text is a copy that Komer sent to Bundy with a handwritten note which reads: “Mac—I put my ideas here down in writing at Taz Shepard's request. Am giving original to him, in case he and you agree to suggest hitting Macmillan for an anchorage at Diego Suarez.”

307. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, July 10, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 INDIA. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Canberra, and Karachi.

308. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, July 11, 1963, 2:35 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Naas, cleared by Komer, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

309. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, July 13, 1963, 3:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-PAK. Secret. Drafted by Naas and Laise; cleared with NR, BNA, GER, G/PM, DOD/ISA, and AID; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to New Delhi and repeated to Bonn, London, and CINCEUR.

310. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, July 16, 1963, 3 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 7/16/63-7/19/63. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and Rangoon.

311. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 17, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 7/63. Secret.

312. Note From the British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington, July 29, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15 UK-US. Secret.

313. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, July 30, 1963, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and Karachi.

314. Summary Record of the 516th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, July 31, 1963, 4:30 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC Meetings, No. 516. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Bromley Smith.

315. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, August 8, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/BALL. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and New Delhi.

316. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, August 9, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 8/1/63-8/14/63. Secret. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Taken from Pres. weekend reading dtd 8/9/63.”

317. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy

New Delhi, August 11, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 4/1/63-8/31/63. No classification marking.

318. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, August 12, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings with the President, 8/63-11/63. Secret. Drafted by Komer. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.)

319. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, August 15, 1963, 9:17 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Schneider and Komer and cleared and approved by Grant. Repeated to Karachi and London.

320. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)

Washington, August 16, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, India 381 (10 Jul 63), Indian Ocean Task Force 63. Secret.

321. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, August 17, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Karachi and London.

322. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, August 20, 1963, 8:21 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-PAK. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted on August 8 in DOD/ISA by R.J. Murray and in SOA by Schneider; cleared with NR, BNA, FE, G/PM, DOD, and AID; and approved by Grant. Repeated to Karachi and London.

323. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, August 23, 1963, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Received in the Department of State at 6:37 p.m. Repeated to London and New Delhi.

324. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, August 23, 1963, 8:16 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 21 US. Secret. Drafted in G/PM by Lord; cleared with BNA, RPM, FE, SOA, UNP, NR, OC, AFI, and within G/PM by Colonel Robinson; and approved by G/PM Director of Operations Howard Meyers. Repeated to New Delhi, Karachi, and Colombo.

325. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy

New Delhi, August 27, 1963.

326. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, August 28, 1963, 12:43 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider on August 26; cleared by Cameron, Grant, and with BNA; and approved by Ball. Also sent to New Delhi and repeated to London.

327. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 5, 1963, 4:30 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Visit of King and Queen 9/63, 1/63-9/63. Confidential. Drafted by Gaud on September 6 and cleared by Talbot and Komer. The King and Queen of Afghanistan made a State visit to the United States September 4-16. They visited Washington September 5-7.

328. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of State

Tehran, September 5, 1963, 11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/BALL. Secret; Immediate; Limit Distribution. Received in the Department of State at 7:23 p.m. Repeated to Karachi. Passed to the White House.

329. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 6, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Visit of King and Queen 9/63, 1/63-9/63. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Wright on September 12. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.) The King also met with Rusk on September 6, and discussed economic development programs in Afghanistan. A memorandum of this conversation is ibid., National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Visit of King and Queen 9/63, 1/63-9/63.

330. Telegram From the Embassy in Portugal to the Department of State

Lisbon, September 6, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/BALL. Secret; Immediate. Received in the Department of State at 5:54 p.m. Repeated to Karachi eyes only Ambassador. Relayed to the White House.

331. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, September 9, 1963, 12:10-1:10 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings with the President, 8/63-11/63. Secret. Drafted by Komer. The time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is taken from the President's Appointment Book. (Ibid.)

332. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, October 10, 1963, 8:56 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-INDIA. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted in SOA by Harold G. Josif; cleared with BNA, and by Cameron, Grant, Harriman, and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Ball. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

333. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 17, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 9/28/63-10/19/63. Secret.

334. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, October 20, 1963, 11:04 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider, cleared by Harriman, and approved by Grant. Also sent to Rawalpindi and Karachi and repeated to London and Ankara for Talbot.

335. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Grant) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, November 4, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Confidential. Drafted by Naas of November 1. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Secretary Saw.”

336. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy

New Delhi, November 11, 1963.

337. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, November 12, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Security, 1963. Secret.

338. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 14, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 10/20/63-11/22/63. Secret.

339. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)

Washington, November 18, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, India 381 (10 July 63), Indian Ocean Task Force 63. Secret. Drafted in OASD/ISA on November 13 by Captain E.L. Schwab.

340. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, November 30, 1963, 11:00 a.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 80 B 01285A, Box 6, McCone Files, DCI Meetings with President Johnson, 23 November-31 December 1963. Top Secret. Drafted by McCone on December 2.

341. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan

Washington, December 2, 1963, 11:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 US/JOHNSON. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cameron and Talbot, cleared by Ball and with the White House, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

342. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) and Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

Washington, December 11, 1963.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, India, Vol. I. Secret.

343. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 18, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Confidential. Drafted by Naas on December 11 and cleared by Talbot.

344. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, December 19, 1963, 7:24 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-5 US. Secret. Drafted by Lakeland and approved by Talbot and Ball. Repeated to Karachi, London, Moscow, and Hong Kong.

345. Memorandum of Conversation

Karachi, December 20, 1963, Noon.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Taylor, Gen., Trip to India and Pakistan, December 1963. Secret. No drafting information is on the source text, but telegram 1189 from Karachi, December 21, which transmitted the text of the memorandum of conversation as Enclosure F, indicated that it was drafted by McConaughy. (Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 JCS)

346. Memorandum for the Record

Karachi, December 20, 1963.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Taylor, Gen., Trip to India and Pakistan, December 1963. Secret. The source text is Enclosure “G” to telegram 1189 from Karachi, December 21.

347. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, December 19, 1963, 11:15 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 JCS. Secret; Priority. Received in the Department of State on December 21 at 2:20 a.m. A note on the source text indicates that the telegram was delayed in transmission. Passed to the White House on December 21.

348. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, December 23, 1963.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Taylor, Gen., Trip to India and Pakistan, December 1963. Secret. Sent to the President under cover of a December 23 memorandum from Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric.

349. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, December 23, 1963, 7:34 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-INDIA. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider and approved by Talbot. Repeated to London, Karachi, and Moscow.

350. Letter From the Ambassador to India (Bowles) to President Johnson

New Delhi, December 27, 1963.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, India, Exchanges with Bowles. Secret; Personal; Eyes Only.

351. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 31, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret. Drafted by Schneider and Josif and cleared with INR/RNA/MEA and by Grant and Cleveland.

1. Editorial Note 1. Editorial Note

A number of major issues affected U.S. policy toward South Asia during the period 1961-1963. Most of these issues had deep roots and were inherited by the Kennedy administration when it took office in January 1961. Two of the more intractable problems dated back to the partition of the subcontinent in 1947 and the establishment of Pakistan. Among other tensions created with the birth of Pakistan were boundary disputes between Pakistan and India, and also between Pakistan and Afghanistan. The dispute between Pakistan and India was over rival claims to territory in the state of Jammu and Kashmir. The Kashmir dispute was the most serious of the problems affecting the subcontinent, and had the effect of creating the intermittent threat of armed conflict between India and Pakistan. The dispute between Pakistan and Afghanistan was over the Pathan tribal area of Pakistan along the Northwest frontier, referred to by Afghans as Pushtunistan. The United States, which had encouraged Pakistan to become a part of the Western alliance system as a member of both the Central Treaty Organization (CENTO) and the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) during the Eisenhower administration, had sought periodically to foster compromise solutions to these boundary disputes, but to no avail. A third boundary dispute, between India and China in the Ladakh district of Kashmir and along the McMahon Line which marked the boundary between China and India's Northeast Frontier Agency, posed no problems of mixed sympathy for the Kennedy administration, given the tensions that existed between the United States and the People's Republic of China.

U.S. concern to foster solutions to the disputes between Pakistan and its neighbors was magnified by competition between the United States and the Soviet Union for influence in South Asia. Policymakers in Washington were particularly concerned to prevent the expansion of Soviet influence in India, the leading and most populous of the neutral nations. They were also concerned about Soviet influence in Afghanistan, traditionally viewed as the gateway to the subcontinent.

Documentation on all of these issues is in Foreign Relations volumes dealing with South Asia for the 1947-1960 period. For material on the major issues affecting South Asia during the last years of the Eisenhower administration, see Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, volume XV, pages 1-823.

2. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Jones) to Secretary of State Rusk 2. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Jones) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, January 31, 1961.

SUBJECT

Significant Problems: Trends in Pakistan

Reports from our Ambassador in Karachi during recent months indicate the possibility that in certain quarters in Pakistan there is a trend toward a neutralist position. While President Ayub and his Government give every evidence of continuing as loyal allies and friends of the United States, there are indications that they may not wish to maintain a defiant attitude toward the U.S.S.R., but that they may wish to reach some sort of an accommodation. To date the principal manifestation of this possible trend is the Pakistan negotiation with the U.S.S.R. for a Soviet oil exploration team which the Pakistanis declined to consider when it was first offered by the Soviets in 1958. The U.S.S.R., for its part, following its propaganda attacks on Pakistan at the time of the U-2 incident, appears to have engaged in a strategic retreat vis-xà-vis Pakistan and has been deliberately friendly in its relations.

Our Ambassador in Karachi believes United States-Pakistan relations may have reached a critical stage and that Pakistan policies may be significantly influenced during the next few months by United States statements and actions. He also believes that if the U.S.S.R. brings an oil exploration team to Pakistan, it may enjoy “a major propaganda break-through.”

The Ambassador likewise reports a feeling of insecurity among the people of Pakistan in matters pertaining to relations with the West and states that doubts are generated by press reports of possible increases in aid to India which omit reference to Pakistan.

The Ambassador reports that President Ayub continues to give assurances that his Government strongly supports collective security and other concepts in harmony with United States policies; that he emphasizes an urgent need for United States declarations making it clear that we attach great importance to nations allied with the West and feels the United States should use the leverage of aid to India to persuade the Indians to pursue “less pro-communist lines.”

The Ambassador therefore believes there is an urgent need for a statement at the earliest practicable date which will reassure our Pakistani allies regarding our attitudes.

I believe there is convincing evidence that responsible Pakistanis are considering the desirability of moving toward a more nearly neutral position between the U.S.S.R. and the United States, and that it would be in our interest to include in our public statements evidence that we do not take Pakistan for granted; that we intend to honor our military commitments and continue our aid programs.

* Source: Department of State, NEA/SOA Files: Lot 66 D 7, Pakistan, 1961. Secret. Drafted by Theodore E. Weil (NEA/SOA).

3. Memorandum of Conversation 3. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, February 8, 1961.

SUBJECT

United States Aid to India

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. B. K. Nehru, Commissioner General for Economic Affairs, India

Mr. George W. Ball, Under Secretary for Economic Affairs

NEA—Mr. Howard R. Cottam, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Economic and Regional Affairs

OR—Mr. Sidney B. Jacques, Director, Office of International Resources

SOA—J. Wesley Adams, Officer in Charge, Economic Affairs

Foreign Aid Requirements of Third Plan

Following an exchange of pleasantries, Mr. Nehru presented a statement on India's requirements for foreign aid to cover its Third Five-Year Plan beginning April 1, 1961 (Annex A).1 The figures contained therein, he said, were revisions of those set forth in a previous memorandum2 which he had supplied Under Secretary Bowles, and which he understood the Under Secretary had given to the Under Secretary for Economic Affairs. In its essentials this memorandum proposed: (1) a U.S. commitment in principle to support India's's Third Plan up to a certain ceiling of aid, (2) a substantial amount of “free” or “non project” aid, (3) “untied” aid and (4) that India, on a population basis and for compelling political reasons, had a good case for receiving “substantially more than one-third” of total American aid.

Following his perusal of Mr. Nehru's document Mr. Ball remarked that, as Mr. Nehru was well aware, current United States laws and regulations made it difficult to accede at this time to some of the proposals advanced in the memorandum. He commented on particular points as follows: (1) Long-Term Commitment. The problem of a long-term commitment in support of the development programs of various countries was currently under consideration by the Administration. He could not predict the final results of this study but could assure Mr. Nehru of the Administration's sympathetic interest in supporting India's development.

(2) Tied Loans. Mr. Ball said that he personally hoped that the United States might be able eventually to move away from the present strict position on U.S. procurement. In view of the current balance of payments position, however, he doubted that there was any immediate prospect of our being able to depart from this policy. The issue, he said, was tied up with a resolution of basic long-term problems of capital movements.

(3) Amounts of Assistance. Here again, Mr. Ball explained that the Administration had under study the over-all problem of volume and type of aid which it might be able to provide on a global basis. As Mr. Nehru was aware, the U.S. was subject to ever-widening demands on its resources.

Mr. Nehru said that his government was faced with three main problems with respect to the financing of its Third Plan: First, he said, was the volume of aid and in this context he reviewed briefly the history of the efforts of the creditor or consortium countries to assist India. Unfortunately, he said, these countries had not been able to make available the full amount of $1,050 million in aid which had been indicated over the last few years. With the greater expenditures contemplated over the Third Plan the Government of India will need even greater foreign assistance than in the past if its Plans are to prove successful.

Secondly, it was most important that India obtain, to the extent possible, advance commitments of aid in order that the Plan projects might go forward without hindrance. He knew it would be difficult under present U.S. legislation, but hoped it might be possible for the United States to make a general commitment of support up to a certain amount, to be followed by annual appropriations and with the money to be disbursed as required.

A third problem concerned the organization of aid to India. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, he said, intended to invite all of the capital exporting countries to participate in the next meeting of the “Aid India Club” now expected to convene in April in London. Mr. Nehru said that if this meeting were to prove successful in producing firm commitments of substantial aid it was important that the United States begin conversations now to urge on the European participants the importance of their coming to that meeting prepared to make firm commitments. In this connection, he presented a table of a proposed apportionment of aid to India among the contributing countries (Annex B).

Asked by Mr. Ball whether the figure of $500 million included in the Indian table as the amount of aid to be obtained from the IBRD and IDA had, in fact, been discussed with Bank officials, Mr. Nehru said that it had. He remarked that both institutions and, in particular, the IDA, should be able to make a more substantial contribution. Noting that the Soviets had already promised $500 million in support of the Third Plan, he said that the GOI expected that the USSR would contribute an additional two sums of $150 million each. Mr. Ball thanked Mr. Nehru for the table.

Sugar Quota for India

Remarking that Ambassador Chagla had already made a representation on the matter to Secretary Rusk, Mr. Nehru urged that favorable consideration be given to the Indian request for a sugar quota of 500,000 tons in the U.S. market. This request, he said, was closely tied in with the external financing of India's Third Plan. If granted, it would enable India to earn very substantial additional funds through commercial exports. Mr. Ball explained that the question of U.S. imports of sugar was currently before the Congress and that we had no way of forecasting what action the Congress might take; however, we would certainly keep the Indian request in mind. Mr. Nehru expressed his appreciation of the legislative aspect and stated that the purpose of his representation was to urge favorable consideration in any recommendations the Department might forward to Congress. He asked if there was any possibility that India might be granted a temporary allocation under existing legislation. Mr. Ball replied that it was his understanding that, under the law, the present quota countries stood first in line, and that only if these countries were unable to supply all of their entitlement could other countries be considered. Mr. Nehru concluded this point by asserting that it would help India enormously if it could obtain an export market for this very important industry.

Barter of Ferromanganese

As a last point Mr. Nehru inquired if it would be possible to negotiate a barter agreement wherein India would provide the United States with ferromanganese in return for agricultural commodities which would be re-exported by India to third countries in exchange for other commodities required by India. Commenting that he did not know if this would be possible, Mr. Ball said that he would investigate the matter.

In conclusion, Mr. Nehru said that Mr. Ball could expect him “to be something of a nuisance.” India, he said, was a huge country and its problems and needs were great. He hoped that the United States would be able to continue the assistance which it had so generously offered in the past. Mr. Ball replied that he would be glad to receive Mr. Nehru at any time and that we intended to be of all possible assistance within the limits of our capabilities and our world-wide commitments.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5-MSP/2-861. Official Use Only. Drafted by J. Wesley Adams (NEA/SOA) on February 13 and approved in B on February 20.

1 The annexes are not attached.

2 A copy of this undated memorandum is attached to a January 31 covering transmittal memorandum from S/S to NEA. (Department of State, NEA/SOA/E Files: Lot 65 D 115, Third Five Year Plan)

4. Letter From the Ambassador to Pakistan (Rountree) to the Director of the Office of South Asian Affairs (Weil) 4. Letter From the Ambassador to Pakistan (Rountree) to the Director of the Office of South Asian Affairs (Weil)Source

Karachi, February 8, 1961.

Dear Tom: My colleagues and I have read with interest your paper entitled “Another Look at the Kashmir Problem,” which was sent with your transmittal slip of January 5, 1961.1

I find the paper in general a good outline of the problem, and am in general agreement with most of its contents. I am inclined to believe, however, that the general tone of the paper reflects a bit more optimism that Ayub and Nehru will succeed in finding a solution to the problem than events, particularly of the recent past, would support. Certainly the Pakistanis have become extremely disillusioned and believe even more strongly than before that some pressure will have to be applied on the Indians before they will move from their present adamant position. Yet the Pakistanis, and particularly Ayub, have often voiced the themes appearing in the paper that “progress toward a solution is apt to be directly dependent upon Ayub and Nehru,” and “it will be more difficult to achieve a solution at a later date when Nehru and Ayub have passed from the scene.” Ayub has long felt that only a strong leader in Pakistan such as himself, and a strong leader in India such as Nehru, can hope to solve the problem by peaceful means pursuant to arrangements which could be rendered acceptable to their respective publics.

As you know, President Ayub, as well as most Pakistanis, believes that the United States has not used to the extent that it should its appreciable potential influence upon Nehru to move toward a settlement of the Kashmir problem. Ayub and his cabinet fully understand the reasons for massive American aid to India and, although this has not always been the case, it is true now at least that they recognize that such aid to India is in fact in Pakistan's interest, as well as in the interest of the entire free world. Their main concern is that we have not used Nehru's imperative need for American assistance as an instrument to persuade him to be reasonable on the Kashmir problem, a solution to which is considered to be essential for the stability of and real progress in the area.

Apart from the general improvement of Pakistan-Indian relations which has taken place under Ayub's regime, there have been two significant developments which have led us to hope that a solution to Kashmir is not impossible. One is the fact that the Pakistanis cautiously state that the plebiscite called for by the United Nations (which they seem to recognize India will never accept) is not the only means by which the problem can be solved, and they have indicated a willingness to discuss some sort of partition. The other is the fact that Nehru disclosed a willingness in his last meeting with Ayub at least to discuss Kashmir, implying some basis other than India's claims to the entire area.

In light of this situation, I have some reservations about the statement in the paper that “for friends of India and Pakistan to intervene at this time with proposals for a solution would undoubtedly be counterproductive.” As indicated above, this is not true in the case of Pakistan. In fact, the opposite is more nearly the case. The lack of American efforts to help find a solution is a continuing and major source of Pakistani disillusionment and dissatisfaction with us.

I realize that any approach to Nehru must be extremely cautious and couched in such terms as to avoid a reversal of the present excellent trend in Indo-American relations. Yet it seems to me that the expanded aid program to India and Pakistan, which appears likely, could provide an atmosphere and context conducive to some initiative on our part. Conversely, increased aid to India unrelated to Indo-Pakistan relations might drive Pakistan further away from us and confirm the already widespread conviction that Pakistan should also have the best of both worlds.

It is easy enough for me in Pakistan to make suggestions as to what we should do in India. Obviously, I am in no position accurately to evaluate the situation there and the prospects of any particular course of action vis-a-vis Nehru. Yet it does seem to me clear that, on the one hand, the tremendous advantages to be gained by some progress on Kashmir and, on the other hand, the dangers of increased and serious problems if no progress is made, render it advisable for us not to come to any firm conclusion that we should take no initiative at this time. I believe we should take some initiative, but the precise nature of it would have to be very carefully considered. Perhaps the recent assumption of power by the new United States administration which the Indians regard as very friendly towards them would provide an opportunity for some sort of review of the situation with Nehru for the purpose of urging him to advance discussions with Pakistan designed to settle the issue on a compromise basis.

Sincerely,

Bill

P.S. I am enclosing an extra copy of this with the suggestion that it might be passed to George McGhee.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/2-861. Secret; Official-Informal.

1 The summary and conclusions portion of this paper, which was prepared by the Policy Planning Staff on November 18, 1960, is printed in Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, vol. XV, p. 214. The complete paper is in Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 67 D 548, India.

5. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 5. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, February 16, 1961, 1 p.m.

1374. Presidential Handling. President Ayub, who was in Karachi briefly en route to Dacca, telephoned last evening and asked me come to his house. Finance Minister Shoaib and Minister Fuel, Power and Water Resources Bhutto were with him (Bhutto is accompanying President to East Pakistan).

Ayub said he was thinking about asking Shoaib during his forthcoming visit in Washington to deliver personal letter to President Kennedy, and he wished talk about it informally with me and obtain my reaction. Letter would offer have Shoaib outline some of Ayub's thinking on US-Pakistan relations and his ideas concerning certain aspects of US policy. His purpose was to be helpful. He was convinced that if President Kennedy understood attitudes Pakistan and other Asian countries, particularly members of security alliances, he would be able to act appropriately to reverse present trend by which number of America's friends had begun to lose heart. President Ayub showed me text of letter which he proposed send and asked whether I thought President Kennedy would like to receive it and to have Shoaib elaborate his views. I responded I am confident President Kennedy would be happy to have President Ayub's views and, although I could not of course know whether it would be possible for him to do so, I had no doubt he would be willing to see Shoaib if his schedule permitted. Ayub asked me to seek appointment and our conversation then turned to substance of Ayub's concern re US-Pakistani relations.

Ayub reiterated that basic policy of GOP is predicated on belief that Pakistan's destiny lies in friendship with US. He had no doubt that US would continue to attach importance to this relationship on basis of alliance, and that there would be no shift in US policy inimical to Pakistan's interest. Nevertheless, he was frankly concerned that in pre-election speeches as well as in statements following assumption of office, administration leaders had on several occasions made warm statements concerning India and other neutrals and had not made such statements about Pakistan and other allies, except NATO. He said this had had disturbing effect not only in Pakistan but also in Iran, Thailand, Philippines and other countries. Also disturbing to United States Allies had been statements by President Eisenhower (to African representatives) as well as by new administration officials which gave impression that US welcomed neutralism. This connection, in responding to my comments context in which statements [made,] Ayub said he could well understand that US must say in effect that it did not insist upon countries joining security pacts against their wishes and that it desired them remain neutral if that was what they wanted, but impression unfortunately had been given that US actually encouraged neutralism and looked with greater favor upon neutralists than upon allies.

Ayub also made a point that he felt US friends, particularly in Asia, had been greatly weakened by extremely soft and almost frightened reaction of US Government to Khrushchev's bellicose threats at time of summit breakdown. When I explained again reasons for great restraint on part of US in responding to Soviet threats and bellicosity, President said while he understood this many Asians had not, and that this had weakened not only US but United States friends in Asia. “You cannot imagine how much this hurt us.” He said US position in Asia should require firmness and courage, if US expected firmness and courage on part of anti Communist leaders.

In the course of this lengthy discussion it was recognized that present public speculation in Pakistan on course of Pakistani policies was due in part to concatenation of several circumstances, particularly (A) fear which President felt was unfounded, that attitude of newly installed US administration toward Pakistan would represent change and that Pakistan might be left in exposed position vis-a-vis Communist bloc, and (B) erroneous assumption that Soviet oil negotiations had implications going beyond actual purposes of GOP. President felt that as facts became clear and doubts removed, Pakistan public would be reassured. He reiterated several times what he has told me from the outset of negotiations with Soviets, i.e. that US had nothing to fear from this matter which he said was “relatively unimportant” and largely an effort on part of GOP to soften Soviets in their hostile attitude toward Pakistan particularly in connection with such questions as Kashmir and “Pushtunistan.”

I sensed that President was somewhat in doubt as to whether he should give me a copy of the letter, since he assumed I would telegraph it in advance of Shoaib's visit. It was obvious that he attached great importance to the original being delivered to President Kennedy by Shoaib, so that latter would have opportunity to elaborate.

I strongly recommend that arrangements be made for Shoaib to call on the President as soon as convenient after his arrival in Washington February 24. I cannot exaggerate importance which I attach to President Ayub's being reassured at this time of our intention to continue to work with Pakistan as an ally, and encourage him to maintain his very strong pro-western and pro-American policies in context of collective security.

Text of letter copy in immediately following message.1

Rountree

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90/2-1661. Secret.

1 Document 6.

6. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 6. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, February 16, 1961, 3 p.m.

1375. Verbatim Text. Re immediately preceding telegram following is text of copy of letter given me by President Ayub:

Begin Text.

Dear Mr. President,

We in Pakistan are very happy on your election and on the excellent choice of your advisers. The wisdom and insight with which you are examining the problems of the world and the conviction with which you are giving expression to your views, give rise to the expectation that the Government of the United States of America will follow firm policies with courage and vigour. This is a heartening change for friends like us of America.

In the under-developed regions of the world today, two major forces are operating. The first is the force of communism with its fixed and unshakeable aim of world conquest and domination through whatever means might be considered effective in any given set of circumstances—subversion, instigation or aggression. the second is the growing feeling of resentment against the colonial powers. Somehow or other, this feeling has come to be crystalized as against The West. Of the Western Powers, their leader, namely, the United States of America is made the special target of antagonism. I may describe this second major force as anti-westernism and anti-Americanism.

The reaction to the spread of communism is different in different countries. In some, as in Pakistan, the government and the people are determined to keep this Godless creed out at all costs. We also fully believe that our destiny lies in friendship with the United States. It is therefore in the supreme interest of the West that this determination should be sustained. It cannot, however, be sustained fully if the attitude and policies in the West itself are calculated to undermine it or even create a sense of doubt in the minds of firm friends.

I have asked my Finance Minister, Mohammed Shoaib, who is visiting Washington in connection with a meeting of the World Bank, to deliver this letter personally to you. In case you would like to discuss the matter I have referred to in this letter, I am sure Mohammed Shoaib would be very happy to elucidate the point further.

With best wishes and very kind regards.

End Text.

Rountree

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90/2-1661. Secret; Presidential Handling.

7. Airgram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State 7. Airgram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of StateSource

Kabul, February 21, 1961.

G-40. Following is text of letter I personally delivered Foreign Minister Naim February 21 setting forth current U.S. position on economic development aid to Afghanistan.

“American Embassy, Kabul, February 21, 1961.

“Your Royal Highness:

“During my recent visit to the United States, I took the opportunity to discuss with top officials of our new Administration the desire and plans of Afghanistan for economic and social development. During the course of my consultations, we reviewed the whole background and the pattern of American efforts to assist Afghanistan in carrying out its plans for development.

“At the outset, I should like you to know that I found great interest in and understanding of Afghanistan at high levels of the new Administration. On the basis of the Administration's review of the current world situation, I can assure you that it is the continuing desire and intention of the United States Government to assist Afghanistan in concrete, practical ways in its own development efforts.

“I know that Your Royal Highness' Government is now engaged in the complicated process of defining its goals and laying its plans for the years ahead in the light of the progress achieved in the years just past. With this in mind, it seemed to me that it might be timely and useful to examine in some detail the role of the United States in assisting in the economic and social development of Afghanistan.

“As you know, American assistance to Afghanistan began in 1949 when the Export-Import Bank made a loan of $21,000,000 for Helmand Valley development. Technical assistance began in 1952 with a small grant for an education program. From these beginnings, American assistance has grown over the succeeding ten years until, by June 30, 1960, approximately $162 million had been committed, including $23 million of wheat. During the current fiscal year, an additional $20 million has been committed, including $7 million of wheat, bringing the total to $182 million. Of this amount $51.7 million has been provided as loans while the bulk, or $130.3 million, has been in the form of grants.

“Equally important was the expansion of American assistance into wider fields. Whereas during the first five years aid was concentrated in the Helmand Valley project and technical assistance in the field of education, the succeeding years saw an expansion to include large-scale development assistance for the construction of roads, airports and educational buildings, as well as increased technical assistance in the fields of civil aviation, mining, agriculture and public administration.

“At present, all of these programs and projects are progressing. The landing field at Kandahar International Airport is in operation; Herat airfield is in an advanced stage of construction; paving is proceeding on the Torkham road and is about to begin on the Spin Baldak road while invitations to construction contractors to bid on the Kabul-Kandahar road will be issued about March 15 under the supervision of the Corps of Engineers. The new buildings for Kabul University are under construction.

“That is the situation at present. In considering the future, account should first be taken of the fact that all of these development projects and technical assistance programs will be carried forward into the period of the Second Five-Year Plan now being drawn up by Your Royal Highness' Government. In the course of the review undertaken in Washington during my consultations, a careful estimate was made of the probable future costs, during the next five years, of completing certain projects and continuing existing programs throughout the period of the next Five-Year Plan. It was calculated that this will require approximately $85 million in new funds during American fiscal years 1962 through 1966. In fact, taking into consideration the accelerating pace of our construction projects, our own provisional estimates, not as yet legislatively authorized, is that an additional obligation of some $30 million could be effectively used during our Fiscal Year 1962. I believe it safe for you to assume that continued aid is clearly implied by these estimates, subject of course to Congressional appropriations. Furthermore, in anticipation of completion of the draft Second Five-Year Plan, our technicians have been working with officials of the appropriate Ministries to identify and estimate requirements for U.S. assistance in certain fields, notably education, agriculture, public administration and specialized training abroad.

“In the specific field of education, the United States has made an exceptional arrangement, unparalleled anywhere else in the world, whereby Your Highness' Government has been assured that up to a specific sum (a little less than $17,000,000) can be made available, subject of course to Congressional appropriations, over the next five years for development and technical assistance in the field of education. This has been made possible by a special decision, approved at the highest level, in the hope that it would facilitate sound forward planning of development in this complex field, particularly at this time, when Your Highness' Government is preparing its plans for the next five years. We have been able to make this special arrangement in the field of education because of our long experience in this field in Afghanistan, our knowledge of your plans and the well-defined limits of the field, combined with the benefit of United States sponsored specialized studies of Kabul University and of the development of primary and elementary education.

“I had the opportunity while in Washington to make known Your Government's desire for a long term commitment to assist in the development of Your country under its Second Five-Year Plan to all the top officials in the new Administration who have responsibility in matters pertaining to foreign assistance. I found these officials greatly interested in being fully informed of this problem since they are now engaged in a searching review of our world-wide assistance program with a view to determining how legislation and procedures might be improved.

“The general desirability of longer term commitments is recognized and the possibilities of obtaining the necessary legislative authority are being carefully analyzed. This is a complex matter involving the legal distribution of authority between various branches of our Government. The outcome of these studies will naturally take some time. In the meantime the new Administration had to conclude that it was not in a position to make such long term commitments to any particular nation at the present time. Our inability to make such a decision at the present time of course in no way alters our desire to continue to assist your country to the limit of our ability, taking into consideration the total resources available to us for assistance to nations around the world in the development of their countries and improvement of the standard of living of their people.

“Furthermore, you may assume that my Government reaffirms its willingness to consider new projects, including design and feasibility studies therefor, submitted through normal aid channels for consideration by ICA, DLF, and other institutions. We remain as well willing to consider future requests for agricultural commodities to provide such supplies to your people and to assist in your efforts to raise local currency for further development. For the immediate future, I am authorized to inform you that we would consider without delay a request from Your Government for an additional 50 thousand tons of wheat under the same arrangements as concluded with Your Government on November 16, 1960.

“I am further authorized to inform you that we are prepared to furnish on a top priority basis the services of an economic advisory team to Your Government to work with Your Ministry of Planning in conducting reviews, not binding on either of our Governments, of development projects, resources, implications of development activities already going on, and feasible methods as to further future development. This is a normal approach which has been accepted by other countries to help provide the technical basis for decisions as to the future direction and extent of foreign assistance. You may be assured that such an advisory team would come to your country on a continuing basis, and with an open mind prepared to arrive at independent conclusions concerning levels and types of development, taking into consideration the availability of Afghan manpower and natural resources, and other economic considerations. The advisory team would be from a non-governmental institution and technical recommendations that they would make would not be under U.S. Government supervision or influence. I shall eagerly await word as to whether such a group of advisors is desired by Your Government.

“I am also authorized to inform you that my Government can make available an additional amount of $10 million for irrigation, drainage and other land and water development within the Helmand Valley. This amount will be obligated in segments over the next several years, and the first segment will be available for expenditure as soon as plans for its most effective utilization can be finalized with the assistance of our Bureau of Reclamation team now working in the Valley. It is my understanding that considerable progress has already been made in the development of such plans and we on our part hope that these plans will be finalized as quickly as possible through mutual agreement as to the best possible expenditure of these funds.

“While in Washington I was also able to secure approval on a previous request of Your Government that U.S. assistance be furnished to help in the establishment of a cartographic institute. Likewise the request of Your Government for assistance in establishing a film laboratory for the processing of film within Afghanistan was also approved. Appropriate officials from the Embassy, USOM, and USIS are prepared to discuss these matters in detail with appropriate members of Your Government.

“In addition, I am authorized to negotiate a $500,000 Educational Exchange (Fulbright) Agreement immediately, details of which I am submitting to Your Royal Highness separately.

“Finally, I should like to convey to Your Highness the sense of encouragement which I experienced in recently observing, at first hand, the intense efforts being made by the new Administration to make our world-wide assistance programs as effective as humanly possible with a view to advancing the world a little closer to the goals of peace, progress and freedom which remain a dedicated objective of my Government.

“Accept, Your Royal Highness, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.”1

Byroade

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 789.5-MSP/2-2161. Confidential.

1 In telegram 789 from Kabul, February 22, Byroade reported that Naim expressed pleasure at the overall tone and content of the letter, but was disappointed that the United States was unable to make a long-term commitment regarding the type of economic assistance that would facilitate planning on the part of the Afghan Government. (Ibid., 789.5-MSP/2-2661)

8. Memorandum of Conversation 8. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, March 7, 1961, 11-11:45 a.m.

SUBJECT

Call of Pakistan Finance Minister on the President

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Mohamed Shoaib, Finance Minister of Pakistan

His Excellency Aziz Ahmed, Ambassador of Pakistan

G. Lewis Jones, Assistant Secretary of State for NEA

The President opened the conversation by expressing the opinion that finance ministers had the most difficult of all jobs in any government.

Shoaib said that he was honored to be received by the President and then handed the President a letter from Ayub Khan.1 The President read this and then said it was a “fine letter.” So many communications between Heads of States consisted only of generalities. This letter had substance. He asked when Shoaib was departing Washington and when told that he would depart March 11 the President said that he would give Shoaib a reply to take back with him.

The remainder of the conversation consisted principally of the President very skillfully drawing out the views of Shoaib on a variety of subjects. The President twice made the point that Pakistan was the friend and ally of the United States in “good times and bad.” He said the U.S. valued Pakistan's friendship and its stalwart posture in international problems.

Colonialism

The President remarked that it was curious that the United States, which had never held any territory in Africa, should be grouped with the colonial powers. Shoaib replied that he was afraid that this was the inevitable result of world leadership: it was the price the United States paid for its preeminent position. Shoaib said that the anti-colonialist theme had a deeper appeal to the people of Africa and the Middle East than did anti-communism. The truth was that in many of these countries the people had had no experience with communism but they had had experience with colonialism. He said in the Middle East the strongest appearance of communism had been in Syria but Nasser had stepped in and redressed the situation. The President said that there had been communism also in Iraq. Shoaib said that Iraq was tremendously isolated and did not have much influence but Nasser's influence was all-pervading. There was a tendency in the Near East and in Africa to believe that Nasser is leading an anti-colonialist campaign: anti-colonialism becomes anti-West as a result of the French, Belgian and Portuguese presence in Africa. Because these countries are the allies of the U.S., the U.S. unfortunately is considered to be in the same category.

Afghanistan

The President asked about Pakistan's relations with Afghanistan. Shoaib replied that the GOP felt that Prime Minister Daud had accepted too much aid of all kinds from the USSR to pull back. GOP feared that Afghanistan had “passed the point of return”. It did not believe that King Zahir wanted this: Daud was responsible. Shoaib said that relations between the RGA and the GOP were tense but “of course there is no military problem.” He told how a tribal army coming from Afghanistan had been routed by the tribesmen on the Pakistan side. (Note: he did not mention Khrushchev's support for the Pushtunistan theory.)

Iran

The President said: “What about Iran?” Shoaib replied that Iran was the subject of constant concern on the part of the GOP. President Ayub stopped there whenever he travelled in order to talk to the Shah. He said that the GOP was convinced that the Shah was solidly pro-West. The country had, however, mismanaged its very considerable resources. The people had looked poorer to him the last time he had been there. The elections in Iran had not gone very well and the country was subjected to vitriolic radio attacks from the USSR. The Shah had a large body of ideas regarding his army and at one time had suggested he might become the Supreme Commander of CENTO. Shoaib repeated that he did not believe that Iran would turn neutralist.

Laos

The President asked whether Shoaib had any ideas with regard to Laos. Shoaib replied that he did not feel competent to talk on this complicated subject.

Aid Program

The President said that the administration was going to have difficulties with the Congress in getting through its aid program. It was difficult to go before the Congress year after year seeking money for foreign aid. The Congress had in mind “bad experiences” with foreign aid such as the $300,000,000 spent in Laos. However, the administration was going to fight hard.

Oil Prospecting Agreement with USSR

The President asked Shoaib about the $30,000,000 agreement recently reached between the GOP and the USSR for oil prospecting. He said he understood that American oil companies had prospected for oil in Pakistan but were thought not to have done a good job—not to have looked very hard. Shoaib said that this impression did not exist among Pakistanis who knew the real situation. Eight or nine foreign companies had spent between seventy and eighty million dollars prospecting for oil in Pakistan. Unfortunately, they had only found gas. Over three years ago the USSR had suggested that it could find oil in Pakistan and would like to try. The GOP considered long and carefully and finally decided to let the USSR work in the area not given as concessions to foreign companies. This was the result of a “change of attitude” towards the GOP on the part of the USSR: earlier the USSR had insisted that the GOP, if it wished to be helped by the Soviets, should withdraw from its alliances—now the USSR said keep your alliances, we will help you anyway. Shoaib said that in negotiating the agreement a very interesting fact had emerged. The Soviets had said that they had three rates of interest. For communist countries the interest was 2%; for neutralist countries the rate of interest was 2-1/2% and for Western committed countries the rate was 4%. The GOP replied that if the interest was to be 4% the deal was off whereupon the USSR quickly agreed to 2-1/2% interest on the $30,000,000 credit of which $25,000,000, approximately, would be in the form of drilling machinery and associated equipment. Only about $5,000,000 would be for technical assistance.

The President commented that if the Russians did find oil this would cause the American companies who had earlier looked for oil in Pakistan to lose face. Shoaib replied that the Soviet Ambassador had commented that if the USSR did not find oil the USSR would lose face.

Indian-Pakistan Relations

The President asked how relations with India were going. Shoaib replied that regrettably, since the Indus Waters Agreement, relations had not been improving. The outstanding question between the two countries was Kashmir. When Nehru had visited Karachi last fall Ayub had had a number of talks with him suggesting that a solution to the Kashmir problem should be found which would take account of the interests of the three parties: the Kashmiris, the Indians and the Pakistanis. Nehru had not followed up on this. Shoaib had spent two hours with him not long ago in Delhi and Nehru had not raised the subject. Every Pakistani in every walk of life felt very deeply about Kashmir. There could be no really close relations between the two countries until Kashmir was settled. (Note: Shoaib did not make the point that the United States should bring pressure on India to achieve a settlement.)

Relations with Communist China

The President asked whether Shoaib thought that the Russians would be able to restrain the Chinese Communists. Shoaib replied that he did not know. The ChiComs had recently made overtures to the GOP in connection with the delineation of Pakistan's northern frontier. The GOP was not sure what the ChiComs had in mind but they gathered that they were prepared to reach a settlement, if only to bring pressure on India (he laughed). He said that the ChiComs would say that they were able to reach an agreement on their border with Burma, Nepal, and Pakistan and that the Indians were at fault in not agreeing also.

Pakistan's Economic Development

The President gave Shoaib an opportunity to speak on the subject of Pakistan's economic development. Shoaib said that all countries make mistakes in their economic plans and execution but he was pleased to say that he thought the GOP is now on the right track and that it is moving forward with its plans to benefit the people of Pakistan. He mentioned the GOP desire to have more PL 4802 to increase the calorie intake. He said that Mr. Galbraith, shortly to be appointed United States Ambassador to India, had gone over the GOP plans and had found them good.

On the political side, Shoaib said that some progress was being made in connection with the Constitution but he did not dwell on this.

Communal Rioting

With regard to Indian-Pakistan relations Shoaib told the President that one reason why there had been a deterioration was the communal killings which had recently taken place in India. Resentment against this ran high in Pakistan and there had been some student rioting in Karachi. Shoaib said that according to “Dawn” about 1000 Moslems had died in India. Lewis Jones quoted the Embassy in Delhi as having estimated the actual number of deaths in the neighborhood of 100 or 200 to which Shoaib did not demur. Shoaib said that India and Pakistan both have approximately 11% minorities from the point of view of religion—Moslems in India and Hindus in Pakistan. However, the population of India being so much greater the actual number of Moslems is much greater and the concern felt for their welfare in Pakistan is understandable. Shoaib repeated that in a recent incident a whole family had been burned to death by the Hindus. He then told the story of his rescuing a Moslem family from a Hindu mob some years ago. (Note: It was interesting to see both Shoaib and Aziz Ahmed speaking on this subject with real emotion. Both of them are highly intelligent, Western-educated individuals but they were profoundly moved.)

The President accompanied his visitors to the door of the office and said goodbye. Shoaib and Ahmed asked Jones what might be said to the press waiting outside. Jones showed them a text of the Department's 1469 to Karachi3 and Shoaib said he would use the points therein which he did to a fairly large group of reporters.

The Pakistanis took Jones back to the Department in their car. They were evidently greatly pleased by the reception they had received and Shoaib spoke of the President's “genius for putting people at their ease.”

Comment:

The visit was a great success and the publicity regarding it in Pakistan will be useful. It is interesting that Shoaib did not mention to the President Pakistan's hope for additional military equipment or the agreement in principle to prepare a four-year PL 480 program for Pakistan.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 4/59-4/61. Confidential. Drafted by Jones. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held in the White House. (Ibid.) Shoaib visited Washington February 24-March 11. Additional documentation on the Shoaib visit is in Department of State, Central Files 611.90D, 790D.00, and 890D.00.

1 See Document 6.

2 P.L. 480 was formally entitled the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act, enacted on July 10, 1954. For text, see 68 Stat. 454.

3 Telegram 1469 to Karachi, March 6, transmitted the text of the press release that the White House planned to release following Shoaib's meeting with the President. (Department of State, Central Files, 790D.00/3-261)

9. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State 9. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of StateSource

Kabul, March 14, 1961, 1 p.m.

859. Believe Department should be fully aware possibility we approaching serious crisis in Pakistani-Afghan relations.

Pushtun problem goes back in history long before advent to power of any current leaders involved. It became more acute at time Indian partition when tribesmen in unadministered areas given choice of joining India or Pakistan. Seizing on opportunity presented by Abdul Ghaffar Khan's opposition to referendum and his cooperation with Congress, RGA has since maintained that tribes should have been given additional choices of independence or joining Afghanistan. Upon coming into power in 1954, Daud made righting this “wrong” a foremost policy of his government. In 1955 issue reached stage of “flag incident” and closing of border by Pak and severe chilling Afghan relations with West. At this time, Soviets started major initiative to penetrate country economically, undermine neutrality and independence through foreign aid program and through aid and trade to tie Afghan economy to Communist bloc.

US has publicly recognized Durand Line1 and throughout has felt merits of issue largely on side Pakistan. US refrained from taking sides publicly in hope being effective bringing two sides together. Our efforts have been futile for many reasons among which are: 1. Deliberate vagueness of Afghan position which makes it difficult understand what they really want; and 2. Pakistan's persistent efforts pretend no problem exists which makes serious discussion extremely difficult.

When Ayub came to power he apparently decided that handling RGA with kid gloves on this problem unwise. All evidence seems to indicate he has felt that blunt soldier-like approach was in best interests Pakistani.

He took lead in publicly calling Pushtunistan issue a “stunt” and otherwise showed condescending attitude towards Royal family and Afghan. He has justified his approach by saying he believed tough approach would drive Afghan to its knees and then it would come crawling to West. We have not agreed his approach but have been unable convince him otherwise.

Afghan position has correspondingly hardened, and preoccupation with this issue has become paramount over all others recently, including development, the other keystone to Daud's policy. It led him into abortive attempt to retain influence in tribal areas of Pakistan last fall when he sent large group of tribesmen across Durand Line. These were slaughtered in ambush by Pakistanis, resulting in great loss of face for Daud and serious challenge to him personally to remain head of government. Pak followed up quickly to take advantage of situation and extend its control by stationing political agents and para-military personnel throughout area to bring it for first time under effective control by any government. Winter came and activities largely ceased due to inaccessibility.

This consolidation of Pak control is direct challenge to RGA's avowed Pushtunistan policy and recognized as such by the government. Our estimate is that Daud and Naim see no course other than to bow in defeat or take some action on their own to recoup their position. We believe they will choose latter, even though aware that it may lead to the end of Afghanistan as independent country and end of Royal family itself. While this may appear irrational and suicidal in American eyes, it is not entirely unprecedented reaction in Moslem Middle East. Daud's present illness, if anything, may well encourage rather than retard this type of thinking.

For the present, Afghan agents are doing what they can to stir up trouble across border. The fact that the area [they are?] apparently as successful as they are leads us to conviction that there is considerable local resentment among tribes across border against Pakistanis for taking over area. Pakistanis have taken dramatic counter-measures including use of modern aircraft which would certainly seem to increase emotions and tensions. Our efforts to urge restraint upon part of Pakistanis not very effective as they take position we know little about tribal area and our advice therefore not very pertinent.

We believe the RGA will probably push situation to stage of guerrilla warfare as means of showing action on their part in support of tribes and in hopes of attracting enough attention to begin internationalization of dispute by introduction into UN. This is certainly highly dangerous as Pakistanis seem likely to react militarily, quickly and with vigor. Our view is that Daud probably no longer has strength to weather such a chain of events, at least as Prime Minister. Only apparent successors, Ali Mohammed and Naim, are probably not of sufficient strength to hold government together. Successors in Royal Family with capability are in much younger age bracket and without popular support. Opposition groups in process formation are as yet unequipped to take over government without apparent period of chaos. One can visualize segments of Pakistani opinion who would be gratified by downfall of Royal Family as worthwhile end in itself, but we can not share their sanguinity without some certainty as to what is to follow.

In event open armed conflict or other unmistakable crisis growing out of border troubles, it possible USSR would side with Afghanistan. In such case, we would seem to have no alternative but unstinting support Pakistan, while, if chaos in Afghanistan should result, Russians might seize opportunity to attempt installation pro-Soviet regime. However, it our guess Russians at this time would not want this issue to create a new crisis, one of East-West conflict, forcing them take sides either in UN or in field. They must feel they are doing well at present in Afghanistan and they have made a small but impressive beginning toward a more favorable position in Pakistan. We believe Soviets would prefer play long-term political game for assured route to sea rather than short quick showdown to absorb Afghanistan.

Thus Soviets might conclude their interests best served by adopting hands-off attitude in event outbreak border hostilities. By withholding support Afghanistan would be left isolated and it is doubtful if present RGA could long survive the stresses which conflict with Pakistan would entail. The Soviets could well decide that proximity plus the foothold already achieved would then enable them to exert a decisive influence in choice of any successor government which might emerge. In the meantime their refusal to back Afghanistan would have a highly favorable effect on government leaders and public opinion in Pakistan and greatly expand bridgeheads of neutralist sentiment which now seem evident there.

For the present, the Afghans are obviously trying involve US politically in dispute to maximum extent possible. This probably why Naim made his naive suggestion to me to go myself as observer across border or send someone from my staff. It also probably why they over-playing press [concerning] use of US equipment and US involvement in support of Pakistanis. Daud's request to Harriman that US extend its “good offices”2 must also probably be looked upon at least partially in that light, although we should not deny that certain amount of honest desperation about current situation may also have been a motive.

The history of US efforts either with formal good offices or in more informal efforts at reconciliation has not been a happy one. Another effort would seem unlikely to succeed unless Afghan position could be more realistically defined and Ayub could be convinced honestly to try find some face-saving solution for RGA that did not prejudice Pakistan's vital interest.

On the other hand it difficult to sit idly by and face prospect not only loss of our considerable investment here but of this issue becoming active additional trouble spot in world situation. One immediate thought for Department to consider is whether Ayub could be informally induced see Daud in Rome en route back from London. In view his [garble] past efforts am hesitant to recommend that US formally urge Ayub to such a course. I discussed such a possibility with Pakistanian Ambassador recently, making clear that I not recommending such a course either to him or to Washington. He seemed to feel that it might be a good idea.

Department should consider whether Harriman should not see Ayub if possible when he returns to London. Harriman could inform Ayub directly circumstances of visit with Daud so as to lay any false suspicions that may arise, and of course hear directly Ayub's side of story. Occasion might arise for Harriman, in obvious personal manner and not under instructions of President, to query Ayub as to whether it would not be worthwhile for him to see Daud while enroute home in order try avert dangerous situation. Am encouraged in making this suggestion by fact that Bhutto in discussion with Rountree (Karachi telegram 216)3 did not rule out possibility of direct Ayub-Daud meeting. It admittedly hard to see what concession either party would or could make, although mutual cessation of propaganda and withdrawal military forces in and adjacent to sensitive areas immediately comes to mind.

Will continue study what US might usefully do and forward any new thoughts that come to us.

Byroade

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/3-1461. Secret; Priority. Also sent Niact to Tehran for Harriman. Repeated to Moscow, Karachi, and London for Harriman. Harriman was en route from Europe to the Middle East at the time.

1 The boundary line between British India and Afghanistan drawn up by a British mission under Sir Henry Durand and agreed to by Amir Abdur Rahman Khan of Afghanistan on November 12, 1893. For the text of the agreement, see British and Foreign State Papers, vol. 95, 1901-1902, p. 1049.

2 Harriman met with Daud in Rome on March 11. The discussion focused on Daud's concern about the use of military equipment provided to Pakistan by the United States to maintain control over what Daud referred to as the “independent areas” of Pushtunistan. Harriman pointed to the dilemma that the Pushtunistan dispute posed for the United States in that it involved a seemingly intractable quarrel between two countries with which the United States had friendly relations. Daud suggested that it might prove useful for the United States to offer its good offices to try to facilitate a settlement to the dispute. (Telegram 3513 from Rome, March 11; Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/3-1161)

3 Telegram 1533 from Karachi, March 11, repeated to Kabul as telegram 216, reported on a March 10 discussion between Rountree and Acting Foreign Minister Bhutto concerning relations between Pakistan and Afghanistan. Acting under instructions from Washington, Rountree expressed concern about the use of equipment provided to Pakistan by the United States under the military assistance program. Bhutto justified the use by noting that Afghan agents were actively fomenting unrest in the Pathan tribal regions along the border with Afghanistan. Pakistan had to use what means it had for internal security purposes, but he assured Rountree that military equipment provided by the United States would not be used in connection with the dispute with Afghanistan except within Pakistan. Bhutto concluded that the dispute should be susceptible to solution by personal diplomacy by Ayub and Daud. (Ibid.)

10. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 10. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, March 15, 1961, 1:04 p.m.

1533. Deliver following message President Ayub, advising date time delivery:

“March 11, 1961

Dear Mr. President:

I appreciate your letter of February 151 which was handed to me by Finance Minister Shoaib on March 7. I like its plain speaking and directness. This is not a time when problems should be obscured by friendly generalities. I agree with you that the force of communism has the ‘fixed and unshakable aim of world conquest and domination through whatever means might be considered effective in any given set of circumstances—subversion, instigation or aggression.' As I see it, this is the force which we must stop throughout the free world and weaken within the Sino-Soviet bloc itself. I can assure you that the United States has the determination to do this.

I was interested in your analysis of the resentment felt in some underdeveloped regions—feelings which have become crystalized against the Western powers, particularly the United States. As you know, the United States is not a colonial power and there are not many colonial powers, at least as usually defined by history, left in the world. More often than not, demagogues whip this dead or dying horse for their own ends, and are prompted to do so by those with sinister motives. Most colonial areas, again using their historical definition, are well on the road to being decolonialized, and in most cases are being materially assisted by the West in the process. It is not too difficult to foresee a period when the only territories left that can be described as colonialized will be the Sino-Soviet satellites and the Chinese Communist and Soviet provinces, in the Central Asian Muslim areas and elsewhere.

I know that I need not reaffirm the friendship which we in the United States feel toward the people of Pakistan. Our common goals, and our mutual understanding of the motivations of anti-western forces serve only to strengthen the ties of friendship between our two countries. The United States is seeking world peace with justice for all nations and it will continue to do so. Fortunately, we have friends and allies, such as Pakistan, who are pursuing the same ends.

I want you to know how helpful and informative my conversations with Mr. Shoaib and Ambassador Ahmed were, supplementing as they did your very thoughtful letter.

Mrs. Kennedy and I look forward with much pleasure to seeing you in November. Meanwhile, I hope you will not hesitate to write me whenever you consider it useful. For my part, I find these exchanges most helpful and shall continue to keep in touch with you on matters of common concern.

With warm personal regards,

Sincerely, John F. Kennedy“

White House desires text this message not become public. Signed original being pouched.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90D/3-1561. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution; Verbatim Text. Drafted by G. Lewis Jones, cleared by Dungan (White House) and in draft by Office of Soviet Union Affairs Director McSweeney, and approved in S/S by Walter J. Stoessel.

1 See Document 6.

11. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 11. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi,March 22, 1961, 7 p.m.

1622. Reference immediately preceding telegram,1 following report of Ambassador Harriman's conversations with President Ayub:

At outset meeting and in accordance understanding with Ambassador Harriman, I delivered original of President Kennedy's letter March 112 and text message March 18.3 These were read by Ayub and provided excellent background for discussions. Harriman explained purposes visit, emphasizing U.S. interest in Pakistan and our appreciation of Pakistan as ally. He said President Kennedy desired share with Ayub views on matters of common interest, and was looking forward to Ayub's visit in November. Harriman spoke at some length on general aspects U.S. policy and atmosphere in Washington.

Ayub expressed sincere appreciation for letters and warmly welcomed Harriman. He said he had been tremendously impressed by President Kennedy and by energy of present administration, which he thought would take initiative in world affairs consistent with U.S. leadership role. He said that, speaking frankly, “people” had felt that speeches made in course U.S. election campaign had indicated there would be change in American attitudes toward Pakistan and other allies to their detriment, but he had never felt so himself. He knew U.S. needed Pakistan as Pakistan needed U.S. He had felt for some time that U.S. was losing its leadership; that previous administration lacked power of quick decision. He thought this situation would be greatly improved under new leadership. He said his government was trying to improve relations with other countries and had taken some steps to “normalize” Pakistan's relations with China and USSR. Nevertheless, focal point of Pakistan's policy continued to be friendship with U.S. and we could count on Pakistan as true friend and ally. He had no doubt as to intentions of Communist bloc to achieve world domination, and only way of preventing this was for free world to stand together.

[Here follows discussion unrelated to South Asia.]

Afghanistan: Harriman told Ayub of his talk in Rome with Daud, and Pak-Afghan relations discussed generally. Ayub reiterated his desire have good relations with Afghanistan, but expressed great annoyance with Afghan activities and fact country seemed becoming more under influence Soviet Union. He reviewed his talks with Naim January 1960 along lines previously reported, and described Bajaur operations of last September. He said this had resulted in trouble between Afghan tribes and RGA and said RGA had employed force, including Soviet supplied aircraft, against dissident tribal elements. He had hoped Afghans had learned lesson as result crushing defeat inflicted by Pakistan tribes upon intruders. However, current intelligence reports indicated substantial military build-up in Afghan territory across from Bajaur. He thought between five and eight brigades were in position. Afghan agents extremely active in Pakistan tribal area endeavoring foment revolt. Harriman mentioned Afghan complaint that Pakistanis using US military equipment, including planes for bombing in tribal region. He said while we recognized GOP right to maintain internal security, he concerned that use of US equipment had become issue in Afghanistan.

We were making efforts to avoid having Afghan turn more to Soviets and it was our hope that current troubles would be handled with restraint. Ayub responded that he sure Pakistan had enough equipment of its own to deal with Afghanistan intrusions into Pakistan. Although he did not say that American aircraft would not be used in future, he described reconnaissance operation and small-scale bombing of two houses and said those had been grossly exaggerated by Afghanistan. He said we could be certain Pakistan would behave in responsible manner.

In course this talk President said he understood why US extending aid to Afghan and stated our common hope was that Afghanistan would be saved from Soviet takeover. He was not optimistic as to prospects of success so long as Daud in control. Foreign Minister commented he thought US should continue its aid programs in Afghanistan and continue try talk sense into Afghan heads.

India and Nehru: Ayub told Harriman of his talks with Nehru in London. He had told Nehru of his earnest wish to come to agreement on water problems between India and East Pakistan arising from desire each country build dams on Ganges River which might affect the other. He had suggested that commission headed by Pakistani Minister go to India to negotiate with similar Indian commission. Nehru had been receptive to this idea and had asked Ayub write him letter setting forth his plan. Ayub encouraged to believe this problem might be worked out satisfactorily and had told Nehru so. He had gone on to say he wanted to work out all problems with India, particularly Kashmir. He had told Nehru solution to Kashmir problem would bring Indo-Pakistan relations to point where both governments could effect substantial savings in their defense budgets, and could concentrate upon defense matters affecting them both. Ayub said, however, that while he was talking about Kashmir Nehru assumed his “far away attitude” and did not respond.

Ayub set forth at length his views on importance of solution to Kashmir problem and his belief that US should do more to bring Nehru around to negotiation. He was concerned that if problem not settled while Nehru alive it would be extremely difficult to settle it later. This issue poisoned relations between two countries and made it impossible for them to make progress as otherwise would be the case.

In course discussion of India, Ayub again expressed fear that India would disintegrate in years to come and that portions at least would become Communist. Nehru and Congress Party were now cohesive force, but with departure of present leadership stresses and strains within country would greatly intensify under Communist pressure. He understood concept of US aid to India and recognized this in interest not only of US but of Pakistan and rest of free world. He felt objective of American aid would be greatly advanced and that future prospect of India would be improved if Kashmir problem worked out so that India and Pakistan could cooperate rather than live as enemies.

Communist China and border negotiations: Ayub and Harriman in course private talk discussed China and Chinese representation issue, in connection with which I understand Harriman will personally report. Harriman told me that during this talk question Pakistani willingness to negotiate with Chinese on border arose, and Ayub had followed line generally set forth Embtel 1483.4 He had emphasized that negotiations based upon GOP desire to avoid trouble with China and not any desire to embarrass India. He had also recognized possibility of arrangement between Moscow and Peking in which Moscow giving impression of being sympathetic to India vis-a-vis China and Chinese giving impression sympathy with Pakistan vis-a-vis India. He had said he would not fall in that trap. This matter discussed further in presence of Foreign Minister and myself. In aside to me Foreign Minister commented that while original intention had been to confine negotiations to Hunza border, more recently it had been decided it would not be practical to do this. Thus GOP thinking of discussing with Chinese arrangement covering entire Sinkiang border from Afghanistan to a projection of cease-fire line. Arrangements would be entirely on de facto basis and would provide an understanding as to point beyond which Chinese military would not go in direction of Pakistani territory, and point beyond which Pakistani military would not go in direction Sinkiang, leaving aside legal question as to where border in fact exists. I asked whether he thought placing discussion on this basis would render Indians any less opposed and he replied that he did not know. He commented that at time of Nehru's visit last September GOP intention negotiate with China was discussed and each side showed other its maps. At that time Nehru had not seemed unduly disturbed over prospect of talks between China and Pakistan. (I might comment that this discussion left me confused as to what GOP now has in mind. I hope to obtain some clarification in near future.)

Collective security and neutrals: Harriman explained to Ayub intention of US to continue strongly to support collective security. Secretary Rusk's plan attend CENTO and SEATO meetings was evidence of this. We valued our allies and intend continue work with them in spirit of alliances. Nevertheless, we considered it important to US and to free world generally that neutral nations be supported and helped, and it was intention of administration to do this. He pointed out that most so-called neutral countries were not in fact neutral in terms of their determination to preserve independence and to avoid being taken over by Communists. In order to do this they required assistance and we felt US, along with other western countries, must earnestly support them. President Ayub did not dissent from this philosophy and indeed seemed to understand and agree with it. His main point was that while helping neutrals US should maintain distinction between them and allies and pursue policies which would make it possible for nations to remain committed, undertaking risks which alliances entail. He spoke of importance of US having strong and effective atomic deterrent and mobile power, and also of having throughout world and particularly in Europe and Asia friendly armies equipped to undertake military action which might become necessary under concept of collective security. Without these friendly forces US could never hope to have enough military resources to prevent Communist expansion. He reviewed in this connection substance of his letter contained in Embassy despatch 700, March 6.5

[Here follows discussion on collective security and developments in Africa, Europe, and the Near East.]

Internal: Discussion embraced Pakistan development program and Ayub expressed appreciation of US assistance without which Pakistan could do little. He identified major long-term problems as being rate of population growth and loss of agricultural land due to water logging and salinization. Flight to Rawalpindi provided opportunity observe at first-hand vastness of problem. Ayub said he had not yet seen Shoaib following latter's return Washington, but he knew generally of Shoaib's optimism as result talks with American officials. Harriman assured Ayub continued interest economic development and expressed particular interest in problem of lost cultivatable land.

Ayub mentioned briefly his desire hold down military expenditures and fact studies being made as to how this can be done without reducing fighting strength.

In discussing recent demonstrations in Pakistan cities, Ayub said trouble was caused largely by Communist elements on campuses. He said government determined to take appropriate measures against agitators. Nevertheless, Pakistani public had been shocked by anti-Muslim riots in India and murder of Muslims which had caused great resentment. He personally had felt that Indian Government had not taken appropriate measures to prevent riots or to bring them under control when started.

Rountree

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90D/3-2261. Secret; Limit Distribution. Harriman visited Pakistan March 19-22 as part of a fact-finding trip for President Kennedy, which included stops in Europe, Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia.

1 In telegram 1621 from Karachi, March 22, Rountree summarized Harriman's “highly successful” visit to Pakistan. Harriman met with Ayub for a total of 5-1/2 hours on March 20, beginning with a meeting at 11:30 a.m. and concluding in the evening in Rawalpindi, following a trip together from Karachi on Ayub's plane. (Ibid.) Telegram 1622 begins with a report on the 11:30 meeting, but is apparently a composite report of the discussions throughout the day.

2 See Document 10.

3 Telegram 1567 to Karachi, March 18, transmitted a message from Kennedy to Ayub to be delivered by Harriman when he arrived. The message explained Harriman's fact-finding mission. The telegram also transmitted a similar message to Nehru, to be delivered by Harriman in New Delhi. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.90D/3-1861)

4 In telegram 1483 from Karachi, March 3, Rountree reported on a conversation with Ayub on March 1 in which Ayub outlined what he said was the increasing threat to Pakistan's security posed by China. The best prospect for avoiding difficulties with China lay, he felt, in reaching agreement with the Chinese on the demarcation of the disputed border between Pakistan and China. (Ibid., 396.01-VI/3-361)

5 Despatch 700 from Karachi transmitted copies of an exchange of letters between Ayub and Leiutenant Colonel Heath Bottomly of the War College at the Air University at Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama. The correspondence dealt with the subject “Maxims for Limited War,” and was initiated by a letter from Bottomly to Ayub dated December 20, 1960. Ayub replied on March 3, 1961. (Ibid., 711.551/3-661)

12. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 12. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, March 24, 1961, 7 p.m.

2157. Eyes Only the President and Secretary State. From Harriman.1 I had two hours and one half with Nehru during our second meeting on March 23.2 After discussing policies of new administration, he said he had developed confidence and respect for President even before the inauguration and admired greatly the statements and actions taken since. I explained our opposition to admission of Red China to UN and determination to honor commitments to Formosa. He replied that he understood the background of position on Red China. He said he is greatly disturbed by Peking's aggressive attitude and believes the danger to world comes from Peking rather than Moscow. He thinks Khrushchev is having considerable difficulty with Peking as shown by the acrimonious exchange in November at Moscow. Sooner or later, he believes, the historic conflict between China and Russia will weaken the present alliance but not for some years; the Soviets must be worried about the aggressive policies of Peking. He agreed that disarmament or arms limitation was the most important subject for discussion with Moscow but that any agreement reached would need concurrence of Peking. He is convinced Khrushchev does not want war and would be ready to ease tensions if it were not for Peking. He recalled the Mohammedan crusades of the past. Today same words which led to “conversion by the sword” are spoken by Moslems but aggressive intentions are gone. Soviets, similarly, speak vigorously but their fire for converting others to Communism by force has lost much of its intensity. In reply, I pointed out that Berlin and other specific situations showed continued Soviet aggressive intentions and that they were practicing brinkmanship and would exploit any free world weakness.

Nehru said the Chinese Communists were at height of their aggressive intentions and the situation is dangerous. He had tried to negotiate with Chou En-lai on the boundary question but had gotten nowhere. When I mentioned to him Ayub's statement that he would negotiate with Peking settlement on the undefined boundary in the Hunza area, Nehru said China has settled with Burma and might with Pakistan to show “unreasonableness of India.”

He spoke at some length on Indian-Pakistan relations saying that Kashmir provided the basic division. He blamed Pakistani politicians for continuing to whip up the issue, stating he is prepared to settle on the boundaries as they now are.

We discussed Iran. He said it unfortunate US had backed unpopular governments and that aid had not in some cases gone to help the people; nevertheless, Shah seems to be the only one who could give stability at this time.

On Congo he said all trouble comes from Belgian interference. He admitted Soviets had also tried intervene last summer but they had been thrown out; Nasser's attempts to supply Gizenga had not been successful because of Sudan's attitude. In discussing Dayal, he said he hoped Dayal could return and be sent to Pakistan but he did not want to have him forced out under fire. I, of course, expressed appreciation for India's support of UN by supply of troops.

In speaking of Laos, Nehru said that no government could be successful without inclusion of the Pathet Lao. He contends that majority of Pathet Lao are not Communists but if opposition to them is continued they will be driven closer to Communists. He maintained that the only authority for intervention is the Geneva Agreement. It is up to Soviet Union and UK to decide whether the ICC is to be convened or something else. He did not seem to be familiar with the NNC concept and stuck to legalistic position that Soviet Union and UK as co-chairmen should take the lead.3

We discussed possibility of his visiting Washington. He said that it would be inconvenient for him to contemplate a trip in near future but that he did want to see the President at a time when it would be mutually agreeable. This, he agreed, I should tell the press.

Maffitt

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.13/3-2461. Secret; Priority.

1 Harriman visited New Delhi March 22-24.

2 Harriman's initial meeting with Nehru took place on March 22. Discussion was limited to the meeting that Nehru was scheduled to have that day with Laotian Prime Minister Souvanna Phouma. (Telegram 2114 from New Delhi, March 22; Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/3-2261)

3 Harriman saw Nehru again on March 24 to deliver a letter from Kennedy, which was transmitted to New Delhi on March 23 in telegram 2616. Kennedy expressed concern in the letter about the dangerous situation in Laos, and he encouraged Nehru to take any diplomatic steps that might help stop the fighting between Pathet Lao and Royal Laotian forces. (Ibid., 751J.00/3-2361) Nehru responded that he would do everything he could to assist in obtaining an armistice in Laos. (Telegram 2153 from New Delhi, March 24; ibid., 751J.00/3-2461)

13. Editorial Note 13. Editorial Note

On March 30, 1961, Secretary of State Rusk stopped briefly in New Delhi and met with Prime Minister Nehru. Rusk was returning from the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Ministerial Council meeting in Bangkok, Thailand. Discussion over lunch focused on mutual concerns in Laos and the Congo. Rusk's memorandum of the conversation, which deals almost exclusively with the discussion concerning the Congo, is printed in volume XX, pages 114-115.

14. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Ball) to President Kennedy 14. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Ball) to President KennedySource

Washington, April 19, 1961.

SUBJECT

Proposed United States Aid Commitments to India and Pakistan

It is proposed that the United States indicate at the forthcoming Consortium of free world countries on India (April 25-27) a willingness to commit up to $1 billion in the next two years in support of India's external resource requirements in the Third Five-Year Plan period. It is also proposed that a United States commitment be indicated at the Pakistan Consortium meeting, now scheduled for late May to consider Pakistan's Second Five-Year Plan. While we cannot suggest with precision an appropriate amount for a Pakistan commitment, it would probably be of the order of magnitude of $250,000,000. Each commitment would include all United States dollar assistance but would not include food provided under P.L. 480. The commitments would be made explicitly subject (a) to the availability of United States funds, (b) to the provision of assistance by other advanced nations as noted in Section III of the attached study entitled Proposals for United States Aid Commitments to India and Pakistan,1 and (c) to other conditions noted in that study.

These proposals have been agreed to in substance by the appropriate officials in the Department of State, the Department of the Treasury, the Bureau of the Budget, ICA, and the DLF. They have also been cleared in substance by the Task Force on Foreign Economic Assistance. The attached study has been reviewed by Dr. Max Millikan.

We believe it essential that the United States make a substantial commitment to the requirements of the Indian Plan in April and to the Pakistan Plan in May, recognizing that such commitments anticipate the new aid program prior to Congressional consideration of the program.

Recommendation:

That you approve the recommendations in the attached document.2

George W. Ball

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 4/16/61-4/30/61. Confidential.

1 The attached 13-page study is not printed.

2 The recommendations in the conclusion of the study called for approval of 2-year commitment to India of up to $1 billion, approval in principle of a commitment to Pakistan in an amount to be determined before the Pakistan Consortium meeting, and authorization for Presidential messages to be sent to the other governments involved in the two consortia urging similarly substantial commitments. A note on a copy of the memorandum reads: “Approved per RDungan to FAMau 4/22/61.” (Department of State, Central Files, 891.00-Five Year/4-1961)

15. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 15. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, April 20, 1961, 6 p.m.

1832. In meeting last evening President Ayub said he wished discuss Afghanistan. His evaluation was that, following abortive Laskar intrusion last September, Daud had been under increasing pressure in Afghanistan including members of Royal Family who were becoming more concerned by his pro-Soviet policies. USSR saw in Daud willing tool for their purposes and were endeavoring support him. Thus they were willing to make public statements on Pushtunistan even though this set back their objectives to create better position for themselves in Pakistan. It could be expected that Soviets would continue give strong support to Daud, including economic and military assistance. Daud's tactics seemed focused in two primary directions. First, to obtain Soviet support to him personally and to his efforts to create a situation in tribal regions of Pakistan which would permit Afghans to take matter to UN in hope of building up sympathy for their position. Secondly, to work on the Americans in order to achieve continuation of American assistance to Afghanistan, but more importantly to bring Americans to press Pakistanis not to employ force in maintenance of internal security on Pakistan side of Durand Line.

President said he had had several reports of conversations which RGA had had with American officials in which they complained about use of American arms by GOP in tribal region. He had been surprised that there had been little indication that response to Afghan officials had included strong reaffirmation of US position on Durand Line, and that we had not pointed out to Afghans that Pakistanis had perfect right to take whatever measures were appropriate to preserve their internal security. Afghan demarches seem to have been based on assumption that Afghans had some right to intrude in Pakistani territory. It seemed to him that American officials had at times equated Afghan intrusions into Pakistan with Pakistani use of American arms for internal security purposes.

He said his concern had grown as result demarches which I had made to Bhutto (Embtel 1533)1 and others and comments which Ambassador Harriman had made to him concerning use of American equipment in tribal regions. He said he was keeping these representations secret since if Pakistan press and public should come to know that US had reservations about employment by GOP for internal security purposes of military equipment supplied under MAP, resentment would be tremendous and it would have an extremely adverse effect on Pakistani-American relations. He said American arms were provided to Pakistan for several specific reasons set forth in the agreement, principal one being for use in maintaining internal security. Pakistan forces were equipped with American arms and arms could not be changed depending upon purpose for, or area in, which they were to be employed. It so happened that forces most likely to come in contact with Laskar intrusion were not equipped by MAP but from GOP resources. Also, limited air bombings that had been carried out included only one American plane which had been used along with several old British planes. However, the region in question was extremely remote and it would be difficult and he thought unwise for Pakistanis to deploy forces in these remote regions in Pakistan when need for this now obviated by air reconnaissance and, if need be, action from the air.

President emphasized he felt US should be more frank with Afghans in citing right of Pakistan self-defense in connection with any intrusions across border. He said Afghans were pouring money and weapons into tribal area. Notorious Afghan agent Bacha Gul had been moving about widely in Bajaur region distributing largesse and arms, and endeavoring to foment revolt. Afghans should not be led to believe that US considered this to be normal and proper.

I told President that we of course recognized Durand Line as border and we also recognized that Pakistan had a right to defend itself and to preserve internal security. One of purposes of our military aid program was to permit GOP to preserve its integrity and stability. Nevertheless, we had been concerned about employment of American arms in this sensitive region and I had, under instructions from the Department, asked Pakistanis to endeavor to carry out their responsibilities without employing American aid weapons, and to act in this sensitive region with restraint. I had expressed this hope particularly in connection with air operations. President said Pakistanis did not want to start any trouble that could be avoided. Pakistan would have to defend itself, however, if attacked, and it could defend itself only with weapons in hands of its military personnel. We could be certain that they would only be employed for purposes specified in our agreement, and he hoped that situation would not arise.

Rountree

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/4-2061. Secret. Repeated to Kabul and Peshawar.

1 See footnote 4, Document 9.

16. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 16. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, April 24, 1961, 8:13 p.m.

3015. Eyes Only for Ambassador. Deptel 3003.1

FYI: Commitment to India authorized by President is for maximum $1 billion for two-year period. In case of Pakistan, President approved commitment in principle, with size and period covered to be determined prior to Consortium on Pakistan scheduled early June. In addition to conditions mentioned first para reftel both commitments would be subject to understanding (a) procurement policies governing US assistance along lines contemplated President's February 6 balance of payments message to Congress2 and (b) US assistance obligations would be made after careful examination specific project and program proposals both countries.

President has despatched messages to Heads of Governments United Kingdom, Canada, Germany and Japan indicating US intention make very substantial commitment of aid to both India and Pakistan and expressing hope their governments able do likewise.

B.K. Nehru informed by Under Secretary Ball April 24 of fact US prepared make substantial commitment at Consortium meeting beginning April 25 subject above mentioned considerations. He was not informed of amount proposed US commitment for India.

It has now been decided there will be no public announcement of President's action prior Consortium meeting. End FYI.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5-MSP/4-2361. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Adams, cleared by Talbot and Battle and in substance by Dungan at the White House, and approved by Cottam (NEA).

1 Telegram 3003 to New Delhi, April 23, instructed Ambassador Galbraith, who had presented his credentials on April 18, to inform Prime Minister Nehru that President Kennedy had authorized substantial new aid commitments in support of the Indian development program. The commitments were subject to necessary Congressional action, and would be proportionate to contributions from other members of the consortium. (Ibid., 791.5-MSP/4-261)

2 For text of this message, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 57-66.

17. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 17. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, April 25, 1961, 10:20 p.m.

1829. Eyes Only for Ambassador. Deptel 1819.1 FYI: President's decision in approving commitment of aid to Pakistan was taken in principle, with exact size and period covered to be determined prior to meeting Pakistan Consortium now scheduled early June. Current thinking is for commitment $250 million. Certainty this figure and its applicability to period of one year or more dependent upon detailed examination latest Pakistan submission to IBRD. In case of India President authorized commitment of up to $ 1 billion for two-year period to be indicated at Indian Consortium beginning April 25.

In both cases commitments would be subject considerations mentioned first para reftel and also to understanding (a) procurement policies governing US assistance along lines US assistance obligations would be made after careful examination specific project and program proposals both countries. contemplated President's February 6 balance of payments message to Congress and (b)

President has despatched messages to Heads of Governments United Kingdom, Canada, Germany and Japan indicating US intention make very substantial commitment of aid to both India and Pakistan and expressing hope their governments able do likewise. No figures mentioned these messages.

Ambassador Aziz Ahmed has been informed by Assistant Secretary Talbot of fact US prepared make substantial commitment to Pakistan at Consortium meeting in June, subject above mentioned considerations. No amounts indicated.

It has now been decided there will be no public announcement of President's action.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790D.5-MSP/4-2561. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Adams, cleared by Talbot and in substance with Dungan, and approved by Cottam.

1 Telegram 1819 to Karachi, April 23, instructed Ambassador Rountree to inform President Ayub that President Kennedy had authorized substantial new aid commitments in support of Pakistan's development program. The commitments were subject to necessary Congressional action, and would be proportionate to contributions by other members of the consortium. (Ibid., 790D.5-MSP/4-2361)

18. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Ball) to President Kennedy 18. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Ball) to President KennedySource

Washington, May 1, 1961.

SUBJECT

Report on India Consortium Meeting

The subject meeting convened on April 25 to consider the amounts required by India both to meet its payments in 1961-62 and 1962-63 and to provide for the placement of new orders during that period.

On the opening day the United States made its offer of $1 billion of aid on the terms and conditions approved by you on April 21. Because proposed commitments by other countries, particularly Germany, were insufficient to total the needed remaining $1.1 billion believed by the U.S. to be required from these nations, the meeting recessed until May 31. In the interim, these other participants will, in the light of the large offer of the United States, reconsider their commitments. The press release on the adjournment of the meeting, however, merely stated that the participants had met, examined the Indian program, decided that it offered a reasonable basis for undertaking commitments, and adjourned to consider what each could do.

The true reason for the adjournment was the fact that commitments offered by others than the U.S. and the IBRD fell about $500 million short of what is generally believed necessary to move the Indian program ahead. While most other participants offered commitments close to our expectations, West Germany was about $300 million short in what we have believed it capable of providing. It offered to make available $331 million, about half of which would refund existing Indian debts to Germany. Furthermore, even this grossly inadequate contribution was to be extended on very hard terms rather than the softer terms and conditions considered necessary in the Indian situation.

The United Kingdom offered $204 million, the Japanese $80 million, and the IBRD $400 million. The Canadian offer of $36 million was not up to expectations but we believe it can be increased. It is also believed that the U.K. offer can be increased.

Before the Consortium reconvenes on May 31 the following actions are being undertaken: 1) We are instructing our Embassies in the Consortium countries to advise their host Governments at the highest levels of the importance we attach to a successful outcome for this meeting and of our interest in seeing that our large offer is matched by similar action on their part.

2) We shall endeavor to seek commitments from France, Austria, Denmark, Sweden, and Norway who now attend the meeting as observers rather than participants.

3) The IBRD will be urged to bring its influence to bear on officials in the participating countries. We are hopeful that Mr. Eugene Black will personally make the necessary contacts.

In addition we will recommend that you discuss both the Indian and Pakistan Consortium Meetings with the Prime Minister of Canada during your visit to Ottawa. We believe that such an approach may be an important element in influencing the Canadians to extend additional resources.

It is our hope that these actions will result in more adequate commitments by others and permit us to proceed with our offer.

George W. Ball

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 5/1/61-6/15/61. Confidential. The memorandum was sent under cover of note from Executive Secretary Battle to the President's Special Assistant, Ralph A. Dungan.

19. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy 19. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President KennedySource

New Delhi, May 13, 1961.

No. 237-PMO/16

My Dear Mr. President, I write to thank you for the generous approach which the United States Government has made in regard to the assistance to India for her Third Five Year Plan. The United States Ambassador here has informed us that at the meeting convened by the World Bank, the United States Government offered a thousand million dollars by way of aid to India for the first two years of the Third Five Year Plan. This aid is in addition to the large quantities of wheat and rice which have already been promised under PL-480. A special feature of the United States aid to India's development plans, which we appreciate greatly and which is of particular value to us, is that repayments in foreign exchange have been reduced to the minimum.

The United States Ambassador has pointed out to our Planning Commission the importance of allowing the recipient of aid the maximum flexibility in regard to the purposes for which the funds can be utilised. This is particularly welcome to us. In the past, credits from the Development Loan Fund have been available mainly for the purchase of capital goods in the U.S.A. We have, during the Second Five Year Plan, built up certain capital goods industries ourselves. These depend upon the import of raw materials and components not available from indigenous sources which we hope the D.L.F. will finance. There are also other needs of ours which we require for development and which are not in the nature of capital goods, e.g., fertilisers for our agricultural economy. We are anxious, therefore, to have as much flexibility as is possible in regard to the use of these funds.

May I thank you again, Mr. President, for your generous approach to our problems and also for exercising your country's great influence on the other participants of the aid programme so as to raise the quantum of aid to a level which will be commensurate with India's needs for the execution of her Third Five Year Plan.

With warm regards and good wishes,

Yours sincerely,

Jawaharlal Nehru

* Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Countries Series, India, 1961. No classification marking.

20. Memorandum of Conversation 20. Memorandum of ConversationSource

New Delhi, May 18, 1961.

PARTICIPANTS

For India

Prime Minister Nehru

Shri M.J. Desai, Foreign Secretary

Shri R.K. Nehru, Secretary General, External Affairs Ministry

S.K. Banerji, Chief of Protocol

For the United States

Vice President Johnson

Ambassador John K. Galbraith

Stephen Smith

Carl T. Rowan

Vice President Johnson opened the session by explaining that his party had come to India at the request of President Kennedy to deliver personally a letter from the President to India's Prime Minister1 and to engage in such discussions as might help the United States to take actions in South and Southeast Asia that would be beneficial to the peoples of that area and to the cause of human liberty. The Vice President said that he had come also because President Kennedy wanted the people of the area to know that the United States was aware of the need for economic progress in the area, and that the United States was determined to work in close cooperation with those nations attempting to raise the living standards of their people.

The Vice President said it was the belief of the Kennedy Administration that military force alone can never be a permanent bulwark against Communist activities which are leading to widespread discontent, and in some cases violent insurrection, in Asia. He warned that he was in no position to make specific commitments as to the degree of United States participation in any development program, because only Congress has authority to make the necessary appropriations. He said that he felt confident that, given a full understanding of the difficulties and challenges in the area, Congress would respond with the necessary boldness.

Prime Minister Nehru expressed great pleasure at this line of talk, asserting that economic development is “a subject that fills my heart and mind.” He said that India is struggling to raise standards of living and develop the country's resources “without resorting to a doctrinaire approach.”

The Prime Minister seemed emotionally touched when he referred to the letter from President Kennedy that Mr. Johnson delivered. He said that he and India “appreciate President Kennedy's concern and generosity.” Mr. Nehru went on to express the opinion that poverty—the whole economic problem—is at the heart of the problems of Asia and Africa. “All other problems in India are secondary to the economic problem, and in many cases are affected by it.” He continued, “We have a politically-conscious mass of people who think that they deserve everything—and they do—but India is unable to supply it.”

The Prime Minister said that he was sure that Ambassador Galbraith and other Americans could understand the economic or surface aspect of this dilemma, but that he doubted that they could understand the emotional aspects of it the way Mr. Nehru did.

Vice President Johnson and the Prime Minister then discussed at some length India's third Five Year Plan. The Prime Minister said that progress under this scheme was aimed at aiding India's 16 million unemployed, and that about 13 million workers would be absorbed in the plan, but that the employment problem would probably be even more acute at the end of five years because the development program will not keep up with the population increase.

The two leaders then discussed education and necessity of spreading it throughout the population if the country is to make real progress against poverty, illiteracy and disease. Mr. Nehru said that currently only 60% of India's boys and 20% to 30% of her girls are in school, but that the hope is at the end of the third Five Year Plan free and compulsory education will be available for every boy and girl in the 7 to 11 age group.

The Vice President inquired as to the size and goals of India's third Five Year Plan. Ambassador Galbraith pointed out that the plan involves an investment of 102 billion rupees or almost 20 billion dollars, as compared with 67 billion rupees (13-1/2 billion dollars) in India's second Five Year Plan.

Mr. Nehru said that the external segment of the third plan, which includes private investments, is about 6 billion dollars.

Ambassador Galbraith pointed out that India's planning for economic development is greatly admired, and that India is representative of the nations the United States wants most to work with, because India's leaders are determined to see that the mass of the people benefit.

The Vice President then discussed the impact of reform programs and efforts to extend social justice in any movement to create political stability. He asked Mr. Nehru's advice with regard to South and Southeast Asia. The Prime Minister said that he was reluctant to talk about other countries but that he felt any progress must have impact on the people generally. He said that he was certain that people would be willing to wait, and would not fall for the lure of totalitarianism if they could see a trend of progress moving in their direction. He said that in the case of India it was absolutely essential to build up industry, because progress never could be sufficient as long as 80% of the people depended on agriculture for their livelihood. He said that India is decentralizing and giving more authority to village councils in order to get human beings interested in their country and its problems.

Vice President Johnson lauded those steps as a grass roots movement certain to have a remarkable effect.

The two then discussed farming cooperatives, land reform, irrigation and rural electrification. Mr. Nehru said that taking electric power to rural areas is one of the biggest revolutionary forces operating in less developed areas. Near the end of the discussion the Vice President asked the Prime Minister for his advice as to how situations such as that existing in Laos might be avoided, thus giving the peoples of the area the opportunity to make the progress of which the two leaders had spoken. Mr. Nehru said that he would reiterate that there must be social and economic approaches to the problems of Southeast Asia, because military solutions alone never did work. He said that land reform was vitally necessary, pointing to Iran as a good example of a country where poor land ownership policies make the country vulnerable to outside interference and agitation.

When the session was terminated because of another appointment of the Vice President, Prime Minister Nehru said that he would welcome further discussions.

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Vice President Johnson's Trip to the Far East, May 61. Confidential. Vice President Johnson left Washington on May 10 for a 2-week tour of South and Southeast Asia, which included stops in Vietnam, the Philippines, the Republic of China, Thailand, India, and Pakistan.

1 In this letter, dated May 8, Kennedy expressed the hope that Nehru and Johnson would enjoy a fruitful exchange of views, and that Johnson would be able to observe and report on economic progress in India. Kennedy applauded India's efforts to promote such progress and noted that his administration was engaged in reorganizing its aid programs to be able to enter into longer-range commitments to better support such efforts. He also expressed appreciation for Nehru's support for the attempt to achieve a cease-fire agreement in Laos. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 4/1/61-10/31/61)

21. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 21. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, May 18, 1961, 8:12 p.m.

715. Embtels 10481 and 1053.2 Policy guidelines for future foreign assistance and presentation to Congress this program developed by Presidential Task Force in accordance with President's message being pouched soon. These guidelines expected make clear U.S. prepared make long-term commitment those countries whose stage of development, planning and internal resources mobilization sufficiently advanced give promise self-sustained growth in foreseeable future. These concepts appear for present, at least, preclude long-term commitment in support Afghan Second Plan. There is thus nothing of substance which you may appropriately give Naim beyond that conveyed your letter February 21.3

U.S. currently contemplating commitment in support Indian requirements first two years its Third Plan, and Pakistan requirements second and third years its Second Plan. Both commitments would be subject necessary Congressional action on aid program and dependent on commensurate contributions from other free world sources. IBRD Consortium which met Washington April 25-26 to discuss Indian requirement reconvening May 31; Consortium on Pakistan convenes June 5. If questioned further regarding unconfirmed press reports of U.S. commitment made at either these meetings suggest you follow line taken with Naim as reported your 1053. In event U.S. commitment to either country is officially confirmed suggest you emphasize long period U.S. close association and fact detailed plans those countries have been available U.S. and other free world countries for study and discussion for some time. Commitments those countries taken in light advanced stage of development planning, execution, and internal resource mobilization.

Latin American program being developed under special authority recently approved by Congress for that area.

Since reports U.S. commitments these other countries may give rise to RGA misunderstanding U.S. position as conveyed your letter to Naim of February 21 you may wish reiterate assurances of continued U.S. close association with Afghan development plans without however exceeding instruction Deptel 5414 and Icato 1135.5 You may also wish to indicate further study Afghan needs and capabilities would place U.S. in better position to assess specifically its overall relationship to Afghan development requirements and to determine what if any adjustments in present aid program would be warranted.

Bowles

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 789.5-MSP/5-1361. Confidential. Drafted in NEA/SOA by Robert J. Carle and Adams, cleared in draft by Weil and with B/FAC and ICA, and approved by Armin H. Meyer (NEA).

1 In telegram 1048 from Kabul, May 12, Byroade asked for guidance on the future direction of U.S. economic assistance for Afghanistan. (Ibid., 789.5-MSP/5-1261)

2 Telegram 1053 from Kabul, May 13, reported on a conversation between Byroade and Foreign Minister Naim in which Naim referred to the fact that the United States was making long-term foreign assistance commitments to other countries. Naim professed to be confused in that he had understood from Byroade that the U.S. Government could not make such long-term commitments without prior Congressional authorization. Byroade responded that Naim's information was apparently based upon a newspaper account concerning a commitment to India, and he added that he did not believe that any such commitment had been formalized. (Ibid., 789.5-MSP/5-1361)

3 See Document 7.

4 Telegram 541 to Kabul, February 15, instructed Byroade to make the points concerning economic assistance for Afghanistan that Byroade made in his February 21 letter to Naim. (Department of State, Central Files, 789.5-MSP/2-1561)

5 Not found.

22. Memorandum of Conversation 22. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Karachi, May 20, 1961, 12:30 p.m.

United States:

Vice President Johnson

Mr. Stephen Smith

Mr. Busby

Ambassador Horace Smith

Ambassador Rountree

Pakistan:

President Ayub

General Burki, Minister of Health, Welfare and Social Affairs

Mr. Manzur Qadir, Minister of External Affairs

Mr. Mohammed Shoaib, Minister of Finance

Mr. Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, Minister of Information

Mr. Dehlavi, Foreign Secretary

Vice President Johnson began by stating that Pakistan was held in very high regard by the United States, which greatly valued its friendship. He mentioned in the context of his public life his interest in international affairs, and the various trips abroad which he had made on official missions since he assumed office as the Vice President. He described President Kennedy as a young and extremely vigorous man, hopeful and very confident. The Vice President fully shared President Kennedy's philosophy. President Kennedy had wanted him to visit nations of Asia, particularly allies, to talk about problems of common interest and to share views of how the strength of the free world might be increased. The United States was anxious to do everything it could to contribute to the strength of Asian nations, particularly in the fostering of economic progress upon which strength could be based. It felt that impoverished nations must be helped; in helping them we were in fact helping ourselves since those more fortunate must share the burden of improving the lot of the poorer if even the rich were to be secure. Continuing, the Vice President said United States had a particular fondness for Pakistan and President Ayub. Pakistan had convictions which it was willing to express. It was willing to support SEATO, including the contribution of forces in connection with the Laos problem, and we appreciated that commitment. The Vice President observed that he did not know where recent events in Laos left us. He wanted to exchange views with President Ayub on this subject.

The Vice President said that President Kennedy was eagerly looking forward to President Ayub's visit, during which many matters could be discussed; however, there was substantial business which would have to take place before the visit. (In this context he handed President Ayub a letter from President Kennedy.)1

The Vice President said that in his visits to several countries of Asia he had found them all aware of the current danger and anxious to do their best to meet it. All the leaders believed they had inadequate means for accomplishing what they considered necessary. We were anxious to do everything that we reasonably could to help them. We recognized the need for additional defensive strength, but even more the need for economic strength.

Referring to Laos, the Vice President said we were prepared for the worst but hoped for the best. He would like to have President Ayub's view as to what would be the best course to follow. There were various alternatives. The United States could, for example, “go back to San Francisco,” but we did not want to do that. On the other hand, our people did not want to get killed in unnecessary and fruitless fighting. He said we had relied on our allies to help train Laotians. This had not worked out well, and the other side seemed far more willing to fight than ours. In Viet-Nam 150,000 friendly forces were confronting 10,000 enemy. Yet they needed even more men and equipment to cope with the problem. In Thailand there were similar difficulties. The problem of the defense of free forces in South Asia would of course be far greater if the Chinese should come in. Yet Diem had said that if we gave him help he would stand up, and Sarit said he needed not nine but 15 divisions.

The Vice President said he would like to be able to inform President Kennedy of what we could expect from our allies if the United States was ready to do thus and so for the area. The United States did not want anything for itself beyond the preservation of the independence of the states of the region. The question was what would be necessary to prevent the communists from gobbling up the weaker nations. It was possible that we could equip them and help them fight properly. If they were not helped, they would be lost. It would be one or the other.

President Ayub responded that he agreed with the Vice President's summary of the problem. He said he would like to outline at length his views on the world situation, but in view of the shortage of time he thought it best for the Vice President simply to read his assessment which had been prepared in summary form for the purposes of the meeting. He handed to the Vice President his notes, which are attached.2

The Vice President agreed generally with President Ayub's views, but commented upon his remarks about American policy by saying that we sometimes might be “kindhearted but not wise.” We did, however, know who stood up, and the difference between strong friends and neutrals. Regarding possible influence by the United States or India to bring about a solution of the Kashmir problem, he thought President Ayub attributed to us a capacity which the Vice President was not sure we had. We had tried some of these things, but had had little influence with Nehru on the question.

President Ayub responded that he knew Nehru would not listen if he did not feel compelled to. That did not mean that he should not listen, nor that the United States did not have the power to influence him. India's flexibility today was gone. With the pressure from the Chinese Communists, India relied even more heavily upon the United States. In fact, it had no alternative.

Continuing, the President said the United States was Pakistan's friend and anything going wrong with the United States hurt Pakistan. In Cuba, for example, a situation had been created which greatly damaged not only the United States, but also its allies, including Pakistan. He mentioned the conversation which he had had with Ambassador Rountree on the Cuban situation and the message which he had sent through the Ambassador to President Kennedy on the subject.3 Pakistan did not want to the United States to fail. It wanted it to win against the Soviets. Its battle was Pakistan's battle. If the United States did not use its power, it hurt Pakistan. The power of the United States was much greater than at times the Americans seemed to think. Its power to influence Nehru was very great indeed. Unless there were peace with India which would permit cooperation in the defense of South Asia, there would be a very great threat within a few years and that threat derived from the fact that the communists wanted to control the entire subcontinent. The Soviets were pressing Pakistan and would like to take over the country, but their interest was not in Pakistan itself but in the entire region. Thus, the threat to India was very great, both from the Soviets and from the Chinese Communists, and the Indians must come to realize that. The United States was spending a terrific amount of money in India. It was doing it because it sought Indian security. It could not, however, say that India really was secure. The Indians must do far more to achieve real security and this involved the creation of a situation in which good relations between Pakistan and India could be maintained. American diffidence about Nehru bothered the Pakistani. The United States should help India; but by the same token it should demand that Nehru help create security in the area around India. Thus India should make peace and cooperation with Pakistan possible.

The President was disturbed by the fact that the Communists gave support to any friend regardless of the merits of the case, but they assured themselves that the countries helped would not operate against their global policies or their world position. Failure of the United States to support its friends created a one-sided proposition that Americans seemed not to realize. Nehru only wanted American economic assistance, and the assurance of help if he should get into difficulties with the Chinese. He would never help the United States. His policies were in fact extremely harmful to the United States; yet America had not used its leverage to bring about a change in those policies, despite Nehru's very heavy reliance upon it.

The Vice President responded again that President Ayub attributed to us the capacity for greater influence with Nehru than we in fact possessed. He did not in fact think that Nehru would listen to us on the Kashmir question.

President Ayub remarked that he would listen if the United States should say that it would not otherwise give him all the help he asked. The Vice President remarked that President Ayub was suggesting the “quid pro quo” approach, to which President Ayub responded that he thought it would be a very good idea when dealing with that type of person. He said again that the United States had very great power and that it should use it. It should not be bluffed by Khrushchev; it should do in a straightforward manner what was necessary for the American and free world position.

Responding to the Vice President's question about what should be done about Viet-Nam and other Asian trouble spots, President Ayub said that if the present leadership in those countries could not run their affairs, they should get someone able to do so. It must be seen to that they were operated properly. If the leaders could not get that bulk of the people to resist communism, the United States should see to it that key people were in the right places to do so. He thought the situation in Laos was extremely bad. Militarily, it was a nightmare. The Thais were beginning to get the jitters. He thought American military people in Thailand, Laos and Viet-Nam should be in a position to assume command responsibilities.

President Ayub thought the Tibetan situation would have a considerable influence in India. Through Tibet, the Chinese Communists were already penetrating India, not physically but in influence, particularly in the Calcutta area. Fortunately the large communist party in India was presently split over the Chinese situation. If this were not so the problem would be even greater than it was today. Responding to the Vice President's question, President Ayub said that China's current economic problems were not substantially lessening Chinese activities in other countries. They were in fact even more aggressive in Africa than the Soviets. The Chinese were not likely, due to their own internal difficulties, to concentrate on a single part of the world, such as Laos, to the exclusion of others.

Responding to the Vice President's question about SEATO, President Ayub said no one seemed to want to fight “except us.” The Vice President remarked that we appreciated Pakistan's willingness to contribute forces to which President Ayub responded, jokingly, that he thought however that the United States should come along with them. The Vice President observed that it still had not yet been decided what would be necessary in Laos. Considering what other countries were prepared to do and contribute, he doubted that much of a fight could be put up there. President Ayub thought that any sort of a fight by the Royal Laotians would mean that the army must be directly commanded by United States officers; otherwise they simply would not fight.

The President remarked that Thailand was relatively easier to defend, to which the Vice President responded that he thought we would have to make a stand much before Thailand was attacked.

President Ayub described the size and disposition of the Pakistani forces, in reply to the Vice President's question. He said that Pakistan had an excellent army but that it needed more equipment and more mobility. These needs had been described to the American authorities and he hoped that it would be possible for them to be met in light of the tremendous advantages to the United States and the free world of Pakistan having a strong military force capable of real help in meeting the threat in this part of the world.

The Vice President thought it would be an excellent idea if President Ayub could visit the leaders of other Asian nations and talk with them about some of these problems. The President remarked that he recently had visited several countries. He was, however, very busy at the moment and did not see how it would be possible for him to undertake other visits.

Turning to another subject, President Ayub and the Vice President discussed economic problems and development of Pakistan. The President and Finance Minister Shoaib described the magnitude of the five year program and its general content. Replying to the Vice President's question, they said the annual deficit in foreign exchange financing would be in the neighborhood of 500 million dollars, which it hoped could be financed through contributions by the nations soon to meet in the consortium group under the auspices of the International Bank.

The President expressed an interest in the Peace Corps and said he hoped that projects could be worked out so that specialists could be sent, particularly in the fields of health, education and agriculture.

The problem of water logging and salinity was discussed at some length. President Ayub handed to the Vice President copies of the Pakistan Program for Water Logging and Salinity Control in the Irrigated Areas of West Pakistan. The Vice President expressed a keen interest in the problem, and said he thought every consideration should be given as to what assistance the United States could render. The President said that Finance Minister Shoaib was leaving almost immediately for Washington and was taking copies of the report with him. He earnestly hoped the United States could provide substantial assistance in this matter. The program covered a 10 year period and would involve the annual expenditure of 110 million dollars.

Before proceeding to lunch (during which the talks were continued),4

President Ayub described on the map in his office the military problems confronting Pakistan and the necessary disposition of Pakistani forces related to the dispute with India over Kashmir. Settlement of the Kashmir problem would permit these forces to concentrate entirely upon defense against possible communist aggression. Another Pakistani interest in Kashmir was described by the President as being the need for controlling the headwaters of rivers flowing into Pakistan upon which Pakistan depended for its very existence. These were practical and immediate reasons why Pakistan must find a solution to these problems. There were other reasons, of course, relating to the desires of the people concerned in Kashmir and of a historical nature.

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Vice President Johnson's Trip to the Far East, May 61. Top Secret. Drafted by Rountree. The meeting was held at the President's House in Karachi.

1 Kennedy's letter, dated May 8, underlined the importance of Johnson's fact-finding mission and the significance Kennedy attached to Johnson's discussions with Ayub. He pointed to the need to build military strength to resist Communist aggression in the area and noted that such strength rested upon economic development. He applauded Pakistan's efforts to promote economic development and noted that his administration was engaged in reorganizing its aid programs in order to better support such efforts. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.90D/5-861)

2 Not attached.

3 Transmitted in telegram 1831 from Karachi, April 19. (Department of State, Central Files, 737.00/4-1961)

4 Conversation over lunch dealt largely with programs for education and land reform and prospects for economic development in Pakistan. (Memorandum of conversation, May 20; Johnson Library, Vice Presidential Security File, VP Johnson's Trip, Far East, May 1961)

23. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to Department of State 23. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to Department of StateSource

Kabul, May 22, 1961, 11 a.m.

1066. For the Secretary from Byroade. Deptel 7151 comes as a great shock to this post—so much so that we wonder whether it was erroneously sent or if it failed to receive high level consideration. To us it seems inconceivable that our policy of trying preserve neutral nation on borders of USSR should be rendered ineffective and unresponsive to clear US interests in Asia by the application of pure economic theory alone, divorced from consideration of history our relations with this country and its neighbors as well as from the realities of the international situation or indeed, from the actual situation here as reported by the Embassy.

I earnestly request that the policy enunciated in that message not be accepted as final until our comments thereon are received and given full consideration.2

Byroade

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 789.5-MSP/5-2261. Confidential; Priority.

1 Document 21.

2 Byroade elaborated upon his objections in telegram 1072 from Kabul, May 25. (Department of State, Central Files, 789.5-MSP/5-2561) In telegram 739 to Kabul, June 2, Talbot responded that the policy outlined in telegram 715 to Kabul would have to stand as policy until there was a more substantial basis for the conclusion that a long-term commitment to Afghanistan's program for economic development was warranted. (Ibid., 789.5-MSP/6-261)

24. Editorial Note 24. Editorial Note

The fourth meeting of the India consortium, organized by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, reconvened in Washington on May 31, 1961. The meeting concluded on June 2, and the Bank issued a press release that indicated that members of the consortium had agreed to undertake commitments of aid to India totaling over $2 billion. The commitments covered fiscal years 1961/62 and 1962/63, the first 2 years of the third Indian 5-year plan for economic development. Contributing members of the consortium included Canada, France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and the International Development Association. A total of $2,225,000,000 was pledged by the members of the consortium. The U.S. commitment for the 2-year period was $1,045,000,000, including $45 million in loans made after January 15, 1961, by the Export-Import Bank and the Development Loan Fund. In addition, the United States agreed to assist India by making available surplus commodities in the amount of approximately $1,300,000,000. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 5/1/61-6/15/61)

25. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 25. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, June 2, 1961, 6 p.m.

2087. From Murree dated 1 June, Midnight. During meeting in Murree June 1, President Ayub again expressed great concern over US policies toward India and particularly with respect to Kashmir question.

It was obvious that President, like other Pakistani officials with whom I have spoken and like virtually all Pakistani press, was upset at reports of Vice President Johnson's statement following Asian tour indicating that President Kennedy and US administration wished Nehru's leadership to be extended over other Asian countries. Most of what President Ayub said about Nehru and Indian policies, and about need for US to support allies more and neutrals less, was repetition of what he told Vice President Johnson. His main point in our conversation was to emphasize his belief that US and US alone can prevent disastrous consequences of failure to arrive at solution to Kashmir problem. Ayub said that a year ago he had been hopeful that Nehru was beginning to see the light and things seemed to be moving in direction of talks to settle Kashmir. He felt several factors had served to make Nehru more intransigent, among these being US statements indicating vast support to India without mention of Kashmir, somewhat lessened pressures from Chinese Communists, and creation two new India divisions which should be adequate to handle immediate Chinese threat in difficult terrain of disputed territories. Latter factor rendered less attractive to India possibility of settling Kashmir question so that forces now concerned with Kashmir could be diverted.

Ayub said it not as though there was only one Kashmir solution which India would have to accept or reject. There were several alternatives which could be considered if Nehru willing to talk seriously. Issue was becoming far more inflamed in Pakistan and no Pakistani Government could fail to press matter and remain in power. Feelings on subject were rising, not diminishing. He, therefore, earnestly hoped that US was giving careful thought to question, and that following Vice President's return to Washington means would be found of exercising US influence upon India to seek a settlement. He had no doubt US recognized valid Pakistani concern and interest.

Comment: I personally believe time has come when we must seriously consider again what we can and should do in connection with Kashmir problem. I believe that at a minimum some approach should be made to Nehru on this subject, and I hope that Department will discuss this possibility with Ambassador Galbraith during latter's consultation there. I would appreciate Department's comments.

Rountree

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/6-261. Secret.

26. Memorandum of Conversation 26. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, June 8, 1961.

SUBJECT

Results of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development Consortium on Pakistan

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Mohamed Shoaib, Finance Minister of Pakistan

Mr. G. Ahmed, Secretary, Planning Commission, Government of Pakistan

Ambassador Aziz Ahmed, Pakistan

Mr. Wazir Ali, Economic Minister, Embassy of Pakistan

Under Secretary George W. Ball

E—Mr. Edwin M. Martin, Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs

NEA—Mr. Howard R. Cottam, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs

SOA—Mr. J. Wesley Adams, Officer in Charge, Economic Affairs

Mr. Shoaib opened the conversation by remarking it was no secret that Pakistan was disappointed with the results of the Consortium held under the auspices of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, June 5-7. Mr. Ball immediately rejoined that it was no secret that the United States was also disappointed with the results. We had hoped, he said, to be able to obtain a commitment by all members of the Consortium covering Pakistan's requirements for two years. This had not been found possible, and so it had been decided to announce initial commitments which would meet Pakistan's immediate requirements and maintain the momentum of its development. It was expected that a further meeting of the Consortium would be called later this year to consider further commitments.

Mr. Martin said that two considerations would determine the date of the reconvened meeting. The first was the German election scheduled for mid-September. The second was the time required for the Pakistanis to come up with firm revisions in their Second Plan figures. Mr. Shoaib commented that frankly he did not know what more the World Bank expected them to produce in the way of planning. It was true, he said, that the Plan had not been officially adopted by the Government of Pakistan. Formal adoption, however, was expected to take place around the middle of June. Except for this formality the Plan had been accepted by the Government. G. Ahmed reinforced this view, asserting that the Pakistan Plan in this respect was more firm than the Indian Plan.

Mr. Shoaib said that he now faced a political problem in how to present the results of the Consortium to his people, since the results were so unfavorable in comparison with those of the Indian Consortium. The people of Pakistan were bound to reason that as allies of the West they were entitled to more favorable consideration than neutrals such as India. They would inquire “What do we have to do to obtain equitable treatment?” Mr. Shoaib contrasted Pakistan's planning with that of the Indians, noting that the Pakistanis had not counted on Soviet aid for the financing of their Plan, and that they had not so over-committed themselves with respect to resources that they had to ask the rest of the world to bail them out, as had India.

Mr. Shoaib then went on to contrast results of the two Consortia meetings. With respect to commitments for the first year, he noted, Germany had agreed to commit $225 million for India compared to $25 million for Pakistan. Comparable figures for the United Kingdom were $182 million for India, $19.6 million for Pakistan; for the United States, $545 million for India and $150 million for Pakistan. With respect to the United States, he noted that in FY 1959 we had extended aid in the amount of $164 million, and only slightly less in the two succeeding years.

Mr. Ball commented that it was important for the Pakistanis to remember that these figures for Pakistan were not for a full year, and it was therefore a mistake to make the comparisons which Mr. Shoaib had just offered. So far as the United States was concerned, he reiterated, we were prepared to commit substantially more than the amount of $150 million. However, when the other participants had not been sufficiently forthcoming, we had felt it necessary to limit our commitment to $150 million (1) in order to preserve the integrity before the Congress of the principles of our new aid program which stress a sharing of development assistance by the capital exporting countries and (2) as the best strategy to maintain pressure on others to make more generous contributions in the future.

Mr. Shoaib said he recognized the force of these arguments. Nonetheless, his President would be disappointed with the results in view of President Kennedy's message1 which led him to believe that a substantial increase in U.S. commitments would be forthcoming.

Mr. Ball remarked that the problem for the Pakistanis was one of explanation, reiterating the point that the commitments at the Consortium meeting represented only an initial action, and that a further meeting was contemplated this year to consider possible further commitments. Mr. Martin said that in his press conference yesterday regarding the Consortium meeting he had stressed this point. Mr. Cottam noted that great care had been taken in the press release on the meeting to make clear that at the resumed meeting consideration would be given to Pakistan's requirements for both the second and third year of the Second Plan.

G. Ahmed said that since a further meeting was also contemplated in the case of India no particular point could be made of the fact that there was to be a subsequent meeting of Pakistan. Mr. Martin commented that so far as the United States was concerned we had made our full commitment in the case of India. Mr. Ball observed that the meeting on Pakistan was comparable to the first meeting on India which had been adjourned, the difference being that in the case of Pakistan we had made public the preliminary results. G. Ahmed suggested that it might have been better to have delayed announcing the results pending the second meeting. Mr. Ball replied that since there would necessarily be a considerable time before the second meeting, it was better, on balance, to announce the results.

With regard to the matching concept, Mr. Shoaib pointed out that the United States had traditionally supplied 80-85 per cent of foreign aid received by Pakistan. In the case of India the ratio between U.S. and other assistance was more nearly 4:4 or 4:3. He thought it not realistic to expect that the ratio in the case of Pakistan could be reduced at any early date to a 50:50 figure. Mr. Martin agreed, commenting that we were prepared for some years to see a gap in this respect.

Mr. Ball then urged that the Pakistan Government itself get in touch with the Germans to urge a larger contribution by that country. The U.S. Government, he said, was reaching a state of diminishing returns in its efforts to extract aid money from the Germans. He thought it would be better psychologically for the Pakistanis to make their own case with that government. Mr. Martin expressed his wholehearted concurrence, adding that this was not to say we had not made every effort to obtain a substantial German commitment to Pakistan. We had, but had not been particularly successful.

Mr. Shoaib agreed with Mr. Ball's suggestion, remarking that his government was sending M. Ayub as its Ambassador to Bonn specifically for this purpose. This, he said, was the “one and only reason for my letting him go from my Ministry.” To the same end, his Government was also strengthening its staff in London.

Mr. Shoaib next remarked that he would have some difficulty stretching the immediate U.S. commitment of $150 million to cover current requirements. Pakistan, he said, needed to place immediate orders for commodity imports to a total of perhaps $120 million. This would leave only about $30 million to apply against development projects, whereas their requests of the Development Loan Fund greatly exceeded that figure. He wondered if perhaps they could proceed to place orders in excess of whatever might be allocated to DLF out of the $150 million on the understanding that they could be reimbursed by the DLF when additional money became available. Mr. Martin said this involved a legal problem for the DLF which would have to be explored. He also cautioned that an indicated willingness by the United States to exceed its commitment at the Consortium meeting might have an unfavorable influence on further European contributions. Mr. Ball said that subsequent reimbursement by the DLF of orders placed now was at least an idea which we could entertain in principle and which we would explore.

Mr. Shoaib next inquired as to the grant component of the U.S. commitment of $150 million. Mr. Martin said that we would not have the answer on this until the legislation had been passed. He would observe, however, that the Administration was under a mandate to reduce grant aid and that it was his guess that such aid, which in the case of Pakistan was described as Defense Support, would be less this next year than before.

Mr. Shoaib further remarked that commodity grant aid had in the past been an important source of local currency for financing plan projects. Mr. Cottam inquired if these could not now be replaced from the proceeds from the expanded PL-480 program now in prospect. G. Ahmed replied that they had hoped not to use the PL-480 proceeds for the Plan, but to conserve them for supplies and programs which would reach the common man and have a more immediate public impact than the larger Plan projects.

Finally, Mr. Shoaib inquired if it might not be possible to decide on a date for the resumed meeting. He remarked that it would not be desirable to have such a meeting coincide with a visit of President Ayub to Washington in early November, and it was accordingly agreed to try to arrange a meeting for late October.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 398.14/6-861. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Adams on June 12 and approved in B on June 21.

1 See footnote 2, Document 22.

27. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the Under Secretary of State (Bowles) 27. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the Under Secretary of State (Bowles)Source

Washington, June 12, 1961.

I-14613/61

Dear Chet: In a recent message (New Delhi's Embtel 1118 of 28 April 1961)1 Ambassador Galbraith emphasized the desirability of maintaining and strengthening the generally pro-Western orientation of India's military leaders. We understand that the Ambassador will be in Washington this week and hope that you plan to discuss this subject with him.

The Department of Defense is concerned over indications of a trend in the Indian Ministry of Defense counter to the pro-Western orientation of India's senior military officers. These disturbing indications include: the recent Soviet emergence as a supplier of military type aircraft to India, a seeming preference on the part of Mr. V.K. Krishna Menon for Soviet rather than American sources of supply of such equipment, and the manipulations of senior officer assignments in favor of politically minded officers within the Indian Army and Air Force by Mr. Menon which may undermine the present strong, Western-oriented military leadership in favor of those more amenable to his personal political thinking.

We believe that this trend should be halted and that early practical steps should be taken to prevent further Soviet inroads which could lead to the exclusion of the United States as a supplier of military equipment to this country.

Since private American business cannot be expected to meet Soviet price competition it is necessary to agree upon procedures by which the United States Government can assume a part of the cost of supplying military equipment. It would also be desirable for us to offer long term loans at low interest rates and accept rupees in payment where necessary. There is legislative authority under the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended, for making such arrangements. Similar arrangements have been made with Burma and Indonesia. Once it is decided that aid to India should be granted in the United States' interest, the Presidential determinations and waivers which would be required under the Act should be sought. Because the actual prices charged by American manufacturers would not be affected, we can, as an internal matter, view the United States Government's participation in the sales arrangements as an aid to India. There would then appear to be no difficulty with the legal position. Once this is clear, such problems as demonstrations of American manufactured equipment could be worked out. It is recognized, of course, that any arrangements made must take account of Indian sensitivity associated with their firm policy of accepting no grant military assistance.

With regard to the security of classified material which might be involved in such sales, Defense recognizes both the provisions of the National Disclosure Policy with its requirement for an in-country survey and the undesirability of special arrangements or exceptions. We believe that the best approach to the security problem would be through our Ambassador's efforts to persuade the Government of India of our firm position and good faith.

It is recognized that problems may arise over Indian requests for equipment which we have not yet made available to our allies in NATO, CENTO, and SEATO. We believe that such problems, as is particularly the case with the C-130 transport aircraft, must be handled on a case by case basis.

The Department of Defense proposes that early representations be made to the Government of India which would make it clear that the United States is prepared to offer military equipment on terms at least as favorable as those offered by any other source of supply. We further propose that State and Defense collaborate in the formulation of positive courses of action with a view to implementation soon after Ambassador Galbraith's return to India.

Sincerely,

Roswell L. Gilpatric2

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 64 A 2382, India 400-702. Secret. Drafted on June 6 in ISA/NESA by Colonel Charles Rousek.

1 This reference is error; the message has not been further identified.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Gilpatric signed the original.

28. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 28. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, June 28, 1961, 6 p.m.

3122. As President Ayub bound to raise Kashmir issue in Washington, Embassy believes it timely to assess the prevailing climate and situation here in order to assist Department in reaching conclusions as to what lies within realm of the possible and therefore what course of action to pursue.

We perceive no flexibility in GOI rationalization of its position on Kashmir which has probably been reinforced by similar situation in respect of Chinese in Ladakh, i.e.: It is held there can be no disputing India's claims which rest on sound legal and political basis; if other party does not accept India's claim and desires peaceful political settlement, this can only be achieved when military occupation vacated and ties of friendship have begun to reknit; in any case, initiative and proposals for settlement must come from those who seek to repair damage done by infringement on India's territory. Thus, those Indians who have hoped for Indo-Pakistan rapprochement have concentrated on soluble problems with view to strengthening the climate and habit of cooperation on the theory that accommodation of positions on Kashmir, involving give and take, can more easily be justified to Indian electorate if it is among friends.

From this standpoint, Indo-Pak relations have to be considerably transformed before Kashmir problem can be tackled. Well informed non-Indian observers, with whom this matter has been discussed recently, do not consider any profitable step on Kashmir can be taken at this time, not only because of current state of Indo-Pak relations but also because it is an election year in India.

It is extremely doubtful Prime Minister Nehru, in the unlikely event he desired to, could gain parliamentary approval under present circumstances of any solution of Kashmir issue that would be acceptable to Pakistan. It must be remembered he is regarded by orthodox Hindus as too pro-Muslim.

These considerations, together with fact that what Nehru says even in confidence to Pakistan leaders seems to leak to press are probably why Prime Minister has greeted President Ayub's conversational overtures on Kashmir with “wall of silence.”

Given present state of Indo-US relations, however, and obvious justification for new administration to have current reading of Indian views from authoritative source, Ambassador plans at a propitious and hopefully early date to discuss Indo-Pak relations with Prime Minister including Kashmir. Obviously no point should be made of this in advance.

If, as is generally believed, Prime Minister is found to consider that Kashmir is more a result than the cause of Indo-Pak troubles, which are basically due to the communalism that produced partition, then current period of renewed communal tension is likely to find Nehru, concerned as he is about communalism, unable to envisage any satisfactory solution and consequently unyielding in his public posture. But at least we shall perhaps be in a better position to gauge what course of action, if any, is open at this time to well wishers of both Pakistan and India.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/6-2861. Confidential. Repeated to Karachi.

29. Special National Intelligence Estimate 29. Special National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, July 5, 1961.

SNIE 32 – 61

PROSPECTS FOR PAKISTAN

The Problem

To estimate the prospects for Pakistan and the Ayub regime over the next year or so.

The Estimate

1. Field Marshal Ayub, President of Pakistan, took power by a bloodless military coup in October 1958. During the more than thirty months since that time he has grappled energetically with three fundamental problems: (a) how to give his government constitutional legitimacy and to make it more representative in character, and at the same time to infuse a spirit of national unity into his regionally-minded people; (b) how to encourage economic development in his resource-poor country; and (c) how to promote Pakistan's foreign policy interests in a complex and changing international scene.

The Political Problem

2. Ayub's personal authority in Pakistan is not under effective challenge. Despite some jealousies and dissensions among his top military and civilian advisers, he has managed to keep close control over them, to make them work effectively, and to retain their personal loyalty. The prestige of the army, on which Ayub's base of power rests, remains high. (The army withdrew from the day-to-day affairs of government after the first few months.) Ayub continues to enjoy wide support among the civil and military services generally. The old line politicians whom he displaced have been intimidated, their party organizations shattered, and many of them have been personally discredited by disclosure of their dishonest and inefficient conduct while in office. Some important politicians, however, may have won a degree of sympathy due to the government's moves against them; the Islamic zealots (Jamaat-i-Islami), the “Red Shirts” (Pushtun nationalists), and the underground Communist Party have retained at least a potential for organized opposition to the regime.

3. Ayub has attempted to bring to Pakistan a greater sense of cohesion and national entity than it has had since its very early days. He himself and most of his advisers are less affected by regional biases than many of their politician predecessors. By removing regional issues from the forefront of politics, Ayub has brought a period of stability and increasing centralization in which more effective national planning has been possible. He has not, of course, been able to eliminate the fundamental political and economic problems which arise out of the country's division into two parts or the very deep cultural and linguistic divisions between East and West Pakistan and within the latter. Indeed, in some cases his firm policy of centralization may have enhanced regional loyalties—especially in the North-West Frontier area. As far as the bulk of the people are concerned, Ayub's benevolent authoritarianism has not been particularly repressive. Although he still has fairly wide, albeit mostly passive, support in the country at large, significant elements still resent the fact that he is not a constitutionally legitimate and representative leader.

4. Ayub's greatest weakness has been his lack of confidence and support from many of the politically-conscious elements in the country. These range all the way from impoverished students and petty trade unionists to successful professional people and influential intellectuals. Most of these groups resent their virtual exclusion from the governing process by Ayub. Many believe deeply in the ideal of the rule of law and have been associated with the parliamentary system. They are unlikely to be satisfied with any limited representative forms, such as the “Basic Democracies” scheme, which Ayub is now implementing.1 Though unorganized, their discontent has recently been manifested in student disturbances in Karachi and the locally famous “Snelson Case” in which the judiciary strongly repudiated what it construed as an effort by the executive to interfere in the traditional responsibilities of the courts.

5. We believe Ayub will continue to dominate the Pakistani scene for the next few years at least—although promulgation of a new constitution and full implementation of the “Basic Democracies” will change the forms through which his power is exercised and probably limit its extent. We anticipate that his regime will continue to be relatively honest and efficient, that he will be able to handle any dissension that develops among his advisers, and that his rule will not become unduly repressive. The period of constitution-making and elections (vaguely promised for 1962) will be a troublesome one, the more so the longer it is. In any event, Ayub is unlikely to win the trust and cooperation of most of the politically-conscious elements or to do more than make a start at weakening basic provincial antagonisms. However, he will probably continue to have a fairly broad base of primarily passive support.

6. The longerterm outlook is less clear. If Ayub is to consolidate his reforms and sustain their momentum, he will sooner or later have to broaden participation in the government and probably also provide some form of legitimate expression for regional feelings. We believe there is about an even chance that a workable form of limited representative government will evolve out of his constitutional experimenting.

7. However, it is going to be difficult for Ayub to share power. He is inclined by training and tradition to have little patience with civilian politicians and parliamentary government. He is still vigorous and relatively young (54); if he chose, he could probably go on for some time resting his power on his influence over the military forces and the lack of any satisfactory alternative to his own rule. In such a case, discontent would grow, narrowing the base of his support, and he would probably become more vulnerable to a coup by some other military leader or group—perhaps in alliance with particular civilian or regional interests. Should Ayub be killed or incapacitated, he would probably be succeeded by one of his senior military colleagues (perhaps General Azam, theGovernor of East Pakistan). In these circumstances, the problem of maintaining governmental stability would become still more complicated.

The Development Problem

8. At the core of Pakistan's development problem are the country's limited resources. Much of the land is desert, mountains, and jungle. Some useful minerals have been discovered, but with the exception of natural gas, their exploitation has lagged. The large population (93 million) is generally unskilled with a high percentage of illiteracy. The living standard is as low as that in any major country in Asia. Until recently, economic development has had a low priority and relatively little has been done to mobilize such resources as are available. The military force imposes a substantial burden on the country. Pakistan does, however, have two valuable, if not always dependable, cash crops (cotton and jute) and the potential at least for a substantial increase in agricultural production.

9. The President has selected honest and competent advisers in the economic field. He has restricted unnecessary imports, encouraged exports, and remedied the worst inequities of the land tenure and taxation systems without changing their basic structure. Fiscal policies have been reasonably successful in stimulating industrial production while restraining excessive inflationary pressures. Sympathetic economic policies and political stability have encouraged the private sector of the economy, and private as well as public industrial investment has risen significantly in the past two years. These developments have provided a tenable, though by no means solid, base for Pakistan's Second Five-Year Plan (1960-1965).

10. In general, the new plan appears to be sound, although in its present form it may tend to emphasize unduly long-term basic development programs at the expense of useful short-term projects with more direct impact on the economy. The plan calls for total investment in the neighborhood of $5 billion and is intended to achieve an increase of about 20 percent in national income and about 10 percent in per capita income. Recent indications that the rate of population growth may be somewhat greater (about 2.2 percent annually) than was previously believed may shave the latter figure somewhat. Nevertheless, successful implementation of the plan would make possible a modest increase in the standard of living, though mainly in West Pakistan. This may prevent for the next few years at least the economic pressures on the political structure from becoming significantly stronger. It would also provide a broadened base for future economic development and encourage greater public interest and participation in the development process.

11. Execution of the plan, however, is dependent not only on the mobilization of domestic resources but on the receipt of large-scale foreign aid; an estimated $2.3 billion in aid (not including PL 480 surplus food grain imports) will be required for the 1960-1965 period, or about double the annual rate of recent years.2 This foreign aid is more likely to be forthcoming if domestic planning and mobilization of resources are handled effectively. If the pace of development is to be maintained beyond the plan period, substantial aid will need to continue, as it will be many years before the Pakistani economy is self-generating even under the best of domestic conditions. Thus President Ayub will continue almost indefinitely to be in the unpleasant position of being responsible for an economic development program the success or failure of which will be determined by external factors over which he can at best exert only limited influence.

International Position

12. The need for external assistance looms large in Ayub's approach to foreign policy. He has made it clear that Pakistan relies for a major portion of its required aid, economic as well as military, on the US, that as an ally it should have a special right to such aid, and that the aid it has received to date has not fulfilled its expectations. At the same time, he has permitted his aggressive Minister of Fuel, Power, and Natural Resources, Z.A. Bhutto, to arrange for a $30 million oil exploration assistance project with the USSR and is now investigating the possibility of Soviet help in dealing with Pakistan's serious water-logging and salinity problem.

13. Pakistan's foreign policy problems are not just a question of obtaining external assistance, however. Ayub's government is under considerable pressure from the Communist Bloc. The USSR has long been frank about its hostility toward Pakistan's alliance with the West, and since the U-2 incident Pakistanis have been acutely aware of the threat of Soviet power. (The plane took off from Peshawar.) Soviet pressure has also been manifested in the growing Soviet presence in Afghanistan with which Pakistan is prone to connect the increasing unrest on its border with Afghanistan. In addition, the USSR has openly supported India and Afghanistan against Pakistan on the Kashmir and “Pushtoonistan” issues.

14. These issues are of themselves of immediate and highly emotional concern to Pakistan and there is a growing sense of concern over failure to cope with them adequately. The “strong” policy toward Afghanistan which the Ayub government adopted when it came to office has in fact increased Afghan intransigence and intensified unrest on the North-West Frontier. The cooperative policy toward India did facilitate a settlement of the Indus waters question, but it did not lead India to take up Ayub's offer for a joint defense effort in South Asia, and most importantly, it failed to achieve any progress on Kashmir. Pakistan's membership in CENTO and SEATO has not brought from the US the support on regional issues for which Pakistan hoped, nor have Ayub's several trips abroad won any new support from the neutrals. Indeed, many Pakistanis fear that the US desire to maintain amicable relations with Afghanistan and to support strongly a major economic development effort in India are manifestations of an increasing partiality toward the “uncommitted” nations. A resulting frustration has tended to increase the existing neutralist sentiment within the country. On the other hand, a sense of growing crisis over external issues tends to increase national unity.

15. In this situation, more complex than any Pakistan has faced in the international field for some years, Ayub's foreign policy is likely to seek greater independence within the framework of its pro-Western orientation. Additional technical and economic agreements with the USSR are possible, as are more comprehensive negotiations with Communist China on Himalayan border questions. Pakistan has already indicated its intention to favor Communist China's membership in the UN; other shifts on emotional Afro-Asian issues and the establishment of closer ties with Tito and Nasser may follow. Ayub's vigorous policy on the “Pushtoonistan” issue will probably continue. In addition, he will try to focus international attention on the Kashmir problem again, perhaps even by provocations or agitation in the disputed area.

16. Pakistan's relations with the US will probably continue to be judged to a considerable degree in the light of US relations with India and Afghanistan. There are likely to be fairly persistent expressions of dissatisfaction with US aid and repeated requests for demonstrations of US confidence and support. In this atmosphere, the possibility will remain that foreign policy problems, especially if they are coupled with unfavorable internal developments, could seriously erode Pakistan's close association with the US.

17. We believe this to be unlikely, however, at least for some time to come. Pakistan is firmly committed to the pro-Western alignment implicit in its SEATO and CENTO memberships, and short of a radical change in government it would be difficult for it to find a congenial place among the neutralist nations. In addition, Ayub and many Pakistanis have a genuine fear of communism. Moreover, Pakistan is heavily dependent on the US for both military and economic aid, and, despite occasional recriminations and manifestations of greater independence, Pakistan will probably continue to place its basic reliance on the West and to cooperate actively with it within the established framework of the alliance. Indeed, a major effort to demonstrate Pakistan's loyalty and to win increased US support and commitments will almost certainly be made during Ayub's visit to the US in July 1961.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 79 R 01012A, ODDI Registry of NIE and SNIE Files, Box 184. Secret. A note on the cover sheet reads: “Submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence. The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff.” All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in this estimate on July 5, except the Atomic Energy Commission representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

1 The “Basic Democracies” are a series of representative bodies beginning at the village level. Except at the village level, election is indirect and some members are appointed by the government. No party organizations are involved. [Footnote in the source text.]

2 Approximately $1.8 billion is required for specific projects in the plan and $500 million for imports necessary to keep the economy operating at a reasonably high level. [Footnote in the source text.]

30. Memorandum of Conversation 30. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, July 11, 1961, 3-5 p.m.

SUBJECT

Kennedy-Ayub Talks

PARTICIPANTS

President Ayub

External Affairs Minister Qadir

Finance Minister Shoaib

Ambassador Aziz Ahmed

Foreign Secretary Dehlavi

President Kennedy

Vice President Johnson

Secretary of State Rusk

Ambassador Rountree

Asst. Secy of State Edwin M. Martin

Asst. Secy of State Phillips Talbot

White House Asst. Rostow (Deputy Special Asst. to the President for National Security Affairs)

President Kennedy opened by expressing a warm welcome to President Ayub on his arrival in the United States.1 Vice President Johnson and President Kennedy's sister had taken great pleasure in seeing President Ayub in Pakistan. We had greatly appreciated his sturdy support of SEATO's Plan 5 at a most dangerous period. Now we wanted to give him our thinking and to get his views on subjects of common interest. For all these reasons, we were glad he could come in July rather than waiting until November. Another reason was that some of the Congressmen who have been least enthusiastic about the American aid program were particularly friendly to President Ayub's country, and when they heard him tell the advantages of the aid program, perhaps they would see it in a better light.

Observing that in these talks the two presidents could begin anywhere, President Kennedy started with his recent visit to Vienna. In 1914, in 1939, and in Korea troubles had arisen in part because there were many misunderstandings. To avoid miscalculation based on misunderstanding, he had wanted to get to know Khrushchev, whose January 6 speech had sounded as if it could lead only to war. He had wanted to know what was really meant. Unfortunately he got little enough satisfaction out of the talks. Khrushchev was courteous, but made it very clear he intended to follow the course he had set out.

On Laos, Khrushchev had said the right words about neutrality, but the President had come away unclear as to what meaning he attached to them. On nuclear testing they got nowhere. On Berlin Khrushchev had said what he had since stated publicly, that he expected to sign a peace treaty, then announce that both the USSR and the Western Powers had thereby lost sovereignty in the area. If this were done, East Germany might or might not take action immediately. All in all, we were faced with a difficult situation, which could end in disaster. We might have to strengthen our military establishment. The extra $4-5 billion would hurt us in the foreign aid field and in other activities although we would do it if necessary. One of our problems was that we did not have as large forces as the USSR and had relied on nuclear weapons as a deterrent. Thus the situation had the dangerous capability of escalating rapidly. We would hope Khrushchev would give way, and we supposed Khrushchev hoped we should.

On the question of Laos, President Kennedy said that in March, when it appeared the Pathet Lao might capture Vientiane, he had gone to see Prime Minister Macmillan. We had heard that the British would not intervene, nor would the French. Macmillan agreed to a limited plan, but the French would not. Then came talk of a cease-fire, and we were faced with a new situation. We had just been through the Cuban episode—which was a mistake, at least in implementation—and he had taken a fresh look at the U.S. military situation. There was the problem of getting troops into Laos, which had no seaport. The U.S. concluded that it might be difficult to go in. Viet-Nam was another country that troubled President Kennedy. President Ayub knew that it was easier to get into these situations than out of them. In many ways this was one of our most anxious problems, because we should not want to make a mistake which would leave us fighting in an Asian situation where we could not win without using nuclear weapons and forfeiting the support of peoples of Asia.

President Ayub responded with general comments about conditions in Southeast Asia. Much of the problem, he said, arose because most of the rulers were princes and others wanting mainly to protect their own interests. Unless they were prepared to identify themselves with their own people, no amount of aid would save them. If the U.S. wanted to help them, it should insist that they undertake reforms. It should also be prepared to take active leadership of local armed forces, including use of weapons, training, and operations. To President Kennedy's comment that the U.S. did not even put Southeast Asian soldiers into uniform, President Ayub agreed that there were many problems. The French would not fight in Southeast Asia, he thought, nor had the British now much interest in the area. Would it not be better, therefore, to detach the French and the British from SEATO? It would give more flexibility. Pakistan had been asked to prepare to send a battalion to Laos, President Ayub said, but he had concluded a battalion could do nothing but get itself lost. He had decided therefore that it would be better to send a brigade group so it could fight well as a more integrated group.

President Ayub then turned to Pakistan's security situation. Displaying a map showing Pakistani information on the deployment of Indian forces, he said that of one-half million troops in the Indian army, 15 per cent were deployed against China and 85 per cent faced Pakistan. Displaying a second map on which Afghan military formations were indicated, President Ayub referred to an Afghan army of 80,000 to 90,000 men on paper but said he didn't know how effective they were. The Russians had poured in $450,000,000 worth of military equipment, though perhaps the Afghans could not yet use the equipment effectively. The Pakistan Army, he added, showing a third map, was necessarily deployed against India and Afghanistan. That was why he kept harping on the Kashmir question. Until it was settled, the armies would face one another. Should the Afghans get properly trained, moreover, Pakistan would be up the gum tree if an attack came from either India or Afghanistan.

President Kennedy believed the Indians are not going to march. They already had what they wanted in Kashmir. To President Ayub the point was that India wanted to neutralize all Pakistan. In answer to President Kennedy's question how that would help India, President Ayub said that it was clear from the Indian Army deployments that they regarded Pakistan as enemy no. 1. To them the Chinese problem was just an aberration, a misunderstanding. President Kennedy observed he could understand India's desire, especially Nehru's, to hold on to what they had in Kashmir. He could also understand India's force being placed there to keep out Pakistan, which had irredentist feeling. President Ayub responded that Kashmir was a test; if India should settle with Pakistan on Kashmir, it would mean India wanted to live at peace with Pakistan.

President Kennedy explained that the U.S. had supported India not with the expectation that India would support U.S. policies, but because we felt it in the interest of us all that India should not collapse. He perceived difficulties in dealing with Nehru, who had been around a long time, and he did not know what the U.S. could do. We could not even bring Chiang Kai-shek, whom we had helped more than anyone, to do what we saw was in his own interest.

President Ayub thought that what the U.S. wanted in South Asia was an area of stability. He wouldn't say that the U.S. should threaten to withhold aid to India, but surely the U.S. had the right to demand responsible action from Nehru. President Ayub acknowledged that the U.S. wanted to do good and to assist India in order that it should not go Communist, but at the back of its mind the U.S. surely thought India would support the U.S. To the contrary, President Kennedy explained, he did not expect Nehru's support on the items that were vital to the U.S. The U.S. had supported the Indian Consortium even when Nehru was strongly attacking U.S. actions in Cuba. President Ayub agreed that Nehru would not support the U.S.; he wanted to keep open his channels to Moscow, also.

One clue to the understanding of India in President Ayub's opinion, could be found in the peculiar patterns in underdeveloped countries wherein central governments collected funds which were then spent in the states. Since demands were always greater than the funds, wrangling resulted of which the Communists could take advantage. Regional wrangling had already started in India for this reason and because of other divisions such as caste, with the result that local regionalisms were growing stronger. So far Nehru's personality and the unity obtained in the fight against the British had held India together, but these could not carry on indefinitely. Meanwhile the Chinese Communists had an army of one-half million troops in Tibet ostensibly to control a population of two million. Actually these troops were not too far from Calcutta, which was the base of Communism in India. In his view India was bound to break up in 15 to 20 years. If it were said that the key to the defense of the rim of Asia was India, he would add in these circumstances that the key to the defense of the subcontinent was Pakistan.

President Kennedy wondered what his guest would feel Nehru could agree to in the Kashmir dispute that Pakistan would also agree to. Describing on the map their respective locations, President Ayub replied that Nehru had shown no disposition to yield anything beyond the cease-fire line in Kashmir. Pakistan would have no objection to India's taking Jammu. To protect its resources Pakistan would have to have some miles on the other side of the River Chenab. But he didn't wish to come down to details now; only to point out the necessity of the two nations coming to negotiate. Pakistan's people were getting fed up. This is why they sometimes talked of working more closely with China, though they didn't want China to come in. What then did Pakistan want of China, President Kennedy wondered. President Ayub wanted nothing of China; he'd like to see it go to hell. But the Pakistani people were anxious to do something about Kashmir.

President Kennedy could understand why a settlement was important, but didn't know whether the U.S. could influence Nehru. In President Ayub's opinion, however, Nehru now had to come to the U.S. He had no maneuverability left. The Chinese did not like him, so he had to turn to the U.S. Why could the U.S. not see that? President Kennedy felt the U.S. to be not all that influential with Nehru on Kashmir. It was a bone-deep issue. Even so, President Ayub felt that the U.S. need merely tell Nehru it was concerned about the waste of its money that occurred because the Kashmir issue was not settled. President Kennedy still believed one should not underestimate the strength of feeling about such issues. He recognized, for example, that Pakistan could not understand why the U.S. should feel so strongly about the admission of Communist China to the U.N., but it did. He supposed that Nehru had the same kind of feeling about Kashmir. Even if this were true, President Ayub commented, many people of India did not agree with Nehru. They would like to get outstanding issues settled. When a number of boundary issues had been settled, many people were joyful. Looking ahead strategically, the U.S. should remember that anything it gave was wasted until the Kashmir issue was solved. Summing up this part of the discussion, President Kennedy wanted President Ayub to understand that (1) the U.S. gave aid to India not to get that country's support but to help it stay free; (2) it was in the vital interest of the United States that this issue be solved; and (3) when Nehru came to Washington in November President Kennedy would make a major effort with him. He wanted President Ayub to know that even if he did not succeed, he would have tried. Unless this effort succeeded, President Ayub believed that Pakistan would have to bring the case again to the U.N. Would the U.S. then support Pakistan? Yes, President Kennedy said, the U.S. would support the U.N. resolutions. President Ayub thanked him for this statement.

Secretary Rusk asked whether there was any chance for a broader consideration of the problem. Could the Kashmir issue be put into the context of the security of the entire subcontinent, for example? Expressing doubt, President Ayub described Kashmir as the manifestation of India's hostility toward Pakistan. No government of Pakistan, he added, could stand by dealing with other problems while ignoring Kashmir.

President Kennedy said that if the U.S. was to be involved in the Kashmir case again, Pakistan should at least wait (to raise the question in the U.N.) until after he had seen Nehru. If after that, Pakistan finally decided to bring the question to the U.N., the U.S. would vote with Pakistan. (Comment: In later discussion with Messrs. Rountree and Talbot, the President made it clear that at the proper time the U.S. should appraise the possible consequences of renewed consideration of the Kashmir question in the U.N., and should counsel the Pakistanis strongly if the prospects were negative. End comment) President Ayub noted that the past U.S. position on Kashmir in the U.N. was known, and that President Kennedy could use this record in his talks with Nehru. Secretary Rusk observed that in the communique of the present meetings, it would be important to emphasize the past record, not talk of the future.

Saying he also wished to talk about Afghanistan, President Ayub recalled that during all the time Afghanistan had served as a buffer between Russia and Britain (British India) it had never had good roads. Now three excellent road systems being built in Afghanistan by the Russians would enable the Russians to bring 9 to 12 divisions to bear on Pakistan if they wanted to. The U.S. was obligingly building lateral roads for them. When this complex was completed, the Russians would be in a position to intimidate Pakistan militarily. Their goal was to intimidate Pakistan and to knock it out of SEATO and CENTO. To reduce this pressure was one reason that Pakistan made its oil deal with the USSR.

President Ayub believed our ability to act in Southeast Asia to be now completely curtailed. Because they were a liability, he felt the protocol countries should be detached from SEATO. President Kennedy reminded him that in Viet-Nam the U.S. had taken on almost unilateral responsibility. Yes, President Ayub responded, and now the U.S. was getting somewhere. The Communists were creeping in all the time, so nothing but direct action could stop them. He doubted that Thailand would last long. As the U.S. was giving the Thai equipment it should ask them to give it the controls so the soldiers would fight.

In President Kennedy's judgment the threat posed by the Soviet Union was not overt war in that region. If it wanted war, it would attack the U.S. He would think the threat that Pakistan might confront in Afghanistan was the possibility of guerrilla warfare and Communist party control. The question was the strength of the border forces in Afghanistan and of the Communist Party influence in both Afghanistan and Pakistan. Things along the border went on, President Ayub responded. There were attacks in the area, and Pakistan hit back hard. The Afghans believed the Russians would prevail. They wanted to get all the support they could from them, but at the same time to keep them at arm's length. They did this by getting U.S. support. Yet the Royal Family in Afghanistan did not want to commit suicide. The U.S. could therefore tell the Afghans it would give aid when their actions justify it. President Kennedy wondered whether it was then President Ayub's opinion that the U.S. should not want to give aid to Afghanistan. Ambassador Byroade had taken another view—that the Afghans should not be allowed to be smothered, and that the U.S. should give them support. President Ayub felt nevertheless that if the U.S. wanted Afghanistan to behave, it should pull back a bit. Answering President Kennedy's observation that at least Afghanistan was not yet a satellite, President Ayub suggested this was true because the Soviets didn't want it yet. In essence he felt Afghanistan was a satellite; the Royal Family was no longer free. But the USSR did not yet have the Communist Party cells in Afghanistan to take over.

Mr. Qadir thought the United States should endeavor to place the Afghans in a position of seeking our aid. If the United States did not give assistance so freely, the Afghans would come to realize the danger of losing it altogether, and this they did not want.

President Kennedy observed that no amount of American aid would make a country want to preserve its independence. Unless there was a will and determination in this regard, assistance rendered was wasted. We should therefore always consider the attitude of the government toward independence as a criterion in determining aid uses. He mentioned Guinea as a country in which the determination of the leaders to preserve their national independence seemed in doubt, and therefore a country in which the utility of American aid was also doubtful.

President Ayub commented that Sekou Toure was a Communist. However, he might be replaced by someone else who would pursue other policies. The difficulty in Afghanistan was that in present circumstances the rule was confined to only one family.

President Kennedy mentioned the problem of judgment involved in such matters. For example, the extension of aid to Yugoslavia had lessened Yugoslav dependence upon the Soviet Union and had helped to bring about a greater degree of independence. There were other such places where we should use economic assistance to avoid, in effect, turning the country over to the Soviet Bloc.

President Ayub said many countries were exploiting American anxiety to help them. This was particularly true in Afghanistan. If, however, the Royal Family should feel itself in danger of losing American aid and thus of increased reliance upon the Soviet Union, their attitude might change. If the United States should pull back a bit they would feel naked and might become more sensible in their foreign relations. He thought in any event it would do no harm to try this tactic. Certainly Pakistan did not want to suggest any course which would increase the danger of the Communists taking over in Afghanistan. Their interests were exactly to the contrary and it was the President's belief that the “shock treatment” would be more successful than the course currently followed by the United States.

President Kennedy said the Pakistanis might have an exaggerated idea of the magnitude of American aid to Afghanistan. The program now was quite limited—we had spent only $22 million in FY 1961 and $165 million in FY 1951-60—and he felt we could not withdraw completely without running a real danger.

Mr. Qadir commented that Secretary Rusk had observed at Bangkok that the United States was sometimes thought of as a cow with milk but with no horns. He thought we should develop a few horns and become a bit tougher in dispensing aid.

President Kennedy referred to the matter of Pakistan's using U.S. equipment on the Pakistani border against Afghan tribal incursions. Recalling that some had thought the situation similar to that in Algeria, where we had come in for criticism because the French had used U.S. equipment, he said that here the situation was different. We had no objection to Pakistan's using U.S. equipment to protect its national security if it felt action vital; it was a question of how best to get into position to settle differences with Afghanistan. President Ayub said that military equipment was not the sort of thing one used unless there was need. Pakistan had no intention of attacking the Afghans. But if they came at Pakistan, it would hit them hard.

Explaining Pakistan's reactions to U.S. policies, President Ayub said that whenever the U.S. had a success anywhere, Pakistan shared in the success. When the U.S. suffered reverses, Pakistani morale went down. U.S. power was the only cover available to Pakistan and other countries. Thus it was not that Pakistan was criticizing U.S. policies, but that if any policy failed, there were repercussions on Pakistan's security. Sometimes a firm stand was necessary. The Russians, for example, used to play a trick on Pakistan. They would give Pakistan very short notice of overflights of their planes to Delhi, and then take unauthorized routes. Finally he had had to tell them that if they again took an unauthorized route, their plane would be shot down. That worked. Pakistan faced that sort of thing quite often. It was living in the midst of tricksters—Russians, Chinese, and those bloody Hindus.

President Kennedy pointed out that if the U.S. were not involved all around the world it could easily maintain military control in limited areas, say the Caribbean. By the same token, so could the USSR over areas near its territory. If the Americans seemed less assertive in some areas, it didn't mean we were fainthearted. But while chances remained in Afghanistan, we'd like to be in a position to move forward with them.

Returning to the subject of Indo-Pakistan relations, President Ayub repeated Pakistan's desire to settle the disputes. He sometimes wondered what sort of statesmanship Nehru had. He had been neither impressed nor inspired by Nehru, who could not see what a fatal mistake he was making in not seizing the chance to settle the disputes.

President Kennedy asked about transportation arrangements across India between the two wings of Pakistan. Mr. Qadir explained that after having agreed to permit transit of some trains each week, Nehru found some objections in his Parliament and as a result India had now made clear this would not be implemented—even though Pakistan had permitted Indian trains to cross parts of East Pakistan between Bengal and Assam.

President Ayub spoke of having hoped that things would ease up, but this was the sort of people they were. These chaps had no intention of fighting China, either. They were spending $700 million on armed forces, shoving the money down the drain. He couldn't understand why they should continue doing so, instead of settling the disputes. But he found Indians a very trigger-happy people. In 1951 they had got on the move, for no apparent reason. President Ayub went on to say that there was a great deal of concern in Pakistan over the spreading scope of American military aid. His people wanted to know whether there was any intention to give India more arms aid.

President Kennedy replied that there was no intention to give India any arms aid.

If this should happen, President Ayub continued, the Pakistani people would force his country out of the pacts and alliances and everything.

President Kennedy explained that when in the new aid bill changes were made in the political qualifications that countries must meet to be eligible for American military assistance, India was not even discussed. If sometime a situation, such as impending war with China, should arise that would cause the Indians to come to the U.S. for military aid, we would talk with Pakistan and see what was the best course of action. However, there was no intention now to give India military aid. If there should be a change in U.S. policy, President Kennedy would talk with President Ayub first.

Mr. Qadir was worried mainly about the public relations angle. Indian newspapers had carried these stories of change in the American law and had suggested India might get U.S. military aid, and Pakistani newspapers had picked them up. As a result, the Pakistani people had become alarmed. The Pakistan Government could not repudiate the story, and if there were no repudiation on this end, people would think the story true.

To President Kennedy the best course seemed to be to try to let the issue pass. It would be wrong to issue a statement. We would get into a fight about something that was not a fact. The best thing therefore was just to let the whole thing pass. Mr. Qadir agreed that that would be best, but felt the people of Pakistan would not let it pass. President Kennedy suggested that all should think about what to do about this in the common interest.

President Ayub concluded the meeting by repeating that he found it a great pleasure to see President Kennedy. He wanted him please to remember that Pakistan genuinely regards him as a friend.2

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, Subjects, Ayub Visit, 7/61. Secret. Drafted by Talbot. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.)

1 President Ayub arrived in Washington on July 11 and returned to Pakistan from New York on July 18. He spent the first 3 days in Washington and was Vice President Johnson's guest during a 2-day trip to the LBJ Ranch in Texas.

2 Presidents Kennedy and Ayub continued their discussions on July 12 and July 13. The conversation on July 12 dealt largely with economic issues. The conversation on July 13 opened with a discussion of the question of Chinese representation in the United Nations before turning to the issues of economic and military assistance for Pakistan. Ayub had an additional discussion of military assistance with Johnson on July 15 during the flight to Texas. Memoranda of the two conversations with Kennedy are in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, Subjects, Ayub Visit, 7/61. A memorandum of the conversation with Johnson is ibid., Pakistan, General, 5/61-7/61. Additional documentation on the Ayub visit is in Department of State, Central Files, 790D.11 and ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366.

31. Memorandum of Conversation 31. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, July 21, 1961.

SUBJECT

Conversation between the President and Ambassador Maiwandwal of Afghanistan

PARTICIPANTS

The President

His Excellency Mohammed Hashim Maiwandwal, Ambassador of Afghanistan Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary of State for NEA

Ambassador Maiwandwal gave a long, historical account of Afghan and Pushtun occupancy of various areas east of the Durand Line and of British determination for several generations to keep Afghanistan a backward buffer state. He said that when the British established the Durand Line in 1893 they knew that it cut through the land of the Pushtuns. Before Britain left India in 1947 it promised that on its departure the Pushtuns east of the Durand Line would have freedom to determine their future. However, after a referendum which was boycotted by the Pushtun nationalist leader, Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, Pakistan claimed it had the sanction to incorporate the Pushtun areas into the new Pakistani state. Afghanistan does not want these areas for itself but Afghans do feel that their Pushtun brothers must have a chance to determine their own destiny.

In the course of the Ambassador's statement the President called for a map. When it came and the President asked the Ambassador what area he was talking about, the Ambassador swept his hand over nearly half of West Pakistan.

Of late, the Ambassador said, Pakistan has been taunting the Pushtuns with American arms. In response to the President's question, the Ambassador confirmed that he was still talking about the areas east of the Durand Line. These actions greatly disturbed Afghans and reemphasized the problem confronting Afghanistan when the United States gives Pakistan sophisticated weapons. The President commented that he had heard that Afghanistan had weapons from the Soviet Union. Agreeing that this was true, the Ambassador said that Afghanistan had turned to the Soviet Union only after the U.S. had given weapons to Pakistan and after Afghan requests for arms from the United States and other Western countries had been refused. He added that the Afghan military and economic relations with the Soviet Union did not mean that Afghanistan was pro-Communist or pro-Russian. If the Pakistanis complained that Afghan roads would enable Soviet forces to reach the Pakistan frontier with ease, their reply would be that they would get there over the dead bodies of the Afghans.

The Ambassador asked for a definition of the U.S. policy toward use of American-provided military equipment in the border areas. At the President's request Mr. Talbot explained that the bilateral Pakistan-U.S. Agreement permits the use of MAP equipment for internal security purposes and that since the U.S. recognizes the Durand Line as Pakistan's frontier there can be no legal objection to Pakistan's use of this equipment to meet vital internal security needs in that area. However, this did not mean that the United States could not counsel Pakistan against such uses as might exacerbate relations between Pakistan and its neighbors.

The President observed that disputes among nations that are friends of ours create difficult problems for the United States. Obviously we cannot settle all of these disputes. We do hope, however, that the parties can find peaceful solutions to them.

The President said that the United States continues to desire friendly relations with Afghanistan. We had been able to help Afghanistan to some limited extent in its economic development programs and he hoped we could do more. He asked the Ambassador to come and see him again when the Ambassador returns to Washington.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790D.00/7-2161. Confidential. Drafted by Talbot and approved by the White House on July 31. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Kennedy Library)

32. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 32. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, July 22, 1961, 6:16 p.m.

35. Joint State/ICA Message. Embtels 11301 and 1131.2 You may at your discretion convey substance of following which represents our carefully considered present position to RGA. While aware this falls short proposals reftels more specific response not now practicable or possible.

1. US is prepared, as we have already demonstrated by our actions to date, to assist Afghanistan in efforts move forward with pressing economic development needs.

2. We plan give first priority successful completion of projects in which we are already engaged. While exact phasing and costing not certain, present estimates are that they will require about $50 million in next two years.

3. We are prepared continue provide wheat under the Food for Peace Program to help meet Afghan food needs. Sales proceeds will help finance agreed development projects.

4. We are willing study in detail Second Five-Year Plan when made available to us with view to determining extent to which we can associate ourselves with it. We havemade advance aid level commitments, subject to fund availability, only on very limited basis (India, one year plus conditional commitment for second year subject to review; Pakistan, part of one year) and only after we have had prolonged and detailed review with government of country concerned and with other interested governments covering soundness of plan, feasibility of specific projects included in plan, priorities as between projected requirements, adequacy of the self-help measures being taken by country, including raising domestic revenues, and all other relevant factors.

5. We are prepared to consider undertaking new projects and/or expansion existing activities of high priority to the RGA which will help meet Afghanistan's urgent development needs. In January we offered to provide grant aid ($17 million) for expanded education programs which the Afghan Government still has under consideration. We are prepared to consider grant financing for technical assistance and for capital costs of educational and other social infrastructure projects. In view of general US policy of increased reliance on loan financing, bulk of future industrial, transportation, irrigation, power and other economic infrastructure project proposals will primarily be considered for development loan financing; if the long-term borrowing authority is enacted we will be able to commit funding for specific projects over a period of years more readily than in the past.

6. When considering new project proposals we will wish study carefully their technical and economic priority, adequacy and soundness of design and plans for implementation, adequacy of Afghanistan's provision for financing share of costs, consistency of financing plans with financial stability, and soundness of financial and administrative arrangements for continuing operations.

7. We are prepared, as illustrated by Nathan Contract, to assist Afghanistan to improve its capacity to formulate and execute a sound long-term development plan.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 789.5-MSP/6-2161. Secret. Drafted in SOA by Carle, cleared by Talbot and Perkins (S/S) and with B/FAC and ICA, and approved by Bowles.

1 In telegram 1130 from Kabul, June 20, the Embassy proposed a detailed program of assurances regarding the estimated magnitude of economic assistance that could be provided to Afghanistan over a 2-year period. (Ibid.)

2 In telegram 1131 from Kabul, June 21, the Embassy requested that the program of assurances outlined in telegram 1130 be given serious consideration. In light of public commitments made to India and Pakistan, and with indications that similar commitments would soon be made to Iran, the Embassy considered that it was “virtually necessary” to reach an understanding with Afghanistan on future foreign aid. (Ibid.)

33. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Ambassador to India (Galbraith) 33. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Ambassador to India (Galbraith)Source

Washington, July 31, 1961.

Dear Ken: I was much interested in your effort, reported in Embtels 3123 and 8,1 to impress upon our Indian friends the stake which neutrals have in support of the genuine independence of other neutrals. I sought to make the same point to Ambassador Chagla by indicating that the United States presence in Southeast Asia had not been sought by us and that we would be happy to see the day when the countries there would be able to maintain their own independence.

As indicated in Deptel 68,2 while we are not reaching out for additional allies, we do and must take our existing commitments seriously. Our problem is to sustain the solidarity and morale of our alliances while working toward a growing recognition by the neutrals of their basic interest in a secure independence for those not aligned. In this connection, I think Khrushchev's January 6 speech3 (the full text of which has been sent to all our Embassies) can effectively be cited as evidence that as far as Communist strategy is concerned the world is divided in two, i.e. the Communist bloc versus all the rest of the countries whether they be aligned or non-aligned.

I agree with you that there is advantage in your talks with Indians in staying out of debates over our existing allies and alliances. At the same time it should always be clear to them that we are not down-grading our commitments. Indeed we seek to strengthen them in the prospect of such trials as Laos and Berlin.

With warm personal regards,

Sincerely,

Dean Rusk4

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 6/16/61-7/31/61. Secret.

1 Dated June 28 and July 2. (Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/6-2861 and 751K.5-MSP/7-261, respectively)

2 Dated July 6. (Ibid., 611.90/7-661)

3 Extracts of Khrushchev's speech are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 555-558.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

34. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 34. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, August 4, 1961, 1:09 p.m.

457. Eyes Only for Ambassador from Acting Secretary. Bombay's 33.1 Fully understand your deep concern re Indian reaction to F-104 deliveries and regret that easier answer could not be found to this problem. GOP's turndown of our request to inform GOI in confidence inevitably means even greater GOP aversion to public announcement. Under circumstances believe only course is to seek to allay GOI reactions if and when news of F-104 deliveries breaks.

If subject F-104's comes up in conversations with Nehru or in Nehru-Bowles talks, you should emphasize: a) we informed GOI year ago that we would supply F-104's to Pakistan (Embtel 3441, April 13, 1960);2 b) number being supplied is such as not to be serious threat to India; c) there are no present plans for increasing this number. If it is useful, you might note that one factor in decision to supply F-104's was to counter incursion of advanced-type aircraft over Pakistan from north. You may also wish to re-emphasize that it is threat from north which has from beginning been and continues to be basic motivation for US military aid program in Pakistan.

Secretary's response to Indian concern re F-104's and Sidewinders reported in Deptel 378.3 His views re broad question our relationships to neutrals and allies contained in his personal letter to you dated July 31.4

Trust there will be lively and fruitful discussion these and kindred subjects at forthcoming Delhi conference.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790D.5622. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Meyer (NEA), cleared by Kitchen and U. Alexis Johnson, William Bundy (DOD), and Rostow (White House), and approved by Acting Secretary Ball. Rostow sent a copy of this telegram to the President, under cover of a handwritten note that reads: “This is how the Department is handling Ken Galbraith's great blast on the F-104's.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 8/1/61-8/31/61)

1 In telegram 33 from Bombay, August 2, Galbraith protested the arrival of F-104 aircraft in Karachi without prior notification to the Indian Government. He argued that no issue caused such deep concern in India or called for more sensitive handling than the supply of advanced weapons to Pakistan. He suggested that the policy of doing so be reassessed. The costs, in his view, far outweighed the gains. (Department of State, Central Files, 790D.5622/8-261)

2 Not printed. (Ibid., 790D.5612/4-1360)

3 Telegram 378 to New Delhi, July 28, summarized a conversation that day between Rusk and Indian Charge D. N. Chatterjee. Rusk responded to the concerns Chatterjee expressed about the provision of sophisticated military equipment to Pakistan by noting that military aid to Pakistan was balanced by sizable economic aid to India, which freed Indian resources to meet military needs. He added, however, that the United States did not want to encourage an arms race on the subcontinent. (Ibid., 762.00/7-2861)

4 Document 33.

35. Memorandum of Conversations 35. Memorandum of ConversationsSource

New Delhi, August 8 and 9, 1961.

SUBJECT

Berlin, China, Tibet, Belgrade Conference, Congo, Latin America

PARTICIPANTS

Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru (India)

Under Secretary Chester Bowles

During my four days in New Delhi I saw Nehru on three occasions: once in his office with Ambassador Galbraith, that same night at a small dinner at his home with Mrs. Bowles, Ambassador and Mrs. Galbraith, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, and Foreign Secretary Desai; and, finally, at a small dinner given by Ambassador Galbraith the night before we left for home.

On all three occasions the Prime Minister was in excellent spirits. It was clear that his relations with Ambassador Galbraith were more than normally cordial and that he has already developed great respect for the Ambassador's judgment not only on foreign policy questions but also on matters of India's economic development. This relationship will be invaluable to us in the future.

As Ambassador Galbraith has undoubtedly reported, our first visit dealt largely with Berlin but also touched on a variety of other subjects.

I underscored the vital importance we attach to the right of the people of Berlin to self-determination and our concern over the willingness of the Soviets to provoke a crisis on this issue. I stressed that the Russians had been considerably more threatening in private than in public and described two difficult personal meetings with Menshikov, whom Nehru knows as a former USSR ambassador to India whom he dislikes.

I expressed surprise that the Indians showed so little public interest in Berlin. Nehru suggested that this was partially due to a sense of fatalism in that the decisions rested with the great powers over whom India could exercise but little influence and partly because the situation was geographically remote as well as complex.

I expressed the view that two quite different dangers flowed from the Berlin situation: 1. Through a miscalculation in Moscow we might stumble into a nuclear war.

2. The likely intensification of the Cold War growing out of a prolonged Berlin conflict would have implications both for U.S. and Soviet policy all over the world, with destructive results for everyone concerned.

I suggested that the difficulties which Khrushchev faced in central Europe stemmed in large measure from the utter failure of the East German government under Ulbricht.

Khrushchev has repeatedly asked for a peaceful competition between two economic systems, a competition in which he has assured the world the Communists would eventually triumph. Actually such a competition had been in effect between the two zones of Germany for the last fifteen years and anyone who has visited these knows that the Communists have suffered a disastrous defeat. Right now 5,000 of their ablest people are fleeing the socialist “paradise” of East Germany each week to live in the capitalist Western zone.

I believe we were able to convince Nehru of our determination not to be pushed out of Berlin, that the struggle there is for self-determination of the people of Berlin and not purely to assure our legal rights, that if we should abandon our commitment the implications would become global and that India would be deeply affected and finally that while standing firm on the Berlin question itself, we were willing to negotiate in good faith on the many open questions which involve U.S. and Soviet interests in Central Europe and throughout the world.

We then touched on a variety of subjects including a discussion of African problems, particularly Angola, the progress India has made since my last visit, etc.

That evening after dinner I talked with Nehru alone for forty minutes in his living room. This conversation turned immediately to the question of China. The following points emerged from this discussion.

1. Nehru stated that China was in an arrogant mood and the greater her internal difficulties the greater her arrogance was likely to become. He described with considerable bitterness Peking's refusal to negotiate the border question in spite of the fact that Chinese forces had pushed 150 miles within Indian territory. As in my talk with him last September in New York he referred with considerable awe to Mao Tse-tung's boast that China could absorb 300 million casualties in a nuclear war and still survive as a nation.

Nevertheless, Nehru felt as did U Nu that the Chinese Communists were unlikely to provoke a war in Mao's lifetime. They would press forward wherever possible, but it was unlikely that they would undertake any massive military moves.

2. We discussed for several minutes the crucial differences between the Chinese and the Indian agricultural problems. With roughly double the arable land per family, India is producing only half as much per acre. This means that China has far less elbow room in which to expand her food production than India.

Moreover, as a free nation India is able to secure food in large quantities from abroad through P.L. 480 or by direct purchase. China, on the other hand, is inhibited not only by the lack of foreign exchange but also by her reluctance to become dependent on capitalist wheat and powdered milk.

3. I suggested that during the coming years the U.S. might be faced with a critical choice between two courses of action:

If the climate permitted: A. We could relieve the Chinese agricultural shortages by making food available in considerable amounts. Although this would relieve much of the pressure on the Chinese economy it would also help assure the success of the Communist industrial program.

B. We could deny the Chinese such food supplies on the gamble that acute and continuing shortages might bring about the collapse of the Peking regime. If this gamble failed, we could expect a massive movement into Southeast Asia to seize control of rich, relatively underpopulated areas from which China's food deficit could largely be met.

After pondering these alternatives at some length, Nehru while admitting that the question was a difficult one said that on balance the wisest course of action would be to help China to close its food gap, if the Peking government gave us the opportunity to do so, in return for an agreement not to indulge in either overt or covert acts of aggression against their neighbors. Although such an agreement might not be adhered to, it offered whatever hope there might be for a greater measure of stability.

4. I then said that although he did not believe the Chinese Communists would move militarily under present circumstances, the possibility of such a move in the next ten years could not be denied. Although India and America might be unable to cooperate fully in planning to cope with such a possibility, we should at least be able to discuss the subject in confidence and to understand each other's limitations and potentials.

I assured him that if China sought to expand into South or Southeast Asia by military power we would oppose this effort with whatever allies we could persuade to cooperate with us. At least we could count on the Australians, New Zealanders, British, Canadians and those Asians under direct attack.

However, in Southeast Asia the military advantages we had in the Korean war, where we were fighting on a narrow front with a strong and powerful base at our rear, were lacking. Moreover, it would be wishful thinking to assume that the Chinese would limit their attack to a force which we could block with our readily available resources.

If, as we must assume, the Chinese should bring their full military resources to bear, we would be forced to choose among using all our available weapons, including nuclear power, an ignominious defeat, or withdrawal.

I stressed that it was important that this situation be clearly understood not only by India but by Japan and other Asian nations so that they could calculate their own most effective course of action.

The only other long range hope of controlling Chinese pressure that I could see was through the development of an indigenous Asian power balance which would depend only indirectly on the United States military. Such a balance, as I had suggested to him on other occasions, could be provided over the long haul only by India, Pakistan and Japan.

I agreed that it was no more possible for the Indians and the Japanese under the present circumstances to accept a formal alliance with us than it would have been for the United States to accept the alliance with the British which Lord Canning proposed in 1823 at the time of the Monroe Doctrine.

Moreover, I recognized the almost insurmountable problems that grew out of India's differences with Pakistan, India's reluctance to expand her military commitments beyond Nepal, Bhutan, Sikkim, and possibly Burma, the built-in pacifism of many Japanese, and the restrictions of the Japanese constitution.

Nevertheless, the subject was critically important, the threat was great and likely to grow, and it seemed to me essential that he carefully consider its implications.

I stressed that we were keenly sensitive to his own difficulties and those of other neutral states in Asia and that we had no desire to embarrass him or them publicly or in any other way. Nevertheless, there were certain hard facts which must be faced and I hoped in future years that progress could be made in developing the necessary Asian power balance which would enable U.S. military forces to remain more unobtrusively in the background.

I added that I had covered this subject in detail with U Nu who said he would discuss it further with Nehru in Belgrade.

5. I asked Nehru about Chinese progress in Tibet. He replied that he had mixed reports, but that he was inclined to feel that the Chinese hold had been pretty well established, that the Khamba revolt had largely been suppressed, (although sporadic fighting continued in some areas) and that there had been some relaxation in regard to the Chinese control of the monasteries.

He said the Chinese had built a network of roads which had greatly improved their military position. Nevertheless, he doubted that the Chinese would attempt to break through in this area. If this should occur, he felt that the Indians and the Pakistani (who regardless of present differences would be forced into some degree of cooperation) could provide formidable opposition.

The much greater danger, he agreed, came from the East. On India's northeast frontier a well developed line had been created with heavily guarded check points at relatively frequent intervals.

After dinner the following evening, a similar exchange began with the Belgrade conference. Nehru told me that he had not wanted to go, but had felt that if he and a few others failed to attend the conference would be taken over by “extremists.” He questioned me about Tito and seemed hopeful, although by no means confident, that he might help provide a moderating force, particularly in regard to Berlin.

I suggested relative to the Belgrade conference that we were now witnessing a unique development in foreign affairs, the dim beginnings of what might be called a world conscience. Evidence of this could be seen in the reluctance of the nuclear powers to embark on further tests in the atmosphere which would create fall-out over large areas of the earth. I added that while many Americans often disagreed with him, it was felt that he had contributed more than any other individual to the development of this new power of world opinion.

I then suggested that the conference in Belgrade would indicate the extent to which this new force could bring effective pressure to bear on a given situation. For instance, certain kinds of resolutions would further increase the present tension, create bitterness in the United States, and strengthen the elements which are most opposed to a rational, responsive American foreign policy in Asia, Africa, and Latin America.

On the other hand if a majority of the conference members showed a sober awareness of the complexities of the problems we face, those forces in the Western world which were constructively working to create partnership with the peoples of the under-developed areas would be greatly strengthened.

Although Nehru was noncommittal as to specifics, he appeared interested in this line of discussion.

I then congratulated Nehru on the crucial role India had played in regard to the United Nations. In the Congo following Lumumba's death there had been a rush by several nations to withdraw their troops and indeed many were actually being pulled out. If this trend had continued, the whole United Nations effort in the Congo would have collapsed. Nehru retrieved the situation, however, by his offer to send 4,500 additional Indians.

History may record this act as the crucial turning point in our efforts to build the United Nations into a positive instrument for world stability. The importance of what he had done was now demonstrated by the marked improvement in the Congo situation which would have been impossible without Nehru's timely assistance.

As Nehru rose to leave he remarked that he had never been to Latin America, that he was considering a very brief visit there following his trip to Washington, and did I have any suggestions.

I replied that a visit could be most helpful but that Latin America was big and complicated and a visit to one country such as Brazil would bring heavy pressures to visit others. The most practical way out if his time was really limited would be to fly from Washington to Mexico City and spend a few days there. This would give him something of the flavor of Latin America with a minimum of complications.

Moreover, he could then return to India via Japan, where he might find it profitable to discuss India's and Japan's common interest in creating a more favorable Asian power balance.

He smiled and remarked that no one could charge us with lack of perseverance, since I had been pressing this same point ever since we first met in 1951.

Comment: Nehru seemed in excellent spirits, confident, ready and anxious to exchange confidences, very favorably inclined toward the United States, while frankly concerned that we would again become so absorbed in Europe that Asia would receive less attention.

I had assumed that the question of Pakistan-India relations would come up naturally. But it was not mentioned, and I did not think it wise to introduce the explosive question of Kashmir.

In discussing our efforts to persuade the USSR to agree to a nuclear test ban and our concern that the Soviet might already have resumed testing under ground, Nehru expressed surprise and even disbelief that under-ground testing unlike atmospheric testing would create no fallout problem.

Since Nehru has a keen interest in science and is normally very well informed, this suggests both the difficulties and the importance of our informational program on this subject.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.91/8-961. Secret. Drafted by Bowles and approved in U on August 17. Bowles was in New Delhi August 7-10 to chair a regional conference of U.S. Ambassadors accredited to South Asian countries.

36. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State 36. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of StateSource

Kabul, August 22, 1961, 2 p.m.

127. In conversation with Talbot, RGA officials from Prince Daud on down raised question future of American foreign aid to Afghanistan.

Daud himself made no special plea except on timing of the American decision. He said that RGA could not press US for assistance, as obviously this purely American decision which we would have to make, weighing all factors involved. He stressed the need for an early answer, regardless of whether affirmative or negative, so that their planning process could be complete.

Prince Naim was far more explicit. He described at some length his feeling that entire future of country depended on outcome this question. He said that RGA simply could not stop development. On other hand the dangers of excessive dependence upon USSR, particularly as it was neighboring state, were fully realized. He felt that far more than development alone was at stake, as in some ways their whole social structure could eventually be changed by over-dependence upon Russia. He said he saw little hope for the future except through assistance from US and West Germany. He described German assistance as very welcome and now very important but looked upon US assistance as far more important for obvious political reasons. He dwelled upon importance of some type of long term assurance, giving example of difficulties caused in past by short term arrangements.

Abdul Hai Aziz, as was to be expected, was even more emphatic, sometimes emotionally so, of the vital necessity of future US assistance, and critical time element involved.

Talbot explained philosophy of new administration and present status legislative process. He explored as deeply as time would permit important questions such as extent of their self-help, limitations imposed by local currency, local skills, et cetera. He told officials he aware of problem prior to his departure from Washington and would study it intensively during his stay here. He said he realized and appreciated keen interest of RGA on this question and hoped it would be possible reach decision in Washington in the not too distant future.

Comment: Naim was more forthcoming on dangers of over-dependence on Russia than ever before to me. This perhaps logical in connection with argument for future US aid commitments. I believe it somewhat more than that, however, in view of recent indications from many sources that RGA not as satisfied as it was a year ago with Russian aid and is more aware of dangers involved.

Byroade

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 789.5-MSP/8-2261. Confidential.

37. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 37. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, September 2, 1961.

Another Afghan-Pakistani Crisis

The long-sputtering Afghan-Pakistani dispute has boiled up into what may become a serious crisis. Phil Talbot says we “may have only 3-4 days to avert what could turn into a major calamity.”

Ayub, perhaps overconfident from what he regards as a highly successful US trip and frustrated over his inability to get any movement from Delhi on Kashmir, is in one of his periodic “get tough with Kabul” moods. Justifiably annoyed at continued Afghan pecking on the Pushtunistan issue, he suddenly decided last week to close all their consulates in Afghanistan,1 and asked Kabul to close its own within two weeks.2 Daud has retaliated by saying he'll sever diplomatic relations if Ayub doesn't withdraw his threat by 6 September.

What might happen if we get into an ascending spiral here is anybody's guess; we could even have a minor border war. Of course the Soviets, who've been egging Daud on over Pushtunistan, might choose to pour on some oil to raise tensions a little more.

State has reacted with promptitude and vigor. It has offered our “good offices”,3 and is trying to cool both sides off. It contemplates that we may have to go next to a public statement deploring the crisis and in effect telling both sides to relax. This won't go down well with the Paks; they have long disagreed with our mediatory efforts, feeling they know how to deal with Afghans better than we do, i.e. be tough. (Which we fear will just drive them further into the bear's embrace.) The hell of it is that Talbot (just in Kabul) and Byroade feel that the Afghans are just now coming around to realize what we've been telling them for years—that they're dangerously close to becoming Soviet prisoners—and that we may have a new opportunity, with skillfully applied economic baksheesh, to keep them from becoming completely dependent upon Moscow.

State feels that no Presidential intervention is yet required. I strongly concur. This fill-in is only because if our current efforts to cool off the contestants do not succeed, we may want early next week to suggest something like a strong prod from you to Ayub.

R. W. Komer4

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 9/1/61-9/14/61. No classification marking. A marginal notation on the source text, in an unknown hand, reads: “Pres. noted. Sept 4, 1961.”

1 The Pakistani Consulates in Jalalabad and Kandahar were closed on August 22. (Telegram 333 from Karachi, August 24; Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/8-2461)

2 Afghanistan was requested to close its Consulates in Peshawar and Quetta and its trade agencies in Parachinar and Chaman. Pakistan charged that the Consulates and trade agencies were centers for subversion and hostile propaganda. (Memorandum from Talbot to Bowles, September 2; ibid., 689.90D/9-261)

3 On August 31, the Department instructed the Embassies in Karachi and Kabul to offer U.S. good offices to mediate in the dispute that had developed between Pakistan and Afghanistan. (Telegram 411 to Karachi and 85 to Kabul; ibid., 689.90D/8-3161)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

38. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 38. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, September 3, 1961, 7:19 p.m.

88. Reftel Karachi 406;1 to Kabul 43. Karachi 407;2 to Kabul 44. For Kabul: You are authorized request audience with King. While Department wishes avoid conveying impression of undue excitement over Afghan actions, it believes that in absence of Daud its views should be brought to attention of King.

You may discuss Pak-Afghan relations along following lines: 1. As result USG offer of good offices President Ayub has told US Ambassador he is agreeable to USG informing RGA that GOP does not intend to interrupt transit; that GOP does not desire severance diplomatic relations; that he does not intend to close borders. Furthermore Ayub has expressed willingness to work out appropriatearrangements tokeep traffic moving. This is clear evidence that GOP is not trying to destroy the Afghans economy or to interfere with Afghan development projects.

2. In light of dangers to both countries generated by the recent exchange of notes, and in light of President Ayub's willingness to continue transit agreement and to work out pertinent arrangements, the USG ventures to ask His Majesty whether he would not be justified in conveying to President Ayub through USG channels his government's willingness to discuss at the working level ways and means keeping traffic moving.

3. With a view to creating an appropriate atmosphere for working level exchanges, the USG believes the RGA would have nothing to lose and much to gain if it responded to President Ayub's gesture by at least extending the deadline for abreach in diplomatic relations. Modification of this unilateral action would indicate to Ayub the good faith of the RGA and encourage the GOP to make a genuine effort to cooperate.

4. The USG has been impressed by the RGA's recent assurances that it wishes to remain independent, and does not wish to be dominated by any foreign power. An impasse in relations with Pakistan could lead to only one ultimate result—dependence on the Soviet bloc and eventual absorption by the bloc. President Ayub's position offers an opportunity for the RGA to avoid this danger without loss of prestige. The USG devoutly hopes that His Majesty will appreciate the fact that a favorable response to President Ayub's gesture will be in the national interest of the RGA.

If for any reason you do not obtain immediate audience with King you should discuss foregoing with Foreign Office.

For Karachi: Department gratified your success in obtaining some assurances from Ayub which may open way for eventual GOP-RGA accommodation; and concurs in your proposed approach to Foreign Secretary (Your 407).

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-361. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Weil and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi.

1 In telegram 406 from Karachi, September 3, Rountree reported on conversations with Ayub September 1-2. Ayub welcomed the offer of U.S. good offices and indicated that he did not intend to sever diplomatic relations with Afghanistan, nor to close the borders between the two countries. He was prepared to work out arrangements to facilitate transit across the borders, but was not prepared to reconsider his decision to close the Consulates. (Ibid.)

2 Rountree assessed his conversations with Ayub in telegram 407 from Karachi, September 3. He concluded that Ayub was firm in his refusal to reconsider the decision to close the Consulates in Pakistan and Afghanistan. He thought that Ayub felt equally strongly about closing the Afghan trade agencies. But, in light of the importance Afghanistan attached to trade, Rountree hoped to persuade Ayub to use the trade agencies as bargaining counters to prevent a break in diplomatic relations. He planned to explore the possibility with Foreign Secretary Dehlavi on September 4. (Ibid.)

39. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot) to Secretary of State Rusk 39. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, September 6, 1961.

SUBJECT

U.S. Offer of Good Offices to Afghanistan and Pakistan

In your telegram to Karachi and Kabul dated August 31,1 our Ambassadors were authorized to offer good offices in connection with the dispute brought to a head by the Government of Pakistan's decision to close its consulates and trade agencies in Afghanistan and the Government of Afghanistan's announcement that unless the Pakistan Government reconsidered its decision, the Afghans would regard diplomatic relations as terminated within a week (Sept. 6).

On the day the telegram was dispatched, the Afghan and Pakistani Charges were called in and informed of the offer of good offices. Ambassador Rountree informed President Ayub of our offer on Sept. 2. President Ayub expressed “sincere gratitude” for your interest and your willingness to be of assistance, and said he hoped you understood fully the reasons for closing the consulates and his feeling that the consequences of this action need not have been the Afghan decision to terminate diplomatic relations. While recognizing the fundamental difference of opinion between the Government of Pakistan and the U.S. as to the best means of dealing with Afghanistan, he went to some lengths to justify his policy of dealing firmly with the Afghans. He said he had no objection to our telling the Afghans that Pakistan did not seek a break in diplomatic relations, nor had it any intention of setting aside the transit agreement. He said his Government was prepared to work out appropriate arrangements to keep traffic moving, but did not agree that we should suggest to the Afghans the possibility of re-opening the consulates.

Upon receipt of Ambassador Rountree's report, the Department authorized Ambassador Byroade to inform the King (in the absence of Prime Minister Daud) of President Ayub's willingness to work out transit arrangements and to suggest that, in response to Ayub's gesture, the Afghans at least postpone their deadline for termination of diplomatic relations. In his reply to this instruction, Ambassador Byroade expressed the opinion that the suggestion to postpone the deadline would be regarded as a request for unilateral action on the part of the Afghans and would have an adverse effect if it were proposed to the King. He suggested that he be authorized to inform Prince Naim of Ayub's willingness to work out arrangements to continue the transit agreement, and to convey to Naim our offer of good offices—which he apparently had not done previously. In a cable sent last night, Ambassador Byroade was authorized to talk to Prince Naim along these lines.

I believe further action on our part should await a report on Ambassador Byroade's talk with Naim. Factors contributing to Ayub's cocky attitude are his apparent belief that if the Afghans are treated roughly they will come to heel (despite possible Soviet backing), and his realization that we are eager to maintain certain facilities in Pakistan. Many Afghans apparently believe we are conniving with the Pakistanis, but continue to exploit our interest in keeping Afghanistan neutral—in the hope of obtaining increasing aid from us.

As of today diplomatic relations between the two countries have, for all practical purposes, been terminated.2 I therefore doubt that a Presidential message could have the effect of preventing the break in relations generated by the Afghan note. The desirability of such a message might well be considered when it appears that the President's personal representatives in Kabul and Karachi have had an opportunity to make the maximum possible use of the current offer of good offices.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-661. Confidential. Drafted by Weil.

1 See footnote 4, Document 37.

2 On September 6, Pakistan and Afghanistan broke relations and closed their respective Embassies in Kabul and Karachi. (Telegram 164 from Kabul, September 7; Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-761)

40. Memorandum of Conversation 40. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, September 12, 1961.

SUBJECT

Transit Problems Between Afghanistan and Pakistan

PARTICIPANTS

His Excellency Aziz Ahmed, Ambassador of Pakistan

Mr. M. Masud, Second Secretary, Embassy of Pakistan

The Under Secretary

SOA—Henry W. Spielman

Mr. Bowles began by mentioning the fact that two days earlier Ambassador Byroade had discussed the Pakistan-Afghanistan problem with Foreign Minister Naim and this morning had called upon Prime Minister Daud. The United States was particularly interested in the continued flow of traffic into Afghanistan. If the border remained closed for any length of time most of our programs in Afghanistan would come to a halt because of a shortage of supplies including asphalt and motor fuels. Mr. Bowles pointed out that our aid to Pakistan had been significant because Pakistan had a well-planned program for economic development. He said it was our understanding that Afghanistan has just completed its development plan and that the planners were hopeful that about one-half of the foreign exchange requirements would come from the West. If the door to the outside world were slammed shut, the Afghans would have to turn to the Soviets.

Mr. Bowles said the Soviets will use the struggle between Pakistan and Afghanistan for their own ends, which could easily bring the Red Army to the Pakistan border and thus jeopardize the whole region of South and Southeast Asia. The Red Army had been an important factor in contributing to the effectiveness of Communist control as witnessed by the fact that Communism had made little progress in areas where it was not assisted by military strength. The Communists had lost ground in Africa, in the UAR, and in Iraq, and were able to maintain their position in East Germany, Hungary, and Poland only with the assistance of the Red Army. Aziz Ahmed replied that his Government was aware of the Soviet threat to South Asia and had mentioned this fact several times in the past but the State Department had not agreed. He said he was referring to the previous Administration.

Mr. Bowles said that in thinking of various possibilities for Afghan windows on the outside world it had occurred to him that it might be worth reviving the idea of a route from Kabul through Iran to the sea involving the construction of a road as well as a port. Such a facility might be rented on a 99-year lease.

Aziz Ahmed said that such an idea suggested that Pakistan had stopped the traffic, which was not true. Also, such a route would shift the problem from one trade route to another but would not solve the real problem, “Paktoonistan.” He asked if there were a historical precedent for such a leasing arrangement. In reply the Suez Canal was suggested.

Mr. Bowles said that if this impasse continues for another thirty days we may be in trouble. He then asked if the trade offices might be reopened. Aziz Ahmed said that he did not see how this would solve the problem unless the required personnel were permitted to operate.

Mr. Bowles reiterated that he was trying to visualize a mechanism for solving the transit problem and if a likely solution could be found he would be willing to discuss it with Daud provided there were a chance of success and provided the Pakistanis were agreeable.

Aziz Ahmed remarked that President Ayub was a Pathan; he understood the Pathan mind and he understood the thinking of the Royal Family in Afghanistan. He was of the conviction that the only effective means of dealing with the Afghans was by following a tough line. Aziz Ahmed suggested that if the United States held back, and gave the Afghans time to cool off, the Afghans would be more likely to take steps to solve their problems. He thought that if Ambassador Byroade said to Daud, “If there is anything we can do, please let us know,” this would be the most effective way to encourage the Afghans to solve the transit problem.

Aziz Ahmed said that he did not believe the Afghans would walk into a Russian trap. Likewise, he thought it unlikely that the Afghans would substitute free world trade routes for Soviet transport. He said if Ambassador Byroade has given Daud the impression that the State Department is disturbed by the transit problem, such an impression would give the Afghans confidence to take a strong line with both the Pakistanis and the United States. Then, he thought, Daud in talks with Americans would try to exaggerate the seriousness of this situation.

Aziz Ahmed wondered whether we had any information on the degree of support the people of Afghanistan were giving the Government on this problem. He thought Daud was the person taking the strong line and that the King and Naim probably were not supporting it fully.

Mr. Bowles said that on this question we were all guessing, but that one thing certain in his mind—the Soviets were going to make the most of this situation, and would develop this opportunity into a diversion action to their probable losses in the Berlin issue.

Mr. Bowles asked if the Ambassador could think of a mechanism that would permit the transit traffic to flow into Afghanistan.

Aziz Ahmed said that he would ask his Government for its suggestions, adding that he would also like to ask the State Department to ask Ambassador Byroade for his suggestions as well.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-1261. Secret. Drafted by Spielman on September 14 and approved in U on September 19.

41. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State 41. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of StateSource

Kabul, September 13, 1961, 4 p.m.

192. Had conversation last night with Abdul Hai Aziz as predicted my telegram 187.1 He advised me take what I had told him to Daud personally as quickly as possible. Accordingly I saw Daud briefly again this morning.

Told Daud I had not come for answers but wanted to give him three additional points for consideration.

(1) I wanted make certain that he and Naim had not misunderstood our offer good offices in connection with transit traffic. Explained I had not had in mind simply formal meaning of term or just using our facilities to get Pakistanis and Afghans together to talk about problems. We had in mind far broader concept whereby not only our channels of communication but American personnel and facilities on both sides of the border were available to assist both sides if any way possible to keep goods moving.

(2) Then told Daud had received personal message from Bowles.2 After expressing concern for developing situation, Bowles had indicated to me that he willing launch serious consideration Washington of opening up feasible transit route through Iran port. This would of course take some time, but it would mean that, if Afghan did not now cut itself off from sea, there was hope of being able to look forward to alternate lifeline in the future.

(3) Also I said that Bowles had expressed to me his hope that further aid assurances might be given to Afghan if our present lifeline of supply not cut. I explained carefully to Daud that I was not giving him at this stage formal assurances by US Government, but rather the intention of Bowles to start working on these things if we could make arrangements to keep things going in interim.

Daud said he much appreciated what he had been told. Even though he understood informal nature of what I had relayed he would consider it carefully and discuss with Cabinet. He said, however, even though what I had said of great importance, he afraid Washington did not quite understand problem. Daily movement of goods, even though extremely important, was not as important as cause of tension between Afghan and Pakistan, which had resulted in present situation. Grateful though he was for our present efforts, he wished we could devote equal energy to core of problem itself. He said “the Pakistanis think that if they are given free hand they can settle Pushtunistan problem by force. As sincere friend of US I wish tell you that if Pakistanis are proceeding on this basis this is greatest mistake you can imagine, and if they persevere in this policy it is certain to cause disaster for whole area.” He went on to say that world apparently knows very little about Pushtunistan problem while it sometimes seemed to him that concerted effort was made to keep veil of silence on it. World opinion knew nothing of Afghan side this issue. What little was known all came unilaterally from Pakistan side. Said in his own view RGA had never asked anything inconsistent with UN or US principles. He referred to Kennedy's statements on self-determination. He said Afghans had always looked to US as country which had greatest desire to protect weaker countries in freedom and important principles such as right of self-determination. He did not feel RGA position unreasonable. Pakistanis say Pushtun tribes happy under Pakistan domination. RGA maintains they are not. All he asks is that Pushtuns be given chance express their honest view. If it were proved that Pushtuns wished to be under Pakistan rule, he would give me his word of honor that RGA would abide willingly by their decision.

Under circumstances did not wish give appearance no consideration would be given Daud's views. On other hand did not feel could remain silent. Therefore general discussion followed with effort on my part make him understand difficulty his position from US point of view, along lines general principle self-determination one thing, but US support to one of its friends attempting apply principle inside territory of another was quite another. Also made reference, as had to Naim, of lack of evidence available to us to indicate a real indigenous independence movement.

Comment: It obvious Daud's preoccupations are not primarily on such subjects as consulates and trade agencies. He must be concerned Pakistanis will, as Shah Wali predicted, occupy frontier area in force right up to Durand Line, and quickly extend Pakistan administration thereto. Do not know whether Pakistanis are about to do this, but there no doubt in my mind that if they do, Daud will fight with everything he has, regardless of consequences.

Believe you and Department now in best position decide whether trip to this area by Bowles would be good idea or not. He would of course be welcomed here. Seems to me key factor to consider is what assurances for future he could get from Ayub under these circumstances, and whether these could be in form which Daud would believe, even if he could secure them.

Byroade

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-1361. Secret; Niact; Eyes Only.

1 Dated September 12. Abdul Aziz was the interpreter during a conversation between Byroade and Daud on September 12. Byroade saw Aziz after the conversation to make certain that the U.S. offer of good offices had been fully understood by Daud. (Ibid., 689.90D/9-1261)

2 Transmitted in telegram 100 to Kabul, September 11. (Ibid., 689.90D/9-1161)

42. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the Under Secretary of State (Bowles) 42. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the Under Secretary of State (Bowles)Source

Washington, September 13, 1961.

Dear Chet, The impending visit of Prime Minister Nehru to Washington in November and recent events of considerable importance cause me to reopen, at this time, the question of possible military sales to India.

Although I recognize fully the reasons for deferring action on this subject, as stated in your letter of 22 July 1961,1 it would appear that we must have a firm governmental position prepared for any high level discussions with Mr. Nehru. In this respect, the discussion contained in my letter of 12 June2 is still valid.

Recent events emphasize the necessity for early reconsideration of our position.

a. The announcement of the provision of new items of military equipment to Pakistan has, on the one hand, had a slight degrading effect on Indian-U.S. relations; and, on the other, has impressed the Indian military establishment with the necessity, within their limited budget, of purchasing military equipment on a qualitatively comparable basis to that of Pakistan.

b. Defense Minister Menon continues to show a predilection for the purchase of Soviet equipment, particularly aircraft. Currently this includes the possible purchase of high performance aircraft to counterbalance the F-104s received by Pakistan, and the search for a jet engine suitable to the Indian-designed HF-24.

c. In response to our continued efforts to interest them in U.S.-manufactured helicopters, IAF officers advise that they have been forced to make “other arrangements” for the purchase of light and medium helicopters. However they are still actively interested, among other things, in the purchase of C-130 aircraft, heavy helicopters, Sidewinder missiles, the MK-44 torpedo, radar and engineer bridging equipment.

d. Most importantly, certain senior members of the Indian military have made informal and unsolicited approaches to representatives of the U.S. Department of Defense with specific proposals for circumventing what they consider to be the negative policies of Defense Minister Menon toward the purchase of U.S. equipment. In general, they appear to be willing to move for closer ties with the United States and consider it essential that some means be found whereby India could purchase U.S. equipment at prices competitive with those offered by Russia. Specifically, an Indian general officer currently in this country for medical treatment has advised that he will contact the Indian Ambassador in Washington to persuade him to take this matter up with the Prime Minister in connection with his forthcoming visit. In effect, the desire and interest of the Indian military is to bring about, if possible, a high level discussion of this subject between President Kennedy and Prime Minister Nehru.

You will appreciate the extreme sensitivity of these conversations, the details of which and the names of the individuals concerned are known to you and are therefore not mentioned in this correspondence.

Our understanding, at the time of Ambassador Galbraith's last visit, was that the next move was his. It was made clear to him that any sales whatever of classified material to India (this would include Sidewinder notably) would necessarily entail some form of SD/MICC over-all check on Indian security practices; and that any sale on favorable terms which would require an element of grant aid would have to be revealed to the Congress (through the medium of a Presidential Determination) and would also inevitably become known in India so that it could not be represented for other than what it was. The Ambassador realized that these two problems would pose extremely serious obstacles from the Indian standpoint, and so far as we are aware, he has not indicated that they can be surmounted, or even that the chances are sufficiently likely for us to warrant making the effort.

On the question of SD/MICC requirements, this is a matter on which the Department of State has the leading role. We cannot, I should suppose, adopt any policy toward India that is inconsistent with our over-all policy on these clearances. The essential point is that we have insisted on them in the past for our close allies so that it is most difficult to relax in the case of nations not allied to us. However, the more limited problem of releasing classified equipment should not be allowed to block the formulation of a general policy for some form of subsidized sales to India, the advantages of which would be substantial.

Despite recognized problems, the Department of Defense continues to recommend that a U.S. Government position be established whereby military equipment may be offered to the Indian Government on monetary terms at least as favorable as those offered by any other source of supply. It appears most urgent that a firm position be established on this in consultation with Ambassador Galbraith and well in advance of Mr. Nehru's visit; and that such a proposal be made to him by the President at that time.

Sincerely,

Ros Gilpatric

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/9-1361. Secret.

1 Not found.

2 Document 27.

43. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 43. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, September 16, 1961.

SUBJECT

Presidential Message to King Zahir

State believes that the time has come to bring your prestige to bear in the potentially dangerous Afghanistan-Pakistan dispute, initially by a letter to King Zahir. Naim's visit to Moscow lends new urgency to this move.

I have certain reservations as to the wisdom of engaging you personally in repeating a plea for the Afghans to reopen transit trade which Byroade made successively to Naim and Daud, with turndowns from both. However, I defer to the State experts who feel that the chief impact to be sought at this juncture is the fact of your intervention itself, and that we should avoid premature revealing of any further moves we contemplate. Your letter would also serve as a peg for a presentation by Byroade.

State's intent is to start a dialogue. They feel Zahir will reply in effect that they want to reopen transit but cannot do so unless the Pakistanis reopen trade agencies, etc. Then State hopes you could write Ayub, telling him of the Afghans' reply and urging him to do so. (Meanwhile, we are informing Ayub of your personal concern over the crisis and the letter to Zahir.)1

I recommend that you approve State's draft, but bear in mind that quite a [lot of] correspondence may be required if our “good offices” are to succeed. Both sides are playing for our intervention on their behalf. Neither is willing to give as yet, so the thankless job of suggesting a way out and selling it will probably be ours.

State feels the sooner we get the letter out the better, so request immediate approval.

R. W. Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Subjects, King Zahir Correspondence, 1961-1963. No classification marking. Rostow noted on the source text that he concurred, and Kennedy initialed his approval.

1 See Document 46.

44. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 44. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, September 17, 1961, 2:29 p.m.

112. Presidential letter to King Zahir1 being transmitted separately. In delivering letter, you should speak along following lines: 1. Despite thousands of miles of geographic separation, USG as King must know has consistently gone to considerable lengths to be friendly and helpful to Afghanistan and its people. USG in particular has recognized difficulties inherent in Afghanistan's geographic isolation and has done its best to assist in establishment and maintenance of effective outlet to the sea.

2. Specifically, after unfortunate developments of 1955 had been resolved through statesmanship both in Kabul and Karachi, USG went to great trouble, diplomatically and financially, to assure permanent arrangements for Afghan trade and transit to and through Pakistan. Pak-Afghan transit agreement of May 29, 1958, was an historic achievement. USG subsequently supported this agreement with substantial sums to insure that port, rail and road facilities would be available to implement the agreement. USG sincerely hopes King and his government will agree that this great investment of effort and money will not be lightly brushed aside.

3. USG fully aware of fundamental political differences existing between Pakistan and Afghanistan but is convinced that trade and traffic between two countries can and should be continued with or without resolution of those fundamental differences. In this connection, we believe assurances USG has received from Pak authorities of their desire to maintain free flow of trade and traffic is hopeful element in otherwise bleak picture.

4. Afghans must know that Paks are no less sensitive to “political strings” on aid, or “pressures” from aid-giving countries, than are Afghans themselves. It is therefore unfair and unreasonable to expect USG because of its aid relationships to Pakistan to control Pakistan's policies. We knew nothing in advance re GOP's announcement re closure of Afghan consulates. We are, on other hand, gratified that we have at least been able to receive Pak assurances re upholding of transit agreement and transit arrangements.

5. We fully realize that Afghanistan can turn to north for immediate relief and its northern neighbor will be only too pleased to exploit Pak-Afghan impasse. We are convinced, however, that motivation for that northern cooperation would not be pure love for Afghans but ultimate political domination. We would like to believe that RGA and particularly Royal Family would appreciate unwisdom of over-dependence upon a ruthless neighbor whose historic designs on Afghanistan are now augmented by Communism's imperialistic philosophy.

6. With foregoing as background, President has dispatched letter to King expressing his personal interest and engaging his personal attention to Afghanistan's trade and transit problems. It is his sincere hope that his letter will provide element which RGA needs to reverse recent trend in its relationships with its Pakistan neighbor. U.S. President's personal interest in this matter will we hope enable King and his government to feel sufficiently confident to permit prompt and normal restoration of Pak-Afghan traffic.

7. What “practical steps” might be taken is a question which is best determined by RGA authorities. Obviously both sides have publicly taken positions which must be taken into account and extreme demands by either side should be avoided. One possibility might be that at least for a beginning necessary documentation could be handled by Afghan bank officials in Pakistan. Another possibility might be third-country handling of documentation. RGA might itself have even better suggestions.

8. USG and its President sincerely hope King and his government will find means for reversing recent unfortunate trends. Our basic desire is to see Afghanistan remain free and develop prosperity. That is purpose of USG assistance programs, which, given a resolution of transit problem, will we trust become increasingly effective in months and years ahead.

In addition to oral presentation to King, you may wish to leave aide memoire containing foregoing. This might be particularly useful if Daub and Naim do not have benefit of your oral presentation. In aide memoire reference to Royal Family in para 5 should be omitted.

In transmitting letter, Dept recommends no publication. This is in line with USG belief that there has already been too much publicity both by Kabul and Karachi which reduces maneuverability both disputants. Dept believes resolution of transit problem can best be handled through confidential diplomacy

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-1761. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Meyer, cleared by Spielman and Deputy Director of the Office of Soviet Union Affairs David H. Henry II and by Komer in substance, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi and Moscow.

1 See Document 45.

45. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 45. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, September 17, 1961, 2:30 p.m.

113. Please deliver following message to the King,1 reporting time and date of delivery: “September 17, 1961. Your Majesty: I cannot but be deeply concerned over the break in diplomatic relations which has resulted from the recent exchange of notes between Your Majesty's Government and the Government of Pakistan. As a friend I am distressed to know that Your Majesty's efforts to bring the fruits of progress and freedom to your people may be seriously curtailed, and that the United States efforts to be of assistance may be severely hampered.

While I realize that a variety of factors is involved in the present tensions between the Royal Government of Afghanistan and the Government of Pakistan, I wish to take the liberty of expressing the view that if the normal flow of traffic between Afghanistan and Pakistan were to be resumed under the existing transit agreement, an immediate source of tensions might be removed. As Prime Minister Daud and Prince Naim have been informed by Ambassador Byroade, we have received assurances from the Pakistan authorities of their desire to maintain the flow of traffic to and from Afghanistan under the transit agreement. This to me is an element of hope.

As Your Majesty knows, the shipment of equipment and materials through Pakistan is essential to the continuation of United States aid projects in Afghanistan and to the planning of future projects.2 I therefore venture to inquire whether Your Majesty will be willing to take steps to permit the resumption of shipments from Pakistan to Afghanistan.3 It is my understanding that this can be accomplished if Your Majesty's Government adopts measures to provide incoming vehicles with the necessary documentation. In this connection I should like to reaffirm the offer of good offices made to Your Majesty's Government through Ambassador Byroade, and to underline my desire to provide practical assistance in working out the transit problem.

I earnestly hope that Your Majesty will take steps to continue the operation of the transit agreement—a move which I would hope might pave the way for improvement in relations between Your Majesty's Government and the Government of Pakistan. This would be in keeping with the call being made to many of us in these critical days to resolve differences through patience, negotiation and peaceful purpose.

Please be assured, Your Majesty, of my deepest personal interest in the solution of this problem and in the well-being of the Afghan people.

Respectfully yours,

John F. Kennedy“

President plans no publicity of this letter. Department believes in interests of progress on problem no publicity desirable.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-1761. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved by Meyer and cleared by Weil, by Bowles in substance, and by Bromley Smith at the White House. Repeated to Karachi.

1 In telegram 213 from Kabul, September 18, the Embassy proposed three amendments to the letter, to prevent it from having a “deleterious rather than benefical effect.” (Ibid., 689.90D/9-1861) The Department accepted two of the proposed amendments, as noted in footnotes 2-3 below. It did not approve a revision of the last sentence in the third paragraph to make reference to exploring possible additional transit routes. Such a change, the Department concluded, might have the effect of raising false hopes. (Telegram 116 to Kabul, September 18; ibid.)

2 The first sentence of this paragraph was changed to read: “As Your Majesty knows, vast quantities of equipment and materials essential to the continuation of US aid projects in Afghanistan have been and are being shipped to Pakistan.”

3 The last clause of this sentence was changed to read: “to take steps to permit the movement of these shipments through Pakistan to Afghanistan.”

46. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 46. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, September 17, 1961, 2:31 p.m.

534. At earliest opportunity you should see Ayub and speak along following lines: 1. President deeply concerned by recent trend in Pak-Afghan relations and has followed closely reports of your conversations with Ayub. President welcomes Ayub's assurances of Pakistan's desire to maintain normal Pak-Afghan transit arrangements and considers this an element of hope in an otherwise bleak picture.

2. Mindful of Ayub's agreeability to our informing Afghans of GOP's readiness to maintain normal transit facilities, President is dispatching confidential letter to King Zahir1 expressing his concern re recent developments, noting GOP wishes tocontinue normal flow of traffic, reiterating our willingness to provide good offices, calling attention to unfortunate repercussions interruption of traffic will have on Afghan development in general and our aid program in particular, and urging practical steps to restore normal traffic, including bilateral traffic, which could pave way to general improvement Pak-Afghan relations.

3. While we realize there some differences in Pak and USG views re tactics, we believe our aims vis-à-vis Afghanistan are identical, i.e., preservation of Afghan independence and forestalling of further Soviet penetration. While holding no brief for Afghan incitement of frontier USG believes continuation Pak-Afghan rupture can only defeat this common aim. Free World already facing major crisis with Communist bloc, centering on Berlin. These tensions likely to increase. At same time likelihood exists that Communists might find it useful to mount diversionary efforts in other areas. Alreadythere have been attempts to bluff Greece over NATO Checkmate maneuvers, to embarrass Turkey by publicly displaying CENTO documents in Soviet Consulate in Istanbul, and to intimidate Iran via strong diplomatic demarches re Iranian membership in CENTO. Little doubt Communists will welcome opportunity exploit Pak-Afghan impasse.

4. We realize element of exciting Americans may be included among Afghan motivations and we have taken this fully into account. Previous experience—e.g. 1955—shows Afghans for reasons of pride are fully capable of falling into the Soviet trap. We will strongly resist any efforts by Afghans or any others to drive wedge in Pak-U.S. relations. In our view, best means of achieving our objective is earliest possible finding of practical means to restore normal Pak-Afghan trade and transit. We of course hope Zahir's reply may lead to steps in this direction which can be acceptable to both sides. It is President's belief that Pak cooperation in this endeavor will prove best demonstration of unbreakable U.S.-Pak friendship.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-1761. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved by Meyer and cleared by Weil, by Bowles in substance, and by Smith at the White House. Repeated to Kabul.

1 See Document 45.

47. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State 47. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of StateSource

Kabul, September 20, 1961, 11 p.m.

225. Audience with King, with Deputy Prime Minister Ali Mohammed as interpreter, lasted one and one-half hours, with King taking initiative prolong discussion. Presented personal message from President,1 stating that in presentation I also instructed to make certain remarks. I then presented contents Deptel 1122 orally, with Ali Mohammed interpreting, basing my remarks on text aide-memoire3 (being pouched). At end of presentation told King I would like add few personal remarks and gave him short summary status freight shipments and wastage being brought about by present situation. Had thought that perhaps he not fully informed these practical matters but it became apparent he was quite up-to-date.

His Majesty said his reply would be preliminary as he wished study carefully text of President's letter before formal reply. He had one general thought however wished give me right away. He wanted express his appreciation for good intentions our President. This motivation on part our President was apparent not only in this crisis but in many others around world. He hoped I would express his appreciation for this sign personal interest of President.

He hoped President would understand that, in view present state of high feelings and emotions arising out of strained relations with Pakistan, practical aspects of movement of goods which we naturally considered so important. [sic]

King said he regretted that we could not be effective in compelling moderation on part of Pakistanis. Said this not only because recent Pakistan actions had been aimed at damage to Afghan, but because he thought policies of present military government of Pakistan would prove unbeneficial, not only for this area, but for people of Pakistan themselves. RGA looked upon recent premeditated (he indicated his intelligence quite good on this point) actions of Pakistan as designed divest Afghan of right of transit that existed for so many years. This unilateral act, aimed at what was an inherent right of Afghanistan, was such that they could not close their eyes and go to Pakistanis seeking new arrangements.

King then spoke bitterly of Pakistan decision close, as practical matter, their borders this year to nomadic tribes. This was inhumane act of great importance causing him great anxiety. It gave further proof of real intentions Pakistan and was significant added factor in total picture.

King said he had listened carefully to my remarks about their northern neighbor. He had only one thing to say in this regard. The most basic of all national policies of Afghan was to retain independence and Afghan would never sell that independence nor would any amount of pressure ever change that basic policy.

King said he would like talk to me as private person and not as King. He asked that I not take notes as his only reason was impress upon me depth of his feeling. He talked at some length on Pushtunistan issue, illustrating with frequent examples distortion he felt we received from general lack of knowledge of area and misinformation given us by Pakistan. The long history of tribal area could not be washed out by imposition of an artificial border. He spoke of an attempted revolution in northern Afghanistan many years ago. RGA, in time of his father, had practically no armed forces at all. Tribal elements from areas across what is now called Durand Line, came at great distances in middle of winter to help Afghanistanis put down this revolt. What was he now to say to people of Bajaur when they ask for Afghanistan help, and what was he to say to his own bodyguard which contained many sons of tribesmen who had once fought shoulder to shoulder with Afghanistanis? He wished we could take deeper look at what is actually going on. For instance, we probably believed over-simplification by Pakistanis in painting Bacha Gul as Afghan agent. If we really studied history of resistance of Bacha Gul's father against British, and of Bacha Gul's own efforts during years he attempted to work in close cooperation with Pakistanis and the Moslem League in an effort find solution Pushtunistan problem, we would find it a distortion to label him simply an Afghan agent.

However, of most importance he considered policies of Ayub dangerous in extreme, even to people of Pakistan itself. We should study more deeply what is happening even in areas as accessible to us as Peshawar area. There, people were being beaten by sticks, exiled and thrown into prison in manner almost unbelievable in present age. Effects of this on minds of people even in Pakistan were very unfortunate.

King wanted me to know that he personally felt their Pushtunistan policy was right one for Afghanistan to follow. He even felt we would agree in the end, as coming events would undoubtedly remove cover of secrecy over events in that area. Afghanistanis could not compel others to see things as they saw them, just as they could not always see things as others do. Even if Afghanistanis were suffering many losses at the moment this probably not as important in long run as losing a basic principle. However, he wanted me to report that the friendly relations between our countries, which included sentiments of the people themselves, were real; even if Afghanistanis complained to us at present he wanted me to know that this was not an important indication of real feelings of he and his people for America and Americans.

Comment: There nothing particularly new in substance of above. Had not of course expected, nor did I get, any indication of RGA relaxation its present policy. I was surprised King went to effort he did to show his personal feelings as being quite similar to those expressed by Daud. This perhaps designed put to rest any suspicion of exploitable differences between King, Daud and Naim. Also was impressed by his apparent sincerity in talking about mistakes Pakistanis are making in tribal areas. In this connection it interesting that British Ambassador told me yesterday that, while complete evidence lacking, he was beginning to feel Pakistanis headed for more trouble on their side of border than they had anticipated. We of course without information on which to form any judgment.

Would not anticipate reply from King to President's message until King, Daud and Naim (returning from Moscow this evening) have made some very basic decisions.

Byroade

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/9-2061. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Karachi.

1 See Document 45.

2 Document 44.

3 Not found.

48. Letter From the Ambassador to India (Galbraith) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot) 48. Letter From the Ambassador to India (Galbraith) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot)Source

New Delhi, September 21, 1961.

Dear Phil: Last night I had a long and exceedingly interesting conversation with Nehru about the arms aid to Pakistan, non-aggression and, less expectedly, Kashmir. In accordance with our arrangement on communications I am passing this on to you by letter with the understanding that you will inform the Secretary. I don't need to persuade either of you of the importance of holding these matters closely for the time being and I hope I have persuaded the Indians of the need for doing so. I say Indians because I thought it wise to try the subject out first with Desai. He provides useful guidance on approach and, since he warns the Prime Minister, one is assured of a more stable reaction there.

I began by cautioning Nehru on the delicacy of the subject I was about to take up and the fact that were it to become public knowledge in any inconvenient way Washington would be at liberty to dismiss it as purely personal talk. I then said that we were far from satisfied with our present relations with the subcontinent and mentioned my recent talks with the President and Secretary. Our arms aid to Pakistan could doubtless be explained to Indian officialdom. We could not hope to explain it to the Indian public; the arming of the Muslims by the Americans would forever be a fertile breeding ground for anti-American agitation, something which did not please us for its own sake. The most plausible occasion for changing the policy would be a rapprochement between India and Pakistan—a declaration of non-aggression and of their common concern for the defense of the borders of the whole subcontinent. (These were my precise words; one needs to be very cautious about using such military terms as a mutual defense pact.) I added that this was no naive excursion nor were we searching the world for disputes to mediate. We were fully aware of the history and its rich yield of difficulty but our aid involved us inevitably in the problem. So long as things were wrong one should beware of the easy course which is to shut his eyes and say nothing can be accomplished. Finally I asked if there were any way of preventing the discussion from becoming immediately a discussion of Kashmir.

Nehru's response was warm and sympathetic. He said it would be a mistake to assume that nothing could be done. But he said that as a practical matter, especially from the viewpoint of the Pakistanis, it was impossible to avoid Kashmir. One cannot think realistically of a settlement which puts aside the major subject of dispute. Then he talked in a relaxed and, indeed, rather amusing fashion of the history of the Kashmir dispute. Nothing, he said, has so taxed his pacifist spirit as sending soldiers into the Valley though he had found considerable moral support in the discovery that Gandhi was agreeable. There was a good deal more detail of this sort including discussion of the military campaign, much of it known, which brought him down to the present Indian position: the ceasefire line presents the only possible settlement. He has people who insist that Azad Kashmir is part of India. The Pakistanis lay their claim on all of Kashmir and Jammu. Neither side can dislodge the other; the only thing is to accept the line as it exists.

This, of course, leaves India in possession of the most desirable piece of real estate, namely, the Valley. I asked Nehru if he would be averse in the interest of a settlement to giving Pakistan rights in the Valley. I noted that after the Republic of Geneva had joined Switzerland a tributary area had been left in economic union with Switzerland but under the political administration of France and had so remained to this day. If the Valley were to remain under Indian administration, why not give both countries free trade with and population access to the Valley? This would mean that communications could again flow up the traditional route from Rawalpindi and the Muslim population of the Valley would have free intercourse with that of Pakistan. Nehru was not specifically averse to the idea. He asked if this would involve some control posts on their roads out of Kashmir to India; I pointed out that the French had them outside of the Zone. He also noted that there would be a danger of a heavy migration from Azad Kashmir and Pakistan to the Valley because of the higher standard of living there. But then he added: “If there were a general settlement we wouldn't have to worry about troublemakers.”

After a little discussion of the possibilities of Pakistan acceptance of some such development we left the subject with the observation by the Prime Minister that to settle this problem would remove one of the worst causes of communalism in India. He noted, incidentally, that in his view Hindu communalism was more vehement and troublesome than the Muslim version.

I would very much appreciate your reaction to this conversation. You will see that I have moved at least a little in the way of a joint tenancy—hardly a condominium—in the Valley. I left the way open for another talk with Nehru with a view to firming up our thoughts prior to his trip to Washington and we should consider what might be said in Washington. It will occur to you that the conversation if it accomplished nothing else has substantially eased the way for anything that the President might wish to say on this subject.

Especially I would like your suggestion as to the next step. Much as I like Bill Rountree personally he is not committed to an escape from the military arrangements of which, indeed, he was one of the authors. Therefore, there is no chance that he would be a good avenue of approach to the Paks. It is my view moreover that this should be part of a much larger approach which includes the waterlogging and salinity problems—we say among other things that we are seeking a settlement which eases tensions between the two countries in order to concentrate resources on saving the Punjab. One possibility might be to get Dave Lilienthal, who did a good job on the Indus settlement, to try his hand again on this one. Or perhaps I might ask the President and Secretary to enlarge my charter in the region to see what could be worked out. Of course, if the Laos conference were ever to end Harriman would be the ideal man. Indeed I would rather trust it to him than anyone else. What is needed is someone who is a master of all the ingredients—our military commitment to the Paks, our needs there, the salinity and waterlogging problem, the need of India for a settlement and an imaginative view of the concessions she might make—who could work out a package that both could conceivably buy.

Yours faithfully,

John Kenneth Galbraith1

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 9/1/61-9/13/61. Secret; Official-Informal.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

49. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State 49. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of StateSource

Kabul, October 3, 1961, 5 p.m.

274. Etemadi of Foreign Office has just given me copy King's letter to President. Inasmuch as he said he did not know time of delivery, but thought it would be tomorrow, am sending text immediately without comment in hope it arrives prior to Maiwandwal's appointment with President. Full text, with minor words omitted, quoted below: “Kabul, September 26, 1961.

Your Excellency: I sincerely appreciate Your Excellency's expression concern over severance diplomatic relations between my country and Pakistan. But I must herewith clarify this undesirable state affairs brought about solely by Pakistan's unilateral action on basis imaginary pretext. It therefore evident development this unfortunate situation is contrary to policy Afghan Government.

Government Afghan convinced transit to and from sea-ports through territory sub-continent, which divided today into India and Pakistan, has been inherent traditional right this country in traditionally accepted form implementation by responsible Afghan offices such as consulates, trade bureaus in different parts area.

Government Afghan has always been convinced that right transit and its means implementation is completely apart from any political differences between two countries.

Unfortunately however, Government Pakistan has continuously interfered in matter, by creating handicaps in application our right and even by having blocked transit, obviously with view bringing political pressure upon this country.

Government Afghan does not consider historical indisputable right transit as mere facility or favour accorded Afghan, and any unilateral decision to deny these rights wholly or partially, or to depart from their traditional forms, will be unacceptable to Afghanistan. Otherwise it becomes evident these basic rights are to be left to whims fancies of Pakistan Government.

Your Excellency fully aware how deeply Government Afghanistan aspires to develop country and bring progress prosperity our people, and how it has made every possible effort attain these aims. Accordingly, government, people Afghan greatly appreciate efforts US help us in development our country and have always tried facilitate implementation your friendly aid for assurance better future for our people.

Pakistan's unilateral decision expressed in her note August 23 to close Afghan consulates, trade agencies which existed for no other purpose than the application our transit rights—implementation of which was their recognized accepted duty, has posed fait accompli which Government Afghanistan cannot ignore. We consider this unilateral action of Pakistan Government as blatant and unlawful violation our rights.

In note delivered Pakistan 30 August, Afghanistan formally requested reconsideration Pakistan's decision close Afghan consulates, trade agencies.

Government Afghanistan reiterates its views that restitution transit possible only when pertinent Afghan offices can render their services normally as of before.

If Government Pakistan persists in its position we have no other alternative than propose to US Government continue her friendly aid to Afghan via Iran, transit goods through Iran being by no means impracticable.

Although Government Afghanistan deplores latter development tension in our relations with Pakistan, we confident that this tension created only by Pakistan Government.

Government Afghanistan hopes Your Excellency's government, friendly as it is to both parties, will make every possible effort for re-establishment Afghan offices responsible for implementation our transit rights through Pakistan, and thus help return normal conditions and reduce tension between two countries.

Your Excellency's personal interest in matter will be deeply appreciated and it expected that continued American effort will make it possible to bring situation back to normal.”

Byroade

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/10-361. Secret: Niact. Repeated to Karachi.

50. Memorandum of Conversation 50. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, October 4, 1961.

SUBJECT

Letter from King Zahir Concerning Pakistan-Afghanistan Controversy

PARTICIPANTS

The President

His Excellency Mohammed Hashim Maiwandwal, Ambassador of Afghanistan

Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs-Phillips Talbot

The Ambassador delivered a letter from King Zahir of Afghanistan in response to the President's letter of September 17.1 He then outlined the Afghan view of the crisis between Pakistan and Afghanistan. Afghanistan believes Pakistan set off the present difficulty by taking advantage of Afghan dependency on the consulates and trade agencies in Pakistan. The Ambassador admitted that there had been fault on both sides in connection with the activities of consulates, but said that steps had been taken to open discussions with Pakistan with a view to rectifying the situation. Meanwhile, Afghanistan had feared that the Ayub visit to the United States would result in a lessening of United States regard for Afghanistan. The Ambassador was in fact in Kabul during August arguing on the basis of reassurances from the President and Mr. Talbot that there had been no change in United States policy toward Afghanistan. It thus came as a surprise to the Ambassador that Pakistan suddenly levied its demand concerning the consulates and trade agencies. The Ambassador concluded by expressing his gratitude for United States interest in Afghanistan's welfare.

The President said he thought King Zahir's letter was a good one. He promised to see what the United States can do, and concluded by saying that Afghanistan would be hearing from the United States very shortly.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Memoranda of Conversation, 7/61-9/62. Secret. Drafted by Gatch. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.)

1 See Documents 49 and 45.

51. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 51. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, October 4, 1961, 3:30 p.m.

141. Eyes Only Ambassador. Deptel 135 to Kabul, 647 to Karachi.1

1) King Zahir's letter delivered to President October 4 confirms advance information that King for practical purposes accepts USG good offices and that RGA may be willing work out transit arrangements without direct reference to “Pushtunistan” issue. President promised early reply.

2) Pakistan Ambassador at his request called on Secretary October 4 to say GOP would not permit re-opening Afghan consulates or trade agencies on ground these were centers of subversive activities—including sabotage and attempted assassination; but there was no reason why other arrangements should not be made such as using Afghan bank branches for documentation. Ambassador also said there would be no problem in making special arrangements so long as RGA refrained from introducing subject of “Pushtunistan.”

3) I continue believe overriding consideration is danger to free world security posed by actual and potential Soviet involvement in Afghan-Pak relations. Possibility USSR planning diversionary effort in this area cannot be ruled out. Loss to USG involved in stoppage of transit traffic and possible termination of US aid projects in Afghanistan constitute other major considerations. While there is no prospect of resolving emotion-laden dispute over status of Pushtuns in foreseeable future, I believe resumption of transit traffic if accepted in good faith by both parties might reduce tensions and in any case would serve USG national interests.

4) For Byroade: You should seek appointment with King at earliest opportunity. Express President's gratification at King's letter. As US understands position, RGA has asked US make every possible effort for reestablishment of transit trade. For this purpose, President requests King's reaction to following proposal: In framework offer good offices President prepared send special representative to Pakistan and Afghanistan to help both sides work towards restoration transit traffic. You should inform King similar offer being made in Rawalpindi. If both sides agreeable, US will at once make available services distinguished senior official. You should impress on King that President attaches utmost importance solving transit problem and hopes King will give this proposal his immediate and most serious consideration. You should coordinate with Ambassador Rountree in order make approaches to two governments as nearly simultaneous as possible. Preferably two Heads of State should be seen on same day, although Amb. Rountree may wish consider whether it might be wiser ascertain Ayub's reactions before King Zahir is approached.

5) For Rountree: You should seek appointment with Ayub at earliest opportunity. You should recall to Ayub your discussions in Rawalpindi and Murree September 1 and 2 in which Ayub said he had no objection to US telling Afghanistan inter alia that “GOP was prepared work out appropriate arrangements to keep traffic moving.” You should add that US understands GOP concern at previous Afghan insistence on considering “Pushtunistan” issue as integral part of dispute and GOP refusal consider any discussions with RGA on such basis. US can now report an encouraging development. Ayub will recall that President sent letter to Zahir on September 202 requesting him make every effort restore transit traffic to normal and reiterating US offer good offices. Zahir's reply delivered to President October 4 confines itself to transit problems and makes no mention of “Pushtunistan.” We interpret this as RGA acceptance US offer good offices. In view this statement and Ayub's previously expressed willingness work out appropriate arrangements, President would like his reaction to following proposal. You should then describe US intentions in same way Byroade instructed using same emphasis.

6. Both Ambassadors should indicate that it would be greatly helpful to success of this endeavor if respective governments could begin immediately to tone down hostile propaganda against each other and to keep public statements re this subject to minimum.

7. Both Ambassadors requested report respective reactions soonest.3

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/10-461. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Gatch and Weil, cleared by Meyer, and approved by Rusk. Also sent to Karachi.

1 Telegram 135 to Kabul, also sent as telegram 647 to Karachi, October 2, noted that the Department had received advance information that King Zahir's reply to President Kennedy's September 17 letter would indicate that Afghanistan, in effect, was prepared to accept U.S. good offices, and was also prepared to discuss a solution to transit difficulties without reference to political issues. (Ibid, 689.90D/9-261)

2 The reference is incorrect; the letter was dated September 17.

3 Rountree saw Ayub on October 7 and reported that he was prepared to welcome a presidential emissary sent to help both sides work toward the restoration of transit traffic. Ayub made clear that his agreement did not extend to broader political issues, and he emphasized that he could not agree to reopening the consulates and trade missions. (Telegram 655 from Karachi, October 7; Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/10-761) Byroade reported on October 9 that Zahir was also prepared to welome a U.S. emissary, but he indicated that the reestablishment of Afghan offices in Pakistan was essential to any transit agreement. (Telegram 289 from Kabul, October 9; ibid., 689.90D/10-961)

52. Memorandum of Conversation 52. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, October 16, 1961.

SUBJECT

Transit Difficulties Between Pakistan and Afghanistan

PARTICIPANTS

The President

The Honorable Livingston T. Merchant, United States Ambassador to Canada

After a short opening discussion on Canada, I referred to my mission to South Asia. I said that the more I examined the problem the less optimistic I was over the possibilities for an early solution. I spoke of the irreconcilable public positions already adopted by the two governments. The President agreed that the problem was difficult and complicated. He added that if a solution were soon found, he would be both surprised and pleased.

I went on to say that the sole ingredient for success lay in the President's prestige and personal interest since there were obviously no benefits nor sanctions which could be applied or offered to either side with profit.

The key appeared to be whether or not there existed with both parties a desire for a solution and I said that I thought this would become apparent quite quickly. Under these circumstances I said that I hoped to restrict my presence in the area to about two weeks and had already laid the ground work for this. To risk cooling my heels for an extended period I felt would be damaging to the President's own prestige and render more difficult the future task of Ambassadors Byroade and Rountree. The President agreed.

Finally I said that whereas there were many ideas produced by the Department for a practical formula to start the trade moving, I believed that I would have to rely principally on our people on the ground for the exact formula or formulas which might work.

Finally I said that whereas my bias was naturally in favor of a stout ally, I fully appreciated the strategic importance of a genuinely neutral Afghanistan and hence we could not lightly contemplate abandoning our effort to achieve this objective. The President expressed himself as being in full agreement on both points.

As I was about to leave I asked the President whether I could hold out to the King of Afghanistan the possibility of his making an official visit to the United States in 1962, if this appeared to be a necessary inducement to arriving at an agreement on transit trade. The President said he saw no reason why I should not do this but said he would like to check the matter with the Secretary of State who was about to enter the room with another group for a meeting on another subject. The Secretary agreed that if this in fact seemed to be the necessary final clincher for a successful outcome, I should be authorized to indicate that an invitation from the President would be forthcoming.

The President then gave me the signed letters for me to bear to the King of Afghanistan and to President Ayub.1 I told him that I was leaving with Mr. O'Donnell, as I did, a copy of my briefing book for Mr. Komer of the White House staff. I said the President himself might at some point desire to scan the documents.

The President wished me good luck and success on my mission.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/10-1661. Secret. Drafted by Merchant and approved at the White House on October 19. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting took place at the White House. (Kennedy Library)

1 Copies of these letters, dated October 16, which introduced Merchant as President Kennedy's personal representative, are ibid., National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Subjects, King Zahir Correspondence, 1961-1963, and ibid., Pakistan, General, 10/61-12/61.

53. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 53. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, October 26, 1961.

SUBJECT

First Round of Merchant Talks

Merchant has seen both the top Pakistani and Afghans. Now he will attempt to devise some compromise for sale during second round of talks. He is not very optimistic about “securing agreement both governments at this time to any arrangement enabling traffic promptly to move again.”

Initial round showed no give in either government's position. Ayub was cordial, admitted Paks had exercised “a bit of bluff” and reiterated Pak willingness reopen transit but not consulates or trade agencies. Daud and Naim in turn also want transit reopened but insist that it be on basis of restoring status quo ante (i.e. consulates).

Both say they are willing to leave aside political issues, but in fact Pushtunistan is the real bone of contention. It remains hard to see how a solution can be achieved without getting into this thorny problem. If Merchant can pull this one off in a few weeks, no one will be more surprised than he.

R.W. Komer1

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert W. Komer. Secret.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

54. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 54. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, October 27, 1961, 5 p.m.

772. For Ambassador Byroade from Merchant. I returned by air from Kabul evening October 25, having spent two days there consulting with Ambassador Byroade and talking to King, Daud and Naim.1 I also had opportunity on social occasions to talk to four or five Afghan Cabinet Ministers. October 20 I had spent in Rawalpindi in company Ambassador Rountree after devoting day of arrival to consulting with him and having extended talk with Foreign Secretary Dehlavi in External Affairs Karachi. In Rawalpindi I talked with Ayub twice and had extended discussion with Qadir2 supplemented by less formal contact with several other Ministers. Between Rawalpindi and Kabul I spent Sunday3 in Peshawar inspecting railroad yards, storage facilities and condition US wheat and other US aid shipments. I also viewed Afghan border and rail line from top of Khyber Pass (see Peshawar's airgram A-28, October 25).4 Foregoing completed my first round exploratory talks during which I floated no possible formulae for settlement transit problem but sought frank expression each government's policies and attitudes while taking occasion myself to underline the President's deep personal interest this matter and elements in situation which led US to see urgency in arrival at some arrangement under which transit traffic would again move. Reception and atmosphere both capitals cordial. Pakistanis, while showering me with good wishes, did not conceal their belief timing good offices premature and hence seriously in error tactically. Afghans repeatedly stated appreciation my presence even if mission failed.

As you are aware from my earlier reports each government maintained with no significant modification or even nuance public positions already taken with same intensity of feeling as reported in detail in past weeks by Ambassador Rountree and Byroade respectively.

Ayub stated he desired friendly relations with Afghans and restoration diplomatic relations. He furthermore reaffirmed in precise terms Pakistani intent to abide by 1958 transit agreement and desire to see traffic resume, attaching however as conditions (A) no reopening Afghan consulates in Pakistan, and (B) no venturing Pakistani trucks and drivers across Afghan border in view Pakistan inability protect them against mistreatment.

Afghan Government, notably Daud who excelled Naim in frankness, stated Afghans desired friendly relations with Pakistan and resumption diplomatic relations. He denied Afghans in effect blockaded themselves on transit route through Pakistan but stated flatly reopening of Afghan consulates and trade agencies in Pakistan was sine qua non for freight to move once more on transit route.

In effect Ayub hoped I would “beat some sense into bloody minds of Afghan Royal Family”, while Daud quite plainly said Pakistanis were people to whom I should talk since they had unilaterally blocked transit and Afghans the injured party.

First round my talks confirmed public positions two governments are diametrically opposed with little in common save reciprocal professions of desire to improve relations. Despite my emphasis in both capitals on limited terms my mission, greater part my listening time was spent on Pushtunistan, which is black background of their relations with each other and makes extremely difficult devising solution to transit problem, resumption of which is of such vital importance to Afghan and of some economic benefit to Pakistanis in Peshawar region. Being now on the ground, I feel even greater urgency attached to effort restore transit traffic. Every week which passes will I believe increase Afghan's already substantial economic dependence on Soviet Union and lead ultimately to its total loss of freedom. Delay in reopening Karachi route will make it daily more difficult for us to justify to ourselves continuing forward programming and procurement for present US economic aid program to Afghan. On latter, however, I recommend no negative decisions be taken in Washington at least until outcome my mission clear.

I have in mind a formula to present early next week separately to both governments. In essence it would entail successive unilateral declarations by Pakistan and Afghan Governments in that order which would include statement intention of each to appoint liaison officer provided for under transit agreement but never appointed. Afghan liaison officer with “additional liaison officers” (latter posted in Peshawar, Chaman and Karachi respectively) would operate with appropriate facilities and immunities in Pakistan to facilitate transit services. This would be portrayed in presentation by me hopefully as first in series of steps, last of which would be renewal diplomatic relations and thereafter negotiation re establishment such consulates in each country as might then be agreed as necessary to meet legitimate needs.

At Chaman Afghan trucks would enter Pakistan for distance necessary to load at storage area located at present rail head. In Peshawar Pakistani trucks would carry goods from storage areas to border point on Pakistan side Tor Kham (at foot Khyber Pass) and transfer loads to Afghan vehicles. Pakistanis would start promptly construction necessary storage and related facilities at Tor Kham. As interim measure pending provision minimum facilities at border Afghan trucks would be admitted to Peshawar to load food, medicine and diplomatic shipments now there. Pakistan and Afghan liaison officers would be charged to undertake urgent study repairing present rail line in Khyber area to actual border, thereby in long term future enabling shipments from Karachi direct to Afghan customs on both border crossing points. Finally, each government's declaration would contain certain preambular recitals of desire restore good neighborly relations, and suitable reference to US good offices, to convention high seas, to transit agreement of 1958 and hopefully some innocuous salad dressing mixed to recipe of each party. I would also seek Pakistan agreement promptly to ratify and deposit instrument high seas convention dealing with rights of land-locked countries, which conventions both countries have signed but only Afghan ratified.

I will reduce foregoing formula with more precision and detail to draft declarations. My plan thereafter is to return Rawalpindi and Kabul in that order first of next week. In this second, and I assume final pair of visits, I will explain these are not negotiating documents in usual sense but represent my best effort find road out of impasse. Naturally, I will consider any constructive counter-proposals or amendments not affecting key elements but I believe it would be great mistake for me to become entangled in protracted talks placing us in the middle. I will use my best efforts at persuasion and as agreed before my departure will hold out no hope of reward or threat of reprisal to either party. I will, however, be franker than by design I was during first round in delineating consequences which I foresee would follow failure achieve early resumption transit traffic.

I am deeply impressed with dangers inherent in present situation to Afghanistan's continued freedom and non-alignment. I am also aware emotional depth of Pak commitment to policy of firmness on northwest frontier. The latter attitude renders it dangerous to our own national interest to apply what Paks would regard as excessive pressure on them, with resultant harm to our relations with an ally which is staunch and now cooperates in area vital to our own security. Realistically, I believe odds are against successful achievement purpose my mission, but I am by no means devoid of hope. One more week I judge will determine success or failure and thereafter I believe it would be unwise for me to remain in area.

This is my own message. Ambassador Rountree, however, has read it and concurs in assessment, formula and tactics. Ambassador Byroade's comments to me repeated to Department are urgently requested.5

Department please repeat to other posts including Tehran as it determines.

Rountree

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/10-2761. Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Also sent to Kabul.

1 The Embassy in Kabul reported on Merchant's conversations with Zahir, Daud, and Naim in telegrams 314, 317, and 318, October 24, 25, and 28. (Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/10-2461, 689.90D/10-2561, and 689.90D/10-2661) Memoranda of the conversations were transmitted in despatch 282 from Karachi, October 27. (Ibid., 689.90D/10-2761)

2 The Embassy in Karachi reported on Merchant's conversation with Qadir and the first of his conversations with Ayub in telegrams 737 and 738, October 21. (Ibid., 120.1590/10-2161 and 689.90D/10-2161) Merchant reported on the second of his conversations with Ayub in telegram 768, October 26. (Ibid., 120.1590/10-2661) A memorandum of the conversation reported in telegram 768 was transmitted in despatch 281 from Karachi, October 26. (Ibid., 689.90D/10-2661)

3 October 22.

4 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/10-2561)

5 In telegram 179 from Kabul to Karachi, October 28, repeated to the Department, Byroade stated that he was concerned that the formula outlined in telegram 772 would not be accepted by the Afghan Government as it contained no specific proposal for the restoration of the consulates. Byroade suggested that, if the restoration of the consulates was impossible, the reopening of the trade agencies, with different personnel and assurances concerning their activities, might provide an acceptable middle ground. (Ibid., 689.90D/10-2861)

55. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 55. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, November 3, 1961, 12:25 a.m.

860. For Ambassador Merchant. Following message approved by President for delivery to Ayub by Embassy Karachi at discretion Ambassador Merchant.1

“November 2, 1961

Dear Mr. President:

I am sending you this personal note because of my deep conviction that only your statesmanship can point the way to a resolution of the serious situation which now exists between your country and Afghanistan. I have been grateful to you for receiving Ambassador Merchant, and I hope you will understand this more personal message.

The factors involved in this difficult problem are of course more familiar to you than to me, and it is not in the spirit of our alliance for me to attempt to press my judgment upon you. Nonetheless, I do venture to put before you the thought that your own stature as a statesman, and the strength of your country, may both make it possible for you, in this situation, to take the large-minded and forgiving course, without any risk that such a decision would be misinterpreted as weakness. Can you not take the lead, as a strong neighbor, secure in his power and sure in his judgment, by authorizing the re-establishment of consulates—or other arrangements of comparable significance—which would assure the early resumption of trade and traffic between your country and Afghanistan?

You must be concerned, I know, with serious questions of opinion among your own people, and I understand the complexities which attend your relations with Afghanistan. But from the point of view of our common interest in limiting the further spread of Communist influence, there does seem to me to be real danger in sustained interruption of Afghan freedom of transit. Your country and mine, accustomed to our access to the sea, do not face the problem which land-locked states so sensitively feel. It would be dangerous for all of us if Afghanistan, in a search for alternatives, were forced into excessive dependence on its northern neighbor.

Let me repeat, in closing, that I write quite personally, on the strength of our friendship and understanding. I understand and respect the fact that the authority and responsibility here are yours. Needless to say, if your judgment takes you on a different course it will have no effect on our very warm friendship. I have wanted, however, to share with you in this private way my sense of the opportunity which your personal qualities make possible, at a time of serious difficulty.

Ambassador Merchant remains at your disposal for the exercise of our good offices in whatever way may be effective.

With the warmest personal regards,

Sincerely, John F. Kennedy“

If delivered, President desires message treated as privileged communication between heads of state with no publicity.2

Bowles

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/11-361. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted and approved by Veliotes (S/S). A note on the source text indicates that the text of the letter was received from Bromley Smith at the White House. Also sent to Kabul.

1 The letter was proposed by the Department of State in light of reports received from Merchant that his second round of discussions with the Pakistanis had not gone well. (Memorandum from Battle to McGeorge Bundy, November 2; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Trips and Conferences Series, Merchant Trip to Pakistan and Afghanistan, 10/61-11/61) Merchant reported on his October 31 conversation with Foreign Minister Qadir in telegrams 790 and 798 from Karachi, November 1 and 2. Merchant found Qadir firmly opposed to the concept of liaison officers, and to stationing additional Afghan officials in Pakistan positioned to conduct the same type of activities that had caused the closure of the consulates and trade agencies. (Department of State, Central Files, 120.1590/11-161 and 689.90D/11-261)

2 In telegram 333 from Karachi, November 3, Merchant indicated that he felt the decision concerning whether to deliver the letter to Ayub should await the outcome of his talks in Kabul on November 4. (Ibid., 689.90D/11-361)

56. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State 56. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of StateSource

Kabul, November 3, 1961, 3 p.m.

331. From Merchant. I shall certainly bend every effort to keep Kabul door open (Deptel 17 November 2)1 but for reasons developed below I doubt useful purpose Presidential message to Ayub at this juncture though naturally I will make no final recommendation till text received.

Kabul's next telegram digests my talk with Prince Naim shortly after arrival from Pindi November 2.2 I also talked to him at Ambassador's dinner same evening but nothing new developed. He was gracious but unwilling to discuss transit or in fact any topic more recent than a millenium ago. He confirmed my appointment with him Saturday morning but in reply my expression eager willingness meet with him or any colleague November 3 he replied being holiday he foresaw no such need. From Ambassador's he left for weekly meeting of Royal Family at Palace and of course it is possible new attitude will emerge from that conclave.

At moment my judgment which Ambassador Byroade shares is that however illogical in terms of simplified transit procedures and Afghan own national interest in avoidance greatly increased dependence on Soviets, RGA at this point in time are unwilling lift finger to enable transit shipments to enter Afghan via Pakistan unless and until Pakistanis agree reopening Afghan consulates or as possible final fall back trade agencies. It is only barely conceivable Ayub might agree to latter.

Naim's reaction November 2 to my draft statement (“does not meet RGA position”) agreement see me November 4 “as matter of form” and no provision of opportunity to see Daud or King foreshadows confirmation flat rejection with thanks my efforts on November 4. Less likely possibility is counterproposal emerging from Palace meeting last night.

If latter occurs I will of course in consultation with Ambassadors Byroade and Rountree consider best tactics and my present travel plans together with Department's guidance already received.

If first alternative is confirmed November 4 as carefully considered RGA position, I intend: 1. Refuse take “no” as final answer and insist Afghans keep my formula under study assuring them no intention to publish or give any public indication good offices have failed or assign blame as between two parties for lack success so far in arrival at modus vivendi for transit resumption.

(2) Tell Naim here and Pakistanis in Karachi (where both Ayub and Qadir will be over weekend though heavily engaged in ceremonial opening new bank building with foreign dignitaries) that owing need my return to Ottawa and fact my stay in area already considerably longer than originally contemplated, I plan to depart Karachi for Washington November 6, where I will report my conversations and present status proposal to the President whose good offices will continue to be exercised through Ambassadors Byroade and Rountree.

(3) Assure both Paks and Afghans of President's deep continuing personal interest in this matter and my genuine personal confidence that by exercise ingenuity and passage of time way will be found, though I am realistically cognizant that US aid program to Afghan cannot continue in present form and dimension very much longer if US supplies continue to pile up as result paralysis Pakistan transit route.

My own view is that time rather than ingenuity is more important ingredient in any solution. I consider Afghans for reasons of fate [face?] and very possibly overconfidence in own ability hold Soviets off short of national disaster are entirely capable of continuing for some time to mutilate their own nose. Despite Ambassador Byroade's and my efforts they may understimate difficulties USG would face in restarting any suspended or sharply reduced country aid program. In this connection, I am satisfied that a significant US aid program with substantial though less effective presence of US advisors and technicians could and should be maintained in Afghan even if (as might be unavoidably decided by Washington) end came to projects dependent on bulk imports delivery of which possible currently only though Karachi. Not all the reasons for Afghan stubborness are openly stated or acknowledged.

Pakistan position likewise not entirely on top of table. Ayub frankly has told me my good offices mission prematurely timed. Reopening transit traffic promptly would no doubt in his view relieve very pressure on Afghans which his hard policy is designed to apply. Accordingly I believe his present purpose vis-a-vis US is to give enough to avoid our being able exclusively to blame him for intransigeance but not enough in any formula to enable Afghans in their pride to accept.

My consequent conclusion is that it is best to leave matter as it stands (assuming I can prevent final and flat Afghan “no”) and personally to depart area making every effort by my departure statement (which when drafted I will cable) that no legitimate basis will exist for public assumption good offices effort has failed or ended. To try to push Ayub further right now by any means I believe would be unproductive. We must bear in mind his importance as an ally and recognize he has in fact already made some distasteful concessions in my present formula in order to meet part way our concern and sense urgency which he decidedly does not share. Similarly I do not believe non-US influence (such as by sympathetic third country ambassadors in Kabul) will help with Afghans at this point. Ambassador Byroade can and will work unrelentingly on Royal Family and other personalities in Kabul, but basically I think passage of time with (1) more evident disastrous effect on trade and economic development from loss German as well as US imports resulting from what is substantially self-imposed blockade of Pakistan route and (2) increasing feeling of nakedness with Russians must do its essential work before any formula falling short of their currently stated demands will prove acceptable. On this point Ambassador Byroade is far from convinced of validity my estimate Afghan reaction to pressures of time will be rational.

Foregoing paragraphs are premised on no change in present Afghan attitude as stated to me November 2 before I depart for Karachi.

I wish to repeat that formula I brought here from Pindi in my judgment would enable immediate movement immobilized freight in Pak with prospect of longer term arrangements logistically more sensible and do so with barely sufficient facesaving elements to permit Afghan acceptance. Ambassador Byroade believes RGA could survive acceptance formula in present form though it might entail or require Daud's departure from present office.

Incidentially Ambassador Byroade believes and I now agree that dangling invitation to King for official visit to US 1962 would not at this time be of utility, although he continues believe early visit to US unrelated to good offices on transit would valuably contribute to relationship.

Finally, all tactics and my travel plans will need new look if Afghans in next day or two indicate any flexibility in their position. I believe this message responds to all points in recent Deptels including 1743 and 176 to Kabul. I also want to say Ambassadors Byroade and Rountree have been invaluable in their wise advice which in each case has reflected broad and not parochial interests. Spengler has been indispensable.

Needless to say I regret deeply fact my efforts so far have produced no tangible result.

I have just received word Naim desires postpone my November 4 appointment from morning to afternoon which may well presage some shift Afghan position. I have, of course, agreed.

Byroade

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/11-361. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Karachi.

1 In telegram 176 to Kabul, the Department instructed Merchant to make every effort to keep the door open in Kabul. If, however, the Afghan Government found the watered down version of Merchant's formula unacceptable, the Department felt that Merchant should “have another go at Ayub.” (Ibid., 689.90D/11-261)

2 In telegram 332 from Kabul, November 3, Merchant reported that he had presented his revised draft formula to Foreign Minister Naim, but since it did not meet the minimum Afghan requirement of reopening the consulates and trade agencies, Naim saw no possibility that his government would agree to it. He agreed to review the proposal with his colleagues “as a matter of routine,” and would meet again with Merchant on November 4 with their response, but he anticipated that the meeting would only be a “matter of form.” (Ibid., 689.90D/11-361) Merchant's meeting with Naim on November 4 bore out Naim's prediction. The Afghan Government's conditions for an acceptable settlement constituted essentially the status quo ante. (Telegram 338 from Kabul, November 5; ibid., 689.90D/11-561)

3 In telegram 174 to Kabul, October 31, the Department of State relayed various suggestions for consideration in the event that Merchant's proposed formula was not adopted by the two sides in the course of the second round of discussions. If there was some hope that a revised formula might eventually be accepted, the Department asked Merchant not to rule out a third round of discussions. Assuming a third round materialized and the Afghan Government remained to be convinced, the Department suggested that Ambassadors of other Moslem countries might provide useful support. Finally, the Department suggested that, if an immediate solution was not in prospect after the second round, the problem be left as fluid as possible. (Ibid., 689.90D/10-3161)

57. Letter From the Pakistani Ambassador (Ahmed) to President Kennedy 57. Letter From the Pakistani Ambassador (Ahmed) to President KennedySource

Washington,November 4, 1961.

Dear Mr. President, I have today received by cablegram the following message from our President for immediate communication to you: “My dear Mr. President,

I understand that Mr. Nehru proposes to ask for military aid from the United States during his forthcoming talks with you. You will undoubtedly recall our discussions on this subject. You were good enough to assure me that at no time had your government had any intention of giving military aid to India and that if at any time you should come to the conclusion that it had become necessary to do so we would be consulted before a decision was taken in the matter. I do not need at this stage to do more than recall those assurances.

You were also good enough to assure me during our meeting that you would do your best to persuade Mr. Nehru to see the necessity of an early settlement of the Kashmir dispute in view of current developments in South Asia. Considering that the United States is assisting India massively in her economic progress in order to help promote stability in this region, I hope it may be possible for you to suggest to Mr. Nehru that he too has a responsibility to pursue policies that would help strengthen, not undermine, the free world position in Asia.

Very sincerely yours, Mohammad Ayub Khan.”

With warm personal regards, Yours sincerely,

Aziz Ahmed

* Source: Department of State, NEA/SOA Files: Lot 64 D 566, The President. No classification marking. The salutation and closing are handwritten.

58. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 58. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, November 7, 1961, 1 p.m.

828. For the Secretary from Merchant. Appreciative your 8811 which crossed my 8262 in code room. I naturally accept your judgment which has taken into account my severally expressed reasons for believing risk in delivery letter to Ayub is considerable but if in your view delay possible I would appreciate opportunity to discuss its content on my return.

Ambassador Rountree in next following telegram gives his estimate which consistent with this message.

In light release my departure statement last night and planned take-off early this morning (in accordance discretion given me in Deptel 875),3 my position so long as I remain in Karachi is certainly confused and probably compromised. In any event I would therefore consider myself poor agent for personal delivery any letter to Ayub.

I honestly believe that from last night onward good offices can more effectively be exercised by our two Ambassadors than by myself. If you agree, I would appreciate by clear telegram Niact your approval my departure early morning November 8 which in absence any PAA flight will require my use foreign airline as far as Rome, Paris or London where I plan to overnight for rest which I can use.

Rountree

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 120.1590/11-761. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Kabul.

1 In telegram 881 to Karachi, November 6, for Merchant, Rusk concluded that the November 2 Kennedy letter to Ayub (see Document 55) should be delivered despite the fact that it was unlikely to persuade Ayub to reestablish normal diplomatic and consular relations with Afghanistan. Rusk reasoned that it was important “to use President's prestige to make clear to Ayub our views on desirability of GOP's adopting a less recalcitrant line to avoid pushing Afghanistan completely into Sino-Soviet orbit.” (Ibid., 120.1590/11-661)

2 Telegram 826 from Karachi, November 7, reported that Merchant's departure statement had been released to the press at midnight on the previous night. It was featured in the morning newspapers under such headlines as “Merchant Mission Fails.” (Ibid., 120.1590/11-761) Merchant had transmitted the text of his departure statement to Washington from Kabul following the failure of his second round of talks with the Afghan Government. The statement expressed regret that his efforts had not led to a solution to the dispute, but indicated that U.S. good offices toward that end would continue to be exercised through diplomatic channels. (Telegram 337 from Kabul, November 4: ibid., 689.90D/11-461)/2/

3 Dated November 5. (Ibid.)

59. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 59. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, November 7, 1961, 6:36 p.m.

890. Embtel 829.1

1. Dept concurs your judgment delivery letter be withheld. Hope had been that Ayub's response to letter might have enabled Ambassador Merchant inject more positive note into departure statement. Under circumstances this objective obviously not feasible.

2. Question of letter to Ayub will be reviewed with Ambassador Merchant here.

3. Dept welcomes indication (Embtel 829) that Qadir appeared to be bit more forthcoming in last interview particularly on subject of reopening consular offices. This may be one of positive elements on which we can build in future discussions, perhaps even in Presidential letter.

4. Dept has appreciated diligence which Embassies Karachi and Kabul have accorded this problem and particularly your unstinting assistance to Ambassador Merchant. Although his mission lacked successful outcome, we believe it demonstrated clearly USG continuing interest in welfare of both Afghanistan and Pakistan. Hopefully with this background, USG's continuing efforts may make some progress in near future in facilitating neighborly relations between these countries both of which we number among our friends.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 120.1590/11-761. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Meyer and Gatch, cleared by Weil and Manfull, and approved by Meyer. Also sent to Kabul.

1 In telegram 829 from Karachi, November 7, Rountree supported Merchant's conclusion that, in light of the prior release of the departure statement, any subsequent good offices effort should be made through the Embassy. Rountree felt the proposed delivery of a Presidential letter by Merchant would be seen, in the circumstances, as a last minute attempt to force a solution, and would be resented by Ayub and his government as such. (Ibid.)

60. Memorandum of Conversation 60. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, November 7, 1961.

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Secretary of State

Ambassador J.K. Galbraith, U.S. Ambassador to India

Mr. Walt Rostow, Special Assistant to the President

Assistant Secretary of State Phillips Talbot

Prime Minister Nehru

Foreign Secretary Desai

Ambassador B.K. Nehru, Indian Ambassador to U.S.

President Kennedy welomed Prime Minister Nehru and his party on November 6 in Newport, Rhode Island. The visit continued in Washington November 7-9. Battle's memorandum noted that Galbraith was the only Department of State official present during or informed of the other meetings during the visit between Kennedy and Nehru, and indicated that Galbraith would prepare memoranda regarding those meetings. No such memoranda have been found.

[Here follows discussion of tension between the United States and the Soviet Union over Berlin.]

Turning to another subject, the President acknowledged the importance India places in its geographic situation in relation to its foreign policy. He also recalled that the United States had been neutralist for a long time. Nevertheless he wanted to say that we would like India to oppose us on issues when we were wrong and to support us on those occasions when we might be right. The Prime Minister welcomed the opportunity afforded by this comment to explain the Indian approach to international issues. Indians naturally seek to act on the merit of each matter, the Prime Minister said, but he attaches importance to the manner of approach as well. He wants to create the feeling that India wants to be friendly and wants to cooperate with other nations even though it does not necessarily agree with each of them on a particular point. It is not a question of finding a midway position between the United States and the Soviet Union; that would have no meaning, really. The worst of the cold war is that it makes everyone rigid in mind and in spirit and so it becomes difficult for either side to deal with the other side. If the way to war is obstructed, then a feeling will come that matters can be dealt with in other ways, and the approach becomes easier.

The President described the foreign policy of the United States as, of course, to support countries with democratic systems, but even more basically to support national sovereignty. Sometimes this means, unhappily, that we support governments not fully supported by their own people. Yet it is not always easy to withdraw. In some places we believe that if we should withdraw communism might take over by subversion. This is the problem that faces us; we don't object when communists take over by electoral means as Jagan did in British Guiana.

The Prime Minister asked why communism has an appeal to many people. Mainly, he felt, it develops in poor and underdeveloped countries. The President pointed out that in many areas communism takes over by force and subversion. The Prime Minister agreed that no one would view with approval terroristic tactics, adding, however, that military actions bring unfortunate results. The very act of meeting a situation militarily may make it worse. For example, with the help of United States forces a situation may be cleared but it is very likely that the position of the leaders then becomes weaker because of their dependence on an outside power. Thus the problem is not settled.

President Kennedy explained that we are faced with a situation in which we are making efforts to settle the Laos problem but at the same time there are serious attacks on South Vietnam, some of them via Laos. If these should succeed, it would look as if by our willingness to negotiate on Laos we had lost both Laos and Vietnam. That would discredit our efforts and make it impossible for us to negotiate on other issues, including Berlin.

Ambassador Galbraith interjected that several members of this Administration have had the view that truly neutral countries offer opportunities for us to help economically to build them up. If in Laos or in any other country neutralism becomes merely a stage which precedes a communist takeover then the whole concept of neutralism will become a stench in the nostrils. The question is what India and other countries can do about this.

Agreeing that there is a question of what to do, Prime Minister Nehru observed that the whole idea in the Geneva Conference of 1954 was to create international commissions to meet this situation. To some extent it has been the failure to live up to these commitments that has led to later difficulties. If the commissions had not been there he was convinced that trouble would have come much sooner in Vietnam. In Laos, indeed, trouble did come after the commission was closed down. These things don't always happen according to plans or our decision. We can affect them sometimes but not always. The Prime Minister said he realized the position of the United States is difficult because the United States is tied up in many matters from which it is difficult to come out.

On Laos the President said that the United States will try to persuade the three Princes to come together promptly, in this month of November. But, he added, we don't want our efforts in Laos to end in a collapse in South Vietnam.

Turning to the question of nuclear testing, President Kennedy began by assuring the Prime Minister that the United States had not prepared for testing during the test ban negotiations. Since those negotiations broke down we have had about three small underground tests. This is in sharp contrast to what the Soviets have done. We are now faced with what to do in the future. A few days earlier he had announced that we would now prepare for testing in the atmosphere. This does not mean we will necessarily conduct tests in the atmosphere. We will examine the Soviet tests. If they have done something that would really change the balance of power—such as making a genuine anti-missile missile or a way of disrupting radar—we could not ignore that. Obviously, however, the President would prefer not to have tests. The U.S. will not have them unless we must. The President wished that the Soviets would agree to ban atmospheric testing. If they do not agree either to that or to inspection, we will face a difficult decision. It is hard to be optimistic when after three years of negotiations the Soviets will not agree to the kind of inspection the British and we think necessary. In fact, Secretary Rusk added, they have interjected the troika concept into the inspection process. We cannot accept the veto inherent in that.

The Prime Minister, agreeing that these are difficulties, asked how then are we to deal with these problems? Presumably the present drift can land the world in a nuclear war. This is a terrible prospect. The moratorium by itself does stop the testing. That could allow the treaty to come in. The treaty has been discussed for three years; it need not require too much further discussion.

President Kennedy observed that it seems obvious the Soviet Union made the decision to resume testing some months ago, perhaps last February or March. This Government made a major effort to get an agreement with the Soviet Union and he is very disappointed that it has not been achieved. He quite agreed that the drift goes on. The Chinese are going to start testing. The French already have done so. In the absence of an agreement, testing will be started by one country after another.

How then to stop this, the Prime Minister asked. It will be a very dangerous situation if the Chinese start testing. In India people rather pooh poohed that prospect but the Chinese are proceeding with it, probably more for prestige reasons than otherwise. The hope in the situation lies in the fact that it is to the advantage of the Soviet Union not to have war. If some treaty can be obtained fairly soon it may be possible for the Soviet Union to forestall testing by China.

President Kennedy suggested that perhaps the Soviet Union resists a test ban either because it feels that China would not agree to this or because it really does not want an inspection process operating within its borders. Secretary Rusk commented that if Khrushchev believes secrecy of the Soviet system to be of very large strategic value then it is very difficult to see how we can proceed into another moratorium without running the risk of being duped. Prime Minister Nehru agreed that the Secretary had correctly described the Soviet position on secrecy. The problem will remain as long as there is a danger of using nuclear weapons. If an assurance can be obtained that they will not be used then the fear does not arise. If disarmament can go that far there is some hope. Anyhow the big question is how one can deal with the situation with its risks of accidents and all.

President Kennedy observed that the records of the 1914 war, the second world war and the Korean war, each of which started in quite distinct circumstances, make it rather hard to see which course will succeed in preventing a future war. Possibly the best course is to indicate with precision where our vital interests lie—and then (he added with a smile) hope that India can be effective as a peacemaker.

President Kennedy went on to say that one matter that had been discussed with President Ayub when he was in Washington was the problem of Kashmir. The danger to the peace is obviously of deep concern to us and to others. We hope our role can be as helpful as possible. In this spirit, the President wondered whether the Prime Minister could see any line of settlement that would be acceptable both to India and to Pakistan.

Responding, the Prime Minister noted that the Kashmir case is now in its fourteenth year. The matter arose in October 1947. At the end of 1948 after fifteen months of fighting a cease-fire was arranged. Since then, apart from occasional troubles, the cease-fire has functioned. Naturally, he said, India's desire has been to settle the issue. India has discussed the problem directly with Pakistan and there have been several UN mediators—good people—but without result.

Recalling in some detail the history of the Kashmir case, the Prime Minister added that basically the Indian position is that no settlement is possible except on the basis of the situation as it now exists—with minor modifications. India cannot accept the Pakistani theory that because the majority of the people in Kashmir are Muslims, Kashmir should go to Pakistan. That theory would crack up India which has 45,000,000 Muslims and is the third largest Muslim state in the world. Without any fault of theirs, the 45,000,000 Muslims in India have become associated with the religious argument that Pakistan puts forward, and would suffer.

The Prime Minister noted that in Kashmir there had been two general elections and economic progress and land reform. Nothing like this had occurred on the other side. Probably if India allowed people from the other side to come into Kashmir, there would be considerable inward migration.

The Prime Minister observed that one Pakistani Prime Minister, before General Ayub, had accepted the idea of the status quo in Kashmir. This man had thought it better to let the Kashmir issue simmer down while India and Pakistan were solving their other problems. Toward this end there had been resolution of the canal waters issue, with India contributing many tens of millions of dollars. Various frontier matters had also been settled. In the last year or so, however, there had been renewed agitation over Kashmir. This was a matter of surprise to India, which thought the Kashmir situation settling down.

The Prime Minister pointed out that the partition of India left tens of thousands of families with members on both sides and many emotional ties between people in the two countries. It is a most extraordinary situation, which now needs to be allowed to quiet down. Perhaps later the two countries could have some form of confederation or something else. Kashmir is not a matter of the territory—actually, the territory is a burden on India—so much as it is a matter of life. The Prime Minister recalled that his own ancestors had come down from Kashmir nearly 300 years ago and that Kashmir has been one of the biggest centers of Indian culture for the past 2000-3000 years; thus the Kashmir question is a largely emotional issue. As a practical matter, raising the Kashmir issue now would uproot all the Indians have done. In three months India is going to have general elections (something Pakistan does not have) and if this problem is touched off now there will be huge troubles. People would be migrating with all their bitterness. That would not be a solution—just more upheavals. With Pakistan developing a conservative Muslim outlook (although Ayub is not a religious figure, but a Sandhurst product) practically speaking the present situation cannot be changed. No government of India could function, certainly not his government, if this were to happen. Possibly a narrow vindictive government might then function, but only that kind. It would be a difficult enough matter to get the Indian Parliament and people to accept the status quo. They certainly would not accept a revision of boundaries to India's detriment.

Ambassador Galbraith asked whether, while the two parts of Kashmir remained, a much more relaxed access could be arranged from one side of Kashmir to the other. Could this be a possible alternative to the narrow territorial debate? The Prime Minister responded that if the territorial claims were dropped all other questions could be resolved easily. He then recapitulated the history of the military action in Kashmir, concluding that India is now again threatened by tribal invasion. Although nothing is officially stated, there are reports of 100,000 tribesmen coming. That is a very difficult situation.

The President asked whether in the Prime Minister's judgment it would then not be feasible to anticipate a solution to the problem that both India and Pakistan could accept. The Prime Minister replied that he had felt a little before Ayub came in that the two countries would settle on the basis of the status quo, with some modifications of the cease-fire line to make it a proper international frontier. However the difficulties remain. Another difficulty is that in part of Kashmir, Ladakh, the Chinese have committed their aggression. To annoy India, the Pakistanis started to flirt with the Chinese on this matter.

Returning once more to the question, the President observed that there would be a somewhat better use of resources if India and Pakistan were at peace and asked whether there is anything the United States can do to help the situation. Responding, the Prime Minister said that even now the bitterness of partition is dying down. While it can again be whipped up by exploiting religion he felt and hoped it would settle down. The Prime Minister noted some important differences between the leaders of India and Pakistan. When independence came the Indian group had been leaders and they came naturally into the government and then stayed on through elections. Pakistan, however, was a negative proposition based on hatred of India and the feeling of landlords to exploit Islam. Its only policy was hatred of India. Persons who came to the front had actually opposed freedom. They all came from top landlord families. A nation could not be built, however, just on hatred of India and Pakistan found that out. When Ayub came to power he had some following at the beginning because he got rid of the unpopular people who had been in charge. Once that was done Ayub, with his rather limited military mind, could think of nothing but cleaning up the streets of Karachi under martial law. Ayub is no stranger to Indians. Every senior officer in the Indian Army knows Ayub well and has his judgment of him.

The Prime Minister added that throughout he himself has been popular with people in Pakistan, even though some of his closest friends have been jailed for their political activities there. The situation is such a pity.

Ambassador Galbraith observed that the Prime Minister was being somewhat severe in describing Pakistani policy as only hatred of India. The Ambassador had worked with their planning people and Pakistani planning, while not up to the standard of India, has been quite good. The Prime Minister agreed that of course there are some people interested in helping the country.

President Kennedy then turned to the question of American aid to India and Pakistan. Many Americans, he said, believe that we would do better to give actual funds to Pakistan and let them decide what they want to spend on military aid and what on economic aid. The difficulty is that it is easier to get funds from Congress for military assistance than for economic assistance. The military assistance enables the Pentagon to sell second-hand equipment to other countries and in effect to use the proceeds to get new equipment. Nevertheless, if giving only economic assistance to Pakistan is the right thing to do, we should look into ways to do it.

Ambassador Galbraith added military assistance to Pakistan still makes big headlines in India. The United States gave India a half billion dollars for economic aid and gave Pakistan twelve airplanes. There were twelve times as many questions in the Indian Parliament about the planes as about the aid. The Prime Minister responded that no one in India except communists want to run down the United States. Indians do not doubt the intentions of Americans, but Pakistan is still a military dictatorship and Indians doubt what it might do.

Mr. Rostow intervened to suggest to the Prime Minister that in talking of “minor border adjustments” in Kashmir the Prime Minister had used the same phrase that President Ayub had used when he discussed the Kashmir issue with President Kennedy. President Kennedy observed, however, that we did not know exactly what President Ayub had had in mind when he spoke of “minor border adjustments.”

The President then asked the Prime Minister what, as a student of personality, is his estimate of Nkrumah in Ghana. Does the Prime Minister think Ghana is a good investment for the United States?

Ghana itself is a good investment, the Prime Minister responded. However, Nkrumah is rather paranoic and does think of himself as the leader of Africa. He asked Indian help in training their Air Force. The Indian officers did go and ultimately he turned them out and handed the job to the British. Now he has turned them out. Some Israelis have had experience there too. The Prime Minister himself had not been to Ghana nor indeed to Africa, except Egypt and Sudan.

The President said he had also wanted to ask the Prime Minister about Tito, i.e. does the Prime Minister think Tito is likely to tie into the Soviet Union more closely? The Prime Minister responded that the Yugoslavs have done rather well. He does not think they will change their basic policies. In foreign policy the Yugoslavs are basically anti-German. Thus they will agree with the Soviet Union on German questions though not really on others. He must admit that he was rather surprised at the Soviet position at the Belgrade Conference. There were many countries there. Non-aligned countries are so non-aligned that they do not agree even among themselves. Africa, of course, is in a state of turmoil. This is a fascinating and dangerous time. There are many Indians in Africa and the Prime Minister advises them to be friendly and helpful. In spite of everything Africa is a confident nation, full of vitality.

Returning to Tito, the President explained that our ambition has been to see Tito's Yugoslavia succeed as a national communist state which we have felt does not constitute a threat to the free world. Our task has, however, been made more difficult by the Belgrade Conference and the Yugoslav position there.

On this note the day's session closed.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/21/61-11/31/61. Secret. Drafted by Talbot; approved in S on November 26; and approved in the White House by Rostow according to a note on a November 29 covering memorandum from Battle to Bundy. The meeting was held at the White House.

61. Memorandum of Conversation 61. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, November 10, 1961, 4:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Conclusions and Recommendations Resulting from my Visit to Pakistan and Afghanistan from Oct. 19 to Nov. 8, 1961, as the Personal Representative of the President of the United States for the Exercise of his Good Offices in Connection with the Stoppage of Transit Traffic to and from Afghanistan through Pakistan

PARTICIPANTS

The President

NEA—Phillips Talbot

Livingston T. Merchant

I reported orally to the President on the results of my mission to Pakistan and Afghanistan along the lines of my reports earlier in the day to Mr. Talbot and to the Secretary. The views I expressed and the recommendations I made are contained in my memorandum to the Secretary of November 11, 1961.1 The President expressed the keenest interest in the problem and its present status. While the President made no decisions in the matter, I received the impression that he was generally in sympathy with my recommendations. In the matter of the future economic aid program to Afghanistan, he indicated to Mr. Talbot that he would like to have relevant recommendations prepared for his consideration. Mr. Talbot said that these were already under way in consultation with Mr. Gaud of AID. At the conclusion of my report, the President thanked me for undertaking the mission.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Trips and Conferences, Merchant Trip to Pakistan and Afghanistan, 10/61-11/61. Confidential. Drafted by Merchant on November 13. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.)

1 Neither this memorandum nor any record of Merchant's meetings with Talbot and Rusk has been found.

62. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 62. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, November 13, 1961, 7:51 p.m.

192. Joint State-AID. Pursuant to discussions with Ambassador Merchant, Dept has reached certain tentative conclusions re future course our policy vis-a-vis both RGA and GOP with respect Pak-Afghan transit problem and on practical steps to be taken to overcome difficulties caused by continuing impasse. Basic conclusion is that since resolution of transit impasse is not an immediate prospect, adjustment of USG aid program to Afghanistan is unavoidable due to sheer physical circumstances. At same time, it is USG desire to maintain substantial US presence in Afghanistan and cordial relations with both RGA and GOP.

A. For Kabul:

Unless you perceive objection, you should at early date see Naim and speak along following lines: 1. President and USG deeply disappointed that mission of Ambassador Merchant did not result in prompt resumption of Pak-Afghan transit and beginning of new trend toward neighborly Pak-Afghan relations. In USG view, diametrically opposed public positions taken by both sides was key factor in inability to break impasse.

2. While realizing that formula proposed by Ambassador Merchant lacked number of elements which RGA considered essential, Merchant and USG felt that formula might have served as basis for making satisfactory start toward resolution of transit issue. Thus we particularly disappointed RGA found itself unable agree to this small step or any reasonable modification thereof.

3. Despite Merchant's lack of success in resolution transit difficulties, USG wishes maintain most cordial relations with RGA. Despatch of Presidential emissary should in itself have demonstrated this USG desire.

4. USG believes situation is not without hope. Merchant mission at least discovered and affirmed certain basic elements which can serve as basis for future progress on this question: a) both sides declared their desire to develop and maintain friendly relations; b) both sides adhered to their desire to see free and assured transit for Afghan goods through Pakistan; and c) both sides agreed Afghanistan should not become Soviet satellite. USG continues willing to use its good offices in building on these elements.

5. With respect to US aid in Afghanistan, USG intends to continue its programs to extent possible consistent with physical capabilities and cost factors. We would thus hope to continue most programs except those such as Kabul-Kandahar road project which because of heavy equipment and materiel involved and unfeasibility of alternate transit routes must be held in abeyance. We shall hope to keep in close touch with RGA to assure minimum disruption of other aspects of USG aid program.1

6. Finally, we deeply appreciative for all courtesies and assistance rendered to Ambassador Merchant. We remain undaunted in our dedication to the improvement of Pak-Afghan relations and will welcome any formal or informal suggestions by RGA as to how we might make further attempts to be helpful.

B. For Karachi:

Unless you perceive objection, you should at early date see Ayub or Qadir and speak along following lines: 1. (Insert para A-1 above).

2. While realizing that GOP made several gestures with view to achieving mutually acceptable formula for resumption Pak-Afghan trade and transit, we could not help but be disappointed by GOP's inability to be more forthcoming with respect to restoration of normal diplomatic and consular relations. In view of fact that GOP's closure of consulates and trade agencies was immediate cause for present impasse, GOP offer to resume normal diplomatic and consular relations might well have permitted at least slight movement toward resolution of transit problem.

3. (Insert para A-4 above).

4. With reference to precluding Afghanistan's becoming Soviet satellite and thus bringing direct risk of Soviet military power to Khyber Pass, USG has welcomed GOP indications that USG aid program to Afghanistan should continue. In view of likelihood of lengthy delay in resumption Pak-Afghan transit route, USG program in Afghanistan will of course be seriously handicapped. Certain projects, which we consider important in preventing Afghanistan from falling to Soviets, like Kabul-Kandahar road will of necessity be suspended or cancelled. Meanwhile, it is USG intention that other projects such as education, aviation, etc. will be maintained to extent possible, utilizing air transport and existing trade routes via Iran.2

5. President deeply appreciates courtesies and assistance rendered Ambassador Merchant. While GOP and USG policies vis-à-vis Afghanistan may have some differences, it clear our objectives are the same. We remain undaunted in our dedication to improvement of Pak-Afghan relations and will welcome any formal or informal suggestions by GOP as to how we might make further attempts to be helpful.

In order avoid future misunderstanding both Kabul and Karachi might wish to record suggested points above in form of aide–mémoire to be left with respective governments.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/11-1361. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Meyer; cleared by Merchant and Gaud, and McGeorge Bundy in substance; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi.

1 Byroade presented an aide-memoire based on telegram 192 to Naim on November 16 and discussed it with him. Naim said that he saw no reason to alter the U.S. aid program in Afghanistan unless there was a political motive for doing so. He stated that Afghan Government studies indicated that it would cost no more to ship the materials involved through Iran than through Pakistan. Hence, the only purpose for altering the aid program must be to put pressure on Afghanistan to settle the dispute. Byroade denied that any such intent underlay the proposed changes in U.S. aid to Afghanistan. He stated that U.S. information indicated that the costs involved in shipping through Iran would be considerably greater than through Pakistan. (Telegram 359 from Kabul, November 16; ibid., 689.90D/11-1661)

2 Rountree saw Qadir according to instructions on October 19. Qadir reiterated Pakistan's established position concerning the resumption of diplomatic relations and the reopening of consulates and trade agencies. But he felt strongly that the U.S. assistance program in Afghanistan should continue, by whatever means possible. He suggested that the transit problem could be eliminated by having the United States assume full responsibility for the delivery of aid materials to the Afghan border. Pakistan would do everything possible to assist the flow of the goods. (Telegram 891 from Karachi, November 19; ibid., 689.90D/11-1961)

63. Memorandum of Conversation 63. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, November 21, 1961.

SUBJECT

Krishna Menon's Call on the President—Discussion of the U.N., Laos and Vietnam

PARTICIPANTS

The President

His Excellency, Krishna Menon, Defense Minister of India

His Excellency, B.K. Nehru, Ambassador of India to U.S.

NEA—Phillips Talbot

The President received the Indian Defense Minister to fulfill informal commitments that had arisen in a brief encounter between them at the United Nations last fall and in the course of the President's recent meetings with Prime Minister Nehru. The role of the United Nations and the situation in Southeast Asia figured prominently in their talk, which exposed significant differences in their views. In particular they debated whether the external penetrations are responsible for current troubles in South Vietnam. Countering the President's analysis, Krishna Menon asserted he would have to see the evidence to support any view but the domestic opposition to the Diem regime explains South Vietnam's difficulties. After their meeting Krishna Menon met the press before leaving the White House. Without saying what he had discussed with the President, in response to questions he extensively restated his known views on many issues.

In response to the President's inquiry about the Defense Minister's health following his recent operation, Krishna Menon said he was feeling quite well now apart from headaches and pains along his left side and his left arm and leg.

The President mentioned Prime Minister Nehru's meeting in Cairo with Tito and Nasser. Commenting that these meetings are not as important as the press makes them out to be, Krishna Menon observed that the meeting was possibly useful to Nasser, who had been somewhat shaken by the loss of Syria (which of course he had not wanted in the first place) and had encountered some opposition to his new land reform and other economic programs—opposition not among the people, but among the more privileged groups.

Krishna Menon told the President he had suggested that disarmament discussion at this session of the U.N. General Assembly be terminated, as continuation would only generate more bitterness and reduce the chance of an agreement between the great powers. The United Nations cannot write contracts between countries, he said; it can only formulate principles. After they have been formulated, the next step is to find modalities by which the affected parties can negotiate agreements. The President observed that if this argument were carried far the U.N. might sink to merely urging that disputing powers meet bilaterally and solve their problems. In his view the U.N. has a more important role. Krishna Menon replied that the United Nations cannot do everything. It has no sanctions. It is not a parliament of man. It is a place where people come together to talk and to that extent it is a concert of nations. Its effectiveness is in laying down certain principles, as when the U.S. and USSR agreed on principles of disarmament which had grown out of last year's twelve-power resolution. If the great powers agree on any motion, it will go through. The President noted that, whereas in 1945 the U.N. had been built on the presumption of accord among the great powers, the situation had changed since then and the U.N. could not ignore these changes.

The President raised the question of Vietnam. He urged the importance of doing an effective job in Vietnam now, else that country will disintegrate into an arena of actions and counter-actions that could have serious consequences. There have been problems about the International Control Commission, but if the ICC could function effectively now and identify the forces from the North that are operating in South Vietnam, that would help the situation. Krishna Menon asserted that effective operation of the ICC in Vietnam has been jeopardized not by its own actions or by positions taken by its Polish or Canadian members but by Diem, who had refused to let the ICC function freely. As to the presence of forces from North Vietnam in South Vietnam, Krishna Menon was skeptical. He would like to see the evidence. He believes that North Vietnam does not have the forces to send south. Even when the Viet Minh were fighting the French their forces were in a bad way. What South Vietnam has in fact is a lot of locally-based Communists who are adherents of Vietnam by day and of the Viet Minh by night.

Without impugning Krishna Menon's approach to the problem, the President stated that we would be delighted to participate in any objective examination of the facts in the situation and in any real observance of the Geneva accords. Indeed, we ourselves had observed the Geneva accords on entry of personnel into South Vietnam until the last few days. Krishna Menon asserted that the Geneva accords had allowed a certain number of French to remain in South Vietnam, but had not transferred this allowance to other countries. Rightly or wrongly, India had subsequently agreed to let Americans be substituted for French, even though India had been criticized by some for taking this position. What is really needed, Krishna Menon added, is the neutrality of all areas in Indochina. In Laos it is a question of the three Princes. Souvanna Phouma knows that his future depends upon his not being absorbed by either the left or the right. The sooner he gets a government functioning, the better it will be. Souphanouvong is not a Communist but rather a “left-nationalist” like some of India's progressive former Maharajahs. Phoumi is just a vagabond, though of course he must be included in the government. The three Princes are brothers and aristocrats and they ought to be able to get along. Once the government is set up, the ICC in Laos can be helpful, though it can only function with the good will of the government and as India has said from the beginning cannot become a super-government. That conception is not practical. If Laos can be settled, that will be a factor of stability in the whole area. The President agreed that the latter point was correct and that we would have to rely on Souvanna Phouma. He made it clear he did not share Krishna Menon's estimate of Souphanouvong.

Returning to the question of South Vietnam, the President explained that he would like to see the United States out of that area, but would not want its withdrawal to leave control to the North. If South Vietnam should fall under the Viet Minh in the next few months, a wave of domination by Communist China could then sweep over South East Asia. Krishna Menon, without commenting on this point, urged the President to recognize that the United States can deal with the Russian Communists, who have been in office for fifty years and are settling down. Unless the U.S. settles the Indochinese issues while the Russians are still there, however, it will have the Chinese to deal with and that would be much worse.

Krishna Menon said that India is sending a new man as Chairman of the ICC in Vietnam and that the Chairman had told him he is quite clear that the North does not want to unify Vietnam by warfare. Like Germany, Vietnam will remain divided for a long time to come. The President observed that under present circumstances the best thing is for Vietnam to remain divided. Our interest is to get a neutral government in Laos and to avoid an unfavorable shift of power in Vietnam.

There followed a further exchange on the role of the North in South Vietnam's troubles. Krishna Menon insisted he had no evidence of penetration from the North into South Vietnam, although he had heard that some people from the South had gone North for training and then returned South. He felt that the troubles in Vietnam result from popular discontent with Diem's government and from militaristic opposition in the South. The President agreed that in some parts of the world there are popular movements against governments, as originally Castro's campaign represented a popular movement against the Batista government. Such movements do not, however, need to rely on terrorism, mutilation and assassinations of the sort now going on in South Vietnam. This is not just popular opposition to the Diem regime; this is a calculated attack intended to undermine and destroy the South Vietnam Government. Our judgment on this does not depend merely on Diem's reports; our intelligence on these points is hard.

With the allotted half-hour overrun, the President saw the Indian Defense Minister out of his office with the comment that if time allowed they could obviously go on discussing these matters for a good deal longer.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/21/61-11/31/61. Secret. Drafted by Talbot on November 24 and approved in the White House on November 30, according to a note on a November 29 covering memorandum from Battle to Bundy. The meeting was held at the White House.

64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, November 29, 1961, 7:14 p.m.

212. Karachi 8871 1 to Dept; Kabul 370,2 3643 to Dept (none rptd London, Jidda, Tehran).

1. Assessment

Reviewing Pak-Afghan situation in wake Merchant Mission, Dept draws following conclusions: a. Understandably annoyed by Afghan propaganda and provocations, Paks are deliberately applying pressure (closure of consulates and denying entry to Powindahs)4 to bring Afghans to knees in belief this will cause Afghans to abandon “Pushtunistan stunt.” Mindful of similarprevious pressures from Paks as well as historic pressures by British, proud Afghans determined resist this Pak pressure.

b. Afghans believed USG could produce change in Pak policy. GOP is extremely sensitive to assumption that, because of substantial aid USG is supplying, GOP policy can be influenced by USG, and is determined not to appear responsive to USG “pressure.” (Earlier [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] reports as well as Merchant's talks with Qadir clearly indicate GOP intends give USG appearance of cooperating but not to point of seeing Pak-Afghan impasse resolved as direct result of USG endeavors.)

c. Neither Afghan Royal Family nor GOP wishes Afghanistan to become Soviet satellite but both greatly underestimate extent to which Soviets can exploit present impasse.

d. Soviet power on Pakistan's border would be serious threat for free world, including Pakistan and USG. Accordingly, USG cannot relax efforts to break Pak-Afghan impasse and facilitate neighborly relations between those two countries.

e. View conclusion 1(b) further dramatic USG efforts, e.g. Merchant Mission and Presidential letters, suggest over-anxiety by USG and likely increase Pak (and Afghan) intransigence. More subtle diplomatic efforts are required. In any case, given other factors in US-Pak relationships, GOP will resist such direct pressure which USG willing to apply.

f. Our goal should be restoration of status quo ante. There is no likelihood of disposing of “Pushtunistan” concept. It is political horse which RGA will ride when useful but which RGA can also bridle as it has in past when it suits RGA purpose. In addition there is little likelihood RGA will consent to any tampering with previous arrangements for handling shipments at Peshawar since shift to Tor-Kham involves political implications unacceptable to RGA.

g. Some time may have to elapse before a long-range solution to Pak-Afghan transit problem is possible. Merchant Mission is still too recent and neither side has as yet felt full economic and political impact of their folly.

2. Courses of Action

In light of foregoing assessment, Dept favors following courses of action: a. To extent feasible USG will continue its aid program to Afghanistan. Purpose is to assure RGA that it need not be exclusively dependent on Soviets. At same time fact that Afghanistan has Iranian as well as Soviet outlet should cause GOP to realize that it cannot bring Afghanistan to its knees. Dept will: (1) look sympathetically into possibility of providing maintenance assistance Meshed-Herat route; and (2) without mounting major airlift seek step-up of Ariana and other air-ferrying services from Beirut to Kandahar and Kabul.

b. In discussing with RGA USG's desire to proceed in accordance with 2(a) above, USG will address further appeal to RGA requesting RGA permit an American forwarding team to arrange for movement to Afghanistan (perhaps via Chaman) of aid supplies now in Pakistan but not any new shipments. Text of proposed demarche presently being prepared will include reference to Congressional interest in efficient delivery of these supplies. If RGA indicates willingness, request might be broadened to include all diplomatic supplies, perhaps even commercial goods, now in Pakistan. Meanwhile, USG request would be directed to GOP not in any case to auction any of these goods.

c. Dept hopes measure of type described Deptel 1018 to Karachi5 might help persuade GOP to restore normal access to Powindahs.

3. Possible Long-range Solution

Dept considering two possible new approaches: a. Noting increasing interest of Saudis (Kabul 370), whose intervention unlike that of USG unlikely be considered by GOP as “pressure,” Dept believes Saudis should be encouraged attempt patch up this quarrel between two Muslim countries. Specifically, suggestion might be made that King Saud address personal letter to Ayub. Dept has been impressed by solution proposed several times here by Afghan Ambassador Maiwandwal (probably with RGA concurrence). It calls for reopening of Afghan consulates and/or trade agencies but in deference to Pak charges against previous RGA officials would authorize only RGA personnel who have never before served in Pakistan. If Saud made this suggestion, of course unattributed to Maiwandwal, it might find some favorable response from Ayub. Coming from “Keeper of Holy Places,” Saud letter might stress interest in Muslim brotherliness and perhaps contain additional suggestion that feast marking end of Ramadhan would be appropriate time for magnanimous gesture by Ayub and for public announcement resolution Pak-Afghan difficulties. Dept believes letter might be sent some time in January assuming Saud has left US by that time. If Ayub accepted this simple proposal, Dept foresees no great difficulty on part either GOP or RGA working out orderly process leading to relatively speedy resumption full diplomatic relations.

b. If Saud letter not successful, or if for any reason it not sent, Dept would consider new approach by respective US ambassadors no later than February. While it is too early spell out exact details because of imponderables over course next several weeks—e.g., details of how Soviet Union will attempt exploit situation, Dept thinks Merchant's last talk with Qadir not without some hope that differences could eventually be reconciled. According present thinking here, approach thus might be suggested involving following steps in consecutive order: 1. Appointment of Afghan liaison officers in Pakistan equipped to document shipments and arrange forwarding, coinciding with joint public statement that both governments looked forward early resumption diplomatic and consular relations.

2. Agreement privately by both governments to continue use moderation in press and radio.

3. As traffic volume increased, transfer of liaison officers into reopened Afghan trade agencies in Pakistan.

4. Assuming trade agency personnel demonstrate by example intent stick to business over reasonable period of time, say six months, two governments would open discussions leading to reopening consulates in both countries under clearly understood ground rules. RGA could help re-establish its bona fides by refraining from using trade agencies as distribution centers for propaganda or literature of any description.

5. Resumption diplomatic relations.

If made in above-described order, this approach would serve to meet RGA demands for restoration previous facilities and at same time permit GOP be reassured that consulates and trade agencies would not be used in manner for which they not intended. Dept would contemplate saving any Presidential letter to Ayub for this critical juncture.

Dept would appreciate views Kabul6 and Karachi7 on foregoing courses of action and proposed approaches. Jidda requested comment on suggestion involving King Saud.8 Teheran requested comment on anticipated Iranian reaction to possibility US assistance maintain Meshed-Herat route.9

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/11-2161. Secret. Drafted by Meyer and Gatch; cleared by Gaud and William R. Polk of the Policy Planning Council; and approved by Meyer. Also sent to Karachi, Jidda, and Tehran and repeated to London.

1 In telegram 887 from Karachi, November 18, Rountree suggested that a revised version of the formula drafted by Merchant be used as a basis for a settlement of the transit issue. (Ibid., 689.90/11-1861) Rountree sent a draft of the revised formula to the Department in telegram 888 from Karachi, November 18. (Ibid.)

2 Telegram 370 from Kabul, November 24, reported that the Saudi Ambassador to Afghanistan had recommended that his government consider mediating the dispute between Afghanistan and Pakistan. (Ibid., 689.90D/11-2461)

3 Telegram 364 from Kabul, November 21, noted that the revised formula proposed by Rountree in telegram 888 from Karachi would have no chance of acceptance by the Afghan Government, and would have a counter-productive effect upon the U.S. position in Afghanistan. (Ibid., 689.90D/11-261)

4 The Powindahs were a Pushtu-speaking nomadic tribe who moved seasonally with their livestock back and forth across the border between Pakistan and Afghanistan. In the spring of 1961, the Government of Pakistan announced that the Powindahs would have to produce the usual international travel documents when they entered Pakistan that fall. The Embassy in Karachi noted that the tribe had no passports or health cards, and would be faced with the prospect of starvation of both animals and people or fighting their way into Pakistan unless the Pakistani authorities relaxed the requirement and allowed the usual migration. (Despatch 275 from Karachi, October 25; ibid., 689.90D/10-2561)

5 In telegram 1018 to Karachi, November 25, the Department instructed the Embassy to express concern that the Powindah problem was potentially explosive. With the onset of winter, the tribe could be expected to fight rather than starve, and the fighting could lead to an escalation of force on both sides of the border. To avoid that danger, as well as for humanitarian reasons, the United States urged that Pakistan consider relaxing the regulations affecting the Powindah migration. (Ibid., 689.90D/11-2561)

6 In a long assessment of the transit impasse and the courses of action and new approaches proposed by the Department, the Embassy in Kabul generally concurred with the steps outlined to move the impasse toward solution. The Embassy warned that a relaxation of the U.S. good offices effort would open the door to Soviet exploitation of the situation. (Telegram 390 from Kabul, December 6; ibid., 689.90D/12-761)

7 Rountree's assessment of the steps proposed by the Department was more pessimistic than that offered by the Embassy in Kabul. He felt that the positions taken by the Ayub government were grounded in the conviction that Afghan agitation on the Pushtunistan issue constituted a threat to the state, and those positions would not be easy to alter. He noted, however, that Ayub was concerned about the risk of Soviet power expanding to Pakistan's border, and concluded that Ayub's concern might lead to opportunities for a break in the impasse. (Telegram 965 from Karachi, December 2; ibid., 689.90D/12-261)

8 Telegram 359 from Jidda, December 13, reported that the Saudi Government had not responded to the suggestion from the Saudi Ambassador in Kabul that Saudi Arabia play a mediatory role in the dispute between Afghanistan and Pakistan. The Embassy felt that, given the longstanding Saudi policy of avoiding foreign entanglements if possible, it was unlikely that the government would respond positively to the Ambassador's suggestion. (Ibid., 689.90D/12-1361)

9 Telegram 430 from Tehran, December 7, reported that the Iranian Government was anxious to facilitate arrangements to transship U.S. aid supplies to Afghanistan. (Ibid., 689.90D/12-761)

65. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of South Asian Affairs (Weil) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot) 65. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of South Asian Affairs (Weil) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot)Source

Washington, December 6, 1961.

SUBJECT

U.S. Action regarding Indian-Portuguese Tension over Portuguese Overseas Territories on Indian Sub-Continent

REFERENCE

Embassy New Delhi's telegram No. 1611 of December 5, 19611

1. There has been mounting pressure on the Government of India to take positive steps to incorporate the remaining Portuguese Overseas Territories on the Indian sub-continent (Diu, Daman, and especially Goa) into India. Indians generally are unable to accept any differentiation between these territories and those already given up by the British and the French.

2. The pressures on the Government of India stem principally from: (a) Goan “nationalists” resident in India, especially in Bombay, who keep the agitation alive on a national scale, who regularly raise the issue in the central Parliament, and whose demands for positive action are reaching a crescendo in this period before the general elections in February 1962.

(b) African nationalists, generally, and Angolans particularly, who have been questioning India's professed anti-colonialism because of India's do-nothing policy in relation to Goa.

(c) The opposition parties in India, who are attacking the Government of India for a weak foreign policy in relation to Chinese Communist occupation of Indian-claimed territory in Ladakh, and the do-nothing policy in Goa.

3. After calling off the “satyagraha” campaign of 1955, the Government of India was able to resist the pressures of the Goan nationalists, and to maintain a stance of peaceableness regarding Goa. Time has been running out on this policy, as Portugal has shown no sign of weakening its hold on Goa. Action in Africa for freedom for Angola has made the Indian Goan policy appear comparatively pusillanimous. Indian influence on the new African states appears to be weakening, as was evidenced at Belgrade. India would like to correct this situation. The Indian Government lacks the force to drive the Chinese Communists from Ladakh. Thus the Government is tempted to answer its foreign policy critics by making at least a demonstration of force against Goa.

4. It is likely that the Indian Defense Minister, Krishna Menon, now running for Parliament, personally feels all the above pressures keenly; but the pressures exist and would be felt by the Indian Government quite apart from his personal involvement.

5. A widespread press campaign is now underway in India for government action on the Goan issue. Two recent incidents off the Portuguese island of Anjidiv (just south of Goa) have been widely publicized; Portuguese military reinforcements are alleged, as well as Portuguese “atrocities” against Goan “patriots.” It is public knowledge that troop movements from Northern India to the vicinity of Goa are being organized. We have learned that a movement of at least a division is being planned and the logistics for this move were being arranged as of Dec. 1.

6. It should be our objective to counter these pressures for military action, and to get the military activity halted well short of the possibility of a full-scale military action. It can be argued with Nehru that to attempt to resolve the Goan issue by force will do enormous damage to Indian prestige and friendship where India most needs friends (among the developed nations) to further the Indian economic development drive. Such a resort to force would only tend to promote further chaos in Africa, where India has done so much to try to restore order, as in the Congo.

7. At the same time, public pressure is so great in India, and the less-publicized international pressure so strongly felt, that purely private U.S. counter-pressure is likely to be ineffective. Should such U.S. pressure take a purely negative form (e.g., “please stop your military moves”) it will put the U.S. in the position of defending reaction and, insofar as it becomes known, will provide highly emotionally-charged ammunition to the Indian Communists and other left-wingers in India with which they will attack U.S. policy.

8. Maximum possible U.S. public support for ultimate freedom for Goa from Portuguese rule will be required to enable the Indian government to respond favorably to U.S. pressure to resume a peaceable policy on the Goan issue. Ambassador Galbraith has outlined the nature of such support.

9. Without addressing the question of the desirability of the Ambassador's suggested position from the viewpoint of history, NEA believes public U.S. support of the principle of self-determination in Portuguese overseas territories would be adequate to enable U.S. representations to Nehru to have some effect, and might dull the edge of the expected left-wing attack on the U.S. in India. U.S. public support should come from the President, and it should contain clear support at least for a greater degree of self-government as the immediate goal the U.S. favors for Goa, and the other Portuguese territories in South Asia.

10. We recognize the possible disadvantages, vis-a-vis the Portuguese, of taking a public position in support of self-determination for a Portuguese territorial unit, and we recognize the difficulties inherent in equating our NATO relationship with Portugal with this phase of our relations with India. Nevertheless, it may be argued that recognition of the principle of self-determination, and practical application of this principle to the extent of granting a greater degree of self-government or at least holding a plebiscite, could rebound to the advantage of the Portuguese. Since Nehru undoubtedly realizes that his government does not possess a God-given right to take over Goa but is supporting the ideal of freedom from colonial rule, Portuguese measures to grant a greater degree of self-government should relieve Nehru of the necessity of yielding completely to the extreme agitators. This in turn would place the Portuguese in a more nearly tenable position. While the Portuguese will undoubtedly condemn a U.S. Government statement as intervention in their internal affairs, such action may be defended on the ground that it is part of the peace-keeping process.

11. It must be remembered that a declaration in support of self-determination for Portuguese territories in the subcontinent would undoubtedly have repercussions throughout the Portuguese empire in other parts of Asia and Africa. On this point, however, we are inclined to agree with Ambassador Galbraith that the time has come to deal with this issue as a whole.

* Source: Department of State, NEA/SOA Files: Lot 64 D 240, Goa-Internal Memoranda. Secret. Drafted by Weil and Rogers B. Horgan.

1 In telegram 1611 from New Delhi, December 5, Galbraith argued for a “bolder and more dramatic” U.S. stand on the Goa issue. He saw the Portuguese colony as an anachronism, and felt that the United States should anticipate logical change and be prepared to accept and publicly endorse the incorporation of Goa into India. (Ibid., Central Files, 753D.00/12-561)

66. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 66. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, December 8, 1961, 8:28 p.m.

1962. Re Delhi 1611 Dept,1 Lisbon 606 Dept.2 Assistant Secretary Talbot called in Ambassador Nehru to discuss Goa morning eighth. He said current situation re Goa has caused Portuguese Government to express deep concern to US. Within USG queries also have been coming to Talbot as to whether GOI would use force to settle issue.

His own position has been to assume GOI would not use force because it has said it would not; it would be contrary to its basic policy; it would do such harm to Indian image. We have noted troop movements but assumed they were not prelude actual invasion. He hoped Ambassador could confirm these assumptions correct. Talbot pointed out US position to oppose use force and that were troops to move across juridical frontier we would expect matter to come to Security Council where US would be forced to take a position against military action.

Ambassador Nehru accepted strength of arguments against use of force but stated he was not in position say what his Government intended do. He noted pressures on Indian Government to act after 14 years in which Portugal has made no movement towards resolving issue. He noted continuing Portuguese oppression in Goa and recent Portuguese military reinforcements. He noted that Mexico December 6 had offered in Delhi to use its influence to organize Latin American countries to persuade Portugal “relieve tensions.” Prime Minister Nehru had replied only way relieve tensions was de facto transfer Goa to India.

Talbot indicated Indian argument that it no longer possible wait for solution Goa problem was understandable but actually situation not static. He noted pressures building up on Portugal over past year and changing Portuguese policies in some of its overseas territories.

Ambassador asked what US is telling Portugal. Mr. Talbot replied we have said our position is to oppose use of force but Portugal knows Stevenson statement March 15 (i.e., on self-determination) still valid.

Ambassador noted Goa situation different from Angola. Asked what US prepared to do if we advised India not to go to war.

Talbot replied he could not now speak on this for USG. Only answer he could give was to repeat his own conviction time would see progress on this issue.

Ambassador promised to convey US concern to his Government.

Dept suggests you talk to Nehru along foregoing lines. Do you have reason to believe that Nehru's delay in receiving you (urtel 1629)3 might also be calculated to hold off US representations re Goa?

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-561. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Horgan, cleared with EUR/WE, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Lisbon, Paris for the Embassy and USRO, London, and USUN.

1 See footnote 1, Document 65.

2 In telegram 606 from Lisbon, December 6, the Embassy reported the concern of the Portuguese Government over the build-up of Indian military forces in the vicinity of Goa. Foreign Minister Nogueira referred to an earlier assurance that the United States would use its diplomatic and political resources to oppose attempts to annex Portuguese territories. On behalf of his government, Nogueira formally appealed to the United States to express its attitude on the question to India. (Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-661)

3 In telegram 1629 from New Delhi, December 7, Galbraith reported that Nehru was busy and it was difficult to make an appointment to see him. (Ibid., 656.9813/12-761)

67. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 67. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, December 8, 1961, 10:24 p.m.

1122. For Rountree and Galbraith Only. Subject US sale military equipment to India discussed in position paper prepared Nehru visit follows: “US sympathetic towards India's efforts to strengthen itself against increasing ChiCom military strength and aggressive inclinations. US prepared to consider Indian requests for certain items of dual-purpose military equipment such as transport aircraft, high-altitude helicopters, radar, engineer bridging and construction equipment, and to supply such items if desired on terms as favorable as circumstances permit.”

Dec. 4 letter from Defense1 states Nehru visit position paper on military equipment sales “appears to provide sufficiently flexible basis for further action,” and that President “while not stating exact text of this position with Nehru did discuss matter of continuing US aid to India in terms which left opening for future discussion on this specific subject.” Citing various AIRA and Embtel New Delhi messages indicating Engineer2 moving towards showdown with Menon also possible imminent arrival Soviet military sales mission to India, Defense believes positive action required now, that US should take steps convey substance our agreed policy sales military equipment to GOI either through Indian Embassy Washington or Embassy New Delhi.

As you aware President has also given personal commitment Ayub to discuss with GOP prior USG decision provide military aid to GOI. We believe Ayub would probably not object USG supplying GOI with dual-purpose military equipment (he had relatively mild reaction to USG supply C-119s in 1960 although this military sale) but we believe Ayub would object strongly USG supply F-104s or Sidewinders. Supply these two items complicated by classification although understand Defense may be able make unclassified version available Indians.

Dept understands Indians prefer pay rupees rather than dollars for US equipment and would probably consider rupee transactions as not inconsistent with India's “neutralist” foreign policy. However, such transactions in US administrative procedures are considered MAP and India would undoubtedly be classified publicly along with US allies and others who receive US military assistance.

FY 1963 MAP now in initial stages preparation for Congressional presentation, and therefore time important.

Before taking decision on dual-purpose supply Department desires you discuss entire problem during your Dec 11-13 mtg and forward your recommendations. Particularly desire comments and recommendations on (1) advisability; (2) method of approach; (3) timing; and (4) possible repercussions.3

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/12-861. Secret; Priority; No Distribution Outside Department. Drafted in NEA/NR by Marvin C. Kettelhut and Edward A. Padelford on December 6; cleared by Weil and with G/PM and AID; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to New Delhi.

1 A copy of this letter from William Bundy to Talbot is in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 64 A 2382, India 440-702.

2 Air Marshal A.M. Engineer, Air Force Chief of Staff.

3 Galbraith and Rountree responded in joint telegram 1038 from Karachi, December 16. The Ambassadors agreed that it was inadvisable to inform the Pakistani Government about the policy concerning the sale of military equipment, as proposed in this telegram. The principal objection was the conviction of the Embassy in Karachi that to do so would cause major damage to U.S. relations with Pakistan. The Ambassadors disagreed on the desirability of indicating to the Indian Government U.S. willingness to receive military aid requests from India. Rountree felt strongly that to accede to such requests would have a similarly adverse effect upon U.S. relations with Pakistan. (Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/12-1661)

68. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 68. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, December 10, 1961, 9 p.m.

1664. Reference 1962 December 8.1 Will see Nehru Monday evening and urge avoidance of force in Goa and also, if climate allows, stress damage that manufactured dustup could do to India abroad. Will emphasize importance of keeping up the threshold to marching armies given present state of the world.2

The foregoing is our strongest line of argument. It remains my view that no decision has been taken for land action and that with second thoughts on relation of action to Indian traditions, danger will if anything recede. However, I keep an escape clause on the effect of some incident, real or contrived and the possibility of some form of sea blockade.

The following points bear emphasizing.

1. We must sharply separate our case against the use of force, which is valid, against any suggestion that we are responsive to pressure by Portuguese. This commits us to support of Portuguese Empire since everyone knows this is the interest of the Portuguese Government. In this connection statement to Ambassador Nehru that we are approaching him at the behest of the Portuguese was ill-advised. Gore-Booth notes that British also anxious to avoid giving impression they are responsive to Portuguese.

2. In asking Indians to forego force on this issue question remains as to what brings the Portuguese to settle. Talbot's implied suggestion that the apple is bound to fall soon anyway along with our UN stand and known attitudes of President and administration are helpful. A much stronger declaration of non-support to Portugal on colonies would do more to persuade Indians to be patient though I realize practical problem of timing.

3. Any NATO involvement with this issue would, of course, be disastrous. It would do nothing to restrain Indians, would inflame local sentiment, identify us uselessly with antagonism toward erstwhile European colonialism, would damage European powers anew, raise the question of NATO arms in Goa which local enthusiasts are already mentioning.

4. We are surprised by suggestion Portugal will take issue to UN and will have some support from us. It is hard to imagine that Portugal regards UN as a good forum for protecting her colonial possessions apart from some such gesture as the memorandum. In any case, at USUN as here, any support we give to exclusion of force must be rigorously separated from support to Portuguese rule.

Delay in discussion with Nehru unrelated to Goa. Goa was not on my original docket and I later told him that in light of pressures of Parliament and Frondizi visit my need to see him not urgent.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-1061. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to USUN, Lisbon, London, and Paris (USRO for Finletter; Embassy pass Dean Brown).

1 Document 66.

2 Galbraith saw Nehru December 11 and argued against the use of force in Goa. Nehru responded by citing Portuguese provocations, and Galbraith observed that it was an odd time for Portugal to initiate a conflict over Goa. (Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-1161)

69. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot) to Acting Secretary of State Ball 69. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot) to Acting Secretary of State BallSource

Washington, December 12, 1961.

SUBJECT

Goa Situation: Situation Report as of Morning of December 12

1. Our latest reports from India indicate there has been an Indian Government decision at least at the Cabinet Defense Committee level to proceed with an armed attack on Goa. The Indian military forces appear to be very nearly in position for such an attack which could be made this week. The reports stress that the final decision has not yet been made and Prime Minister Nehru is capable of calling off the action at the last minute. However, the build-up for an attack has already gone so far that it would create a morale problem among the public as well as in the armed forces if the attack were to be withheld without any progress being made towards freeing Goa from Portuguese control.

2. On December 8 I called in Ambassador Nehru and made clear to him the United States opposition to the use of force by India in the Goan situation. On that day Secretary Rusk, at his press conference, made the same point and added that we welcomed the indications then evident that both sides wished to avoid force. Ambassador Galbraith spoke to Prime Minister Nehru yesterday afternoon, urging him not to use force in the Goa situation, emphasizing that in the present state of the world we felt it would do a serious disservice to peace for India to put its armies in motion. He reports that the Prime Minister gave no impression as to any effect of this plea. Yesterday afternoon I made a similar plea to Ambassador Nehru when the latter called on me to report the answer he had received from New Delhi in response to his transmittal of my conversation with him on December 8. This morning Ambassador Galbraith made a further, written statement to the Indian Government. As a result of these actions we believe the Indian Government is fully aware of the U.S. position.

3. The United Kingdom has also seen to it that the Indian Government is aware of its opposition to the use of force through conversations of their High Commissioner in New Delhi with the Secretary General of the Indian Ministry of External Affairs. The U.K. feels that because of their close relationship with Portugal they are unable to do more.

4. The Brazilian Government has made a public plea to the Indian Government to avoid the use of force.

5. We do not have hard information as to the situation within Goa but our best estimate is that the majority of Goans are relatively passive in the present situation. There are a small number of members of Goan activist groups within Goa who are capable of some subversive action although they appear to be poorly armed.

6. As of this morning it appears there is a real possibility that pressures on Prime Minister Nehru from various services (including communist-influenced “Goan Nationalists” and Krishna Menon, who is running for Parliament) will prevail and that an armed attack may take place if there remains no indication that Portugal is willing to consider any change in status for Goa.

7. Meanwhile, the Portuguese have been in close touch with us in Lisbon and here. The Foreign Minister told us on December 9 of his proposal to have impartial international observers (not under UN auspices) go to the border area to examine the situation and report, presumably publicly. We indicated this appeared to be a constructive step. The Portuguese press reports that the Indian Foreign Office rejected this proposal out of hand. The Portuguese have indicated they would like our public support for their international observer proposal, but we have not yet given an answer. The proposal may be a dead issue.

8. The Portuguese Government sent an information communication to the President of the Security Council on December 11, but stopped short of asking for a meeting on the Goan situation. The Portuguese Ambassador said they wished to see how the situation developed. (Probable Soviet support of India in the Security Council and the general anti-colonial tendencies of the UN, as well as the fear of establishing a precedent that would apply to Angola and Mozambique, will make Portugal wary of taking Goa to the UN.)

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-1261. Secret. Drafted in NEA by Horgan and in EUR by Starrs.

70. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 70. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, December 12, 1961, 1 p.m.

1690. Department pass Defense-Army, Navy, Air. Embassy telegram 16811 and Department's telegram 1980.2 In view of the overnight developments, I decided to make one more effort this morning to persuade India against armed action on Goa. I accordingly delivered letter quoted next following telegram to Nehru and M.J. Desai this morning.3 To be at all persuasive you will understand it was essential to suggest sympathy for anti-colonial aspect and some alternative. Hence The New York Times extract which avoids official commitment and the reference to UN and world support. Portugal will not like but presumably will appreciate armed action less.

He still felt, however, that there was some possibility that Nehru was undecided or capable of changing his mind. (Ibid., 753D.00/12-1261)

I had a long and urgent talk with Desai afterwards impressing on him the stake which India had in the avoidance of armed solution. He noted the shooting on border and adjoining waters. I also said they surely realized the world would not believe that Portugal was attacking India and that what India was calling a naval concentration consisted of a couple of antique gunboats. I have a feeling that Desai admitted the force of my argument but he made it clear that the matter was passing rapidly beyond his hands. At the end of the discussion he said specifically that unless the Portuguese made some major concession within the next couple of days, he believed action would go forward. My estimate of the likelihood of such action is now getting rather high. Some vague indication of U.S. acquiescence to action was picked up by B.K. Nehru in Washington. I told Desai this had no standing.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-1261. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Paris for Secretary Rusk and USRO, London, Lisbon, and USUN.

1 In telegram 1681 from New Delhi, December 12, Galbraith reported that information available to the Embassy indicated an increased likelihood of Indian action against Goa. He still felt, however, that there was some possibility that Nehru was undecided or capable of changing his mind. (Ibid., 753D.00/12-1261)

2 Telegram 1980 to New Delhi, December 9, reported that the Department had received information that a journalist in India had filed a story alleging that an Indian attack upon Goa was imminent, and that India had been assured that if the attack took place the United States would not support Portugal. The Department emphasized that no such assurance had been given and reiterated its opposition to the use of force in the Goan dispute. The Embassy was instructed to make the same points clear to the reporter who filed the story. (Ibid., 753D.00/12-961)

3 In his letter, Galbraith pointed out that India's leading role as a champion for the peaceful settlement of international disputes would be seriously compromised by armed action against Goa, and a dangerous precedent set for similar action in disputes festering elsewhere. He cited The New York Times editorial that noted that colonialism was dying in Africa and Asia and U.N. resolutions calling for an end to colonialism, as evidence that India was not without resources in seeking a peaceful settlement to the dispute over Goa. (Telegram 1691 from New Delhi, December 12; ibid., 753D.00/12-1261)

71. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 71. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, December 13, 1961, 4 p.m.

1730. Following telegram 145 from Karachi repeated for your information:

For Timmons.

Would you deliver to Nehru's office the following letter to Nehru signed by you as Charge:1

“Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

The President has asked the Embassy to tell you of his concern over the spreading rumors that India will resort to force to solve the Goa problem. He is strongly hopeful that India will not follow such a course with its grievous example for the world.

The President has expressed his approval of Ambassador Galbraith's letter2 with the importance it attaches to separating the use of force from the colonial issues involved in the Portuguese presence.”

Advise Washington and Karachi when message delivered and repeat exact text to Washington.

Timmons

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-1361. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Paris and Lisbon.

1 The substance of the President's message was sent to Galbraith in Karachi, where he was meeting with Rountree and Ayub, for his concurrence. (Telegram 1154 to Karachi, December 12; ibid., 753D.00/12-1261) Galbraith drafted the text of the letter and forwarded it to New Delhi.

2 See footnote 3, Document 70.

72. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 72. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, December 14, 1961, 5:40 p.m.

2041. Embtel 17541 (not repeated info addressees). We appreciate great efforts you are making to stop Indians from a decision to use force against Goa and we wish we could help with Portuguese. Unfortunately, unanimous estimate here is that Portuguese will not give an inch on this in any time span that would help you, and an approach from us would only bring recriminations and bitter comparisons to our consistent stand on negotiating in face of threat of force in Berlin and elsewhere. So we have few cards to give you.

Moreover, we believe you should make it clear to Nehru now that, if Indians attack Goa, issue will certainly be brought to UN and we would, to our great regret, be forced to take a position against India just as we took position against UK and France in Suez matter.

Nevertheless, the USG recognizes that Goa is a colonial issue, and recognizes that colonial age is passing, and has and will continue to urge Portugal to recognize this fact (for example, Deptel 532 to Lisbon,2 repeated New Delhi 1977).

FYI: Foregoing message has been discussed with and approved by the President, who specifically commends your efforts and expresses his regret that we cannot offer any more help. He did not create Portuguese intransigence. End FYI.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-1461. Secret; Niact. Drafted by U. Alexis Johnson and McGeorge Bundy; cleared by Talbot, Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs William R. Tyler, Director of the Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs Joseph J. Sisco, and President Kennedy; and approved by Johnson. Repeated to Paris for the Secretary, to Lisbon, and to London.

1 In telegram 1754 from New Delhi, December 14, Galbraith reported on a conversation with Nehru that evening. He found Nehru weighing a heavy decision. Galbraith felt that he could still influence that decision if he had “a card to play.” A strong card would be knowledge of a U.S. approach to Portugal in support of India's position on Goa. (Ibid., 753D.00/12-1461)

2 Telegram 532 to Lisbon, December 9, instructed the Embassy to stress to the Portuguese Government that U.S. diplomatic support in the emerging crisis over Goa was tied to the position that Portugal must accept and proclaim self-determination as a goal for its overseas territories. The United States was not prepared to assume the posture of appearing simply to protect the status quo. (Ibid., 753D.00/12-961)

73. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 73. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, December 13, 1961, 6 p.m.

1019. Ambassador Galbraith and I met with President Ayub at 7:30 P.M. last night and stayed for private dinner attended also by Foreign Secretary. Ayub obviously pleased to renew acquaintance with Galbraith, and relaxed discussions ranged over variety of subjects. This summary report relates only to Kashmir and Indo-Pak relations.

Galbraith told Ayub President Kennedy, when he had learned of Ayub's invitation for Galbraith to visit with him in Pakistan, had suggested that he personally give him background of talks with Nehru in Washington and also review substance of Galbraith's own talks with Nehru on subject Indo-Pak relations. Galbraith did so, reviewing Kashmir problem as Nehru sees it. He told Ayub that he had advised Nehru of intention and had latter's full approval.

With respect Washington talks, Galbraith said President Kennedy had had in mind his promise to Ayub that he would make strong effort to encourage Nehru undertake discussions with Ayub to settle issue. He also had had in mind Ayub's letter on question of military assistance to India.1 He said military aid had not to his knowledge arisen in course of talks. President Kennedy had pursued Kashmir question at some length and had urged effort to settle problem. Nehru had responded in considerable detail.

Galbraith emphasized U.S. belief some way around impasse should be found which would result in improvement in relations between India and Pakistan, so that both countries could concern themselves more fully with other problems. If settlement not reached at time when Indian and Pakistani officials in office who had previously served together and had basic friendship, difficulties in future would be greatly enhanced. He thought Nehru would like to settle Kashmir. Latter had indicated his concept of settlement as being partition at cease-fire line with some adjustments. Moreover, Indians now preoccupied with forthcoming elections and this did not seem propitious time to press negotiations. U.S. Government was, however, hopeful that progress might be made after elections and would continue to do what it could in line with President Kennedy's discussions with Ayub.

Ayub expressed gratitude that President Kennedy had discussed matter with Nehru and that he had arranged to have him informed of developments. He then outlined his position on Kashmir and emphasized that settlement this issue indispensable to good relations between India and Pakistan. Until settlement reached, large portions of their armies would be facing each other and nations could not collaborate in such matters as defense against common external threat to the subcontinent in which they both should be vitally concerned.

When Galbraith reported Nehru's comment that settlement with Pakistan would help internal communal situation in India, Ayub said this was a point he had previously stressed to Nehru and seemed pleased to hear it affirmed. Ayub said important thing in any talks with Nehru was for them to come together with a view to working things out. Talks not predicated on desire on both sides for solution would not improve matters.

Galbraith talked generally of line of settlement he had mentioned to Nehru which avoided direct clash on territorial question by mutual access arrangement to Vale. Ayub listened with interest but did not comment specifically.

Although Ayub was not specific in indicating his view of elements of settlement, he again referred particularly to importance of Pakistan controlling headwaters of rivers flowing from Kashmir upon which its economy depends. In describing dangers of possible future diversions, he emphasized only Chenab river and included territory considerably below Srinagar in the Vale of Kashmir as important for Pakistan to control. He said while problem related also to other rivers, this would not concern Pakistan greatly since possibilities of diversion were small.

Question of GOP taking matter to Security Council or UNGA did not arise. I am inclined to believe GOP will not do so at this juncture, in view indication U.S. continued interest in encouraging bilateral negotiations perhaps after Indian election

Rountree

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-1361. Secret; Limited Distribution. Received in the Department of State on December 14 at 7:15 p.m. Repeated to New Delhi.

1 See Document 57.

74. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 74. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, December 15, 1961, 5 p.m.

1767. I saw Prime Minister at 10 a.m. for half an hour. I told him we could not honestly promise to move Portugal in immediate future, and if issue came before SC we would be obliged to take stand against India, not with a view to embarrassing him but consistent with our opposition to use of force. I then said I had done all that persuasion could accomplish and would not reiterate previous arguments. We then had a long discussion in which I went back over previous arguments and several new ones. Latter included impression of grave weakness conveyed to all, including ghost of Gandhi, if India, having removed the British and French without fighting, should now have to resort to it for mere Portuguese. I noted age of Salazar and indications of internal dissent in Portugal as harbingers of change emphasizing the obvious time limit on the Portuguese colonial empire in Africa and all that meant. Nehru noted situation deteriorating rapidly and that many innocent people were likely to suffer or be killed in this situation. I pointed out that most of the shooting so far had been in newspapers, he himself had said the casualties were negligible, and that my research indicated that only one unfortunate seemed to have got in front of bullet. Why then should a strong government with a well-disciplined army anticipate disorder and bloodshed that had not occurred.

The conversation throughout was friendly even on the tough points like the UN and the newsprint atrocities.

It is my feeling I may have moved him a bit, that he was even looking for arguments. Would also note he was very sensitive to the reactions of the President. It is still my feeling that the decision is to act on Goa or conceivably other enclaves probably tomorrow, but possibly we may have produced one more pause for reflection and pressure from Krishna Menon.

FYI, reference Department telegram 2041.1 I confess I had no real hope you could make progress with the Portuguese but thought you should ask.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-1561. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Lisbon, London, and Paris for the Secretary.

1 Document 72.

75. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 75. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, December 17, 1961, 11 p.m.

1783. Eyes Only for the Secretary. Reference: Department telegram 2081.1 On receipt of reference telegram 4:00 this afternoon I sought appointment with Prime Minister and got to him at 8:00 for an hour. I used every resource at my command for acceptance of proposal but so far as I can presently tell without success. It wasn't a bad card but it was too late. In might-have-been department, last week might have worked. Nehru was still very angry over Portuguese refusal to accept part of U Thant letter specifying UN resolutions.2 I argued this not known to the world and at this moment Salazar's response looked better than his. The six months also set him back a bit. He said that once the pressure was off Portuguese would sit still as before. I provisionally modified the six-month period to sufficient period to give time to put the arm on the Portuguese but without effect. He also asked what success we had had in budging Portuguese so far. Both question of what Portuguese would do in six months and effect of our approach so far exceedingly tough to handle. Then we got to the gut issue which is he believes they have gone beyond point of no return in public involvement. This reinforced by assertion that volunteers are about to move in, internal disorder is imminent along with accounts of Portuguese firing this morning. I repeated my argument that none of this had yet involved serious bloodshed and I referred finally to effect on American public opinion and mentioned West New Guinea and again Congo. I asked if I should report there was no chance, then fuzzed my question to keep issue open. He virtually told me there was none. I said our offer stood and asked him to call.

I would now guess they are going to move and my estimate in fact is for tomorrow morning. This confirmed by a heavy propaganda briefing by MEA this afternoon, a report this morning that a police official of Diu had asked for a peaceful takeover and departure of Gen Kaul without cancelling a Monday dinner in my honor. Vice President who is much opposed to action also reported to have said it is imminent. However I don't entirely exclude the thought that they are keeping up a very high level of tension on the theory that this is the only thing that really gets results. Sorry not to have better news. If they move I will wire suggestions on Washington reaction for which I urge close attention.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-1761. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Lisbon, USUN, and London.

1 Telegram 2081 to New Delhi, December 16, reported on a meeting that day among Acting Secretary Ball, Under Secretary McGhee, and Ambassador Nehru. Ball and McGhee warned that an Indian invasion of Goa would trigger a reaction in the United States that would force the Kennedy administration to oppose the Indian action in the United Nations and make it difficult to maintain Congressional support for assistance to India. Ball suggested that if Prime Minister Nehru would announce a suspension of action for 6 months, the United States would be willing to undertake a serious effort to help bring about a peaceful solution to the problem. (Ibid., 753D.00/12-1661) A memorandum of this conversation is ibid., Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330.

2 On December 14, Acting U.N. Secretary-General U Thant addressed identical letters to Indian Prime Minister Nehru and Portuguese Prime Minister Antonio Salazar. He urged them to “ensure that the situation does not deteriorate to the extent that it might constitute a threat to peace and security,” and to enter into negotiations to seek a solution to the problem. (Public Papers of the Secretaries-General of the United Nations, Vol. VI: U Thant, 1961-1964, p. 74)

76. Editorial Note 76. Editorial Note

At midnight December 17-18, 1961, an estimated 30,000 Indian troops, under the command of Lieutenant General J.N. Chaudhury, marched into Goa and the smaller neighboring Portuguese territories of Damao and Diu. Portuguese forces were heavily outnumbered and surrendered in all three territories on December 19.

In Washington, Secretary of State Rusk reacted to the first reports of Indian troop movements by calling Indian Ambassador Nehru to protest against the resort to force. (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

In response to an urgent request from the Portuguese Government, the U.N. Security Council met on December 18 to consider the Indian invasion of the Portuguese territories. (U.N. Document S/5030) Adlai Stevenson, U.S. Representative to the United Nations, criticized the Indian military action as a violation of the principles of the U.N. Charter. (U.N. Document S/PV.987) In the course of the debate, Stevenson submitted a draft resolution that called for a cease-fire, withdrawal of Indian forces, and the resumption of negotiations. The resolution was cosponsored by France, Turkey, and the United Kingdom. (U.N. Document S/5033) The resolution failed by a vote of 7 to 4, in that the negative vote cast by the Soviet Representative constituted a veto. (U.N. Document S/PV.987) For text of Stevenson's statement in the Security Council and the draft resolution he submitted, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pages 956-960.

77. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 77. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, December 23, 1961, 2:21 p.m.

2168. Acting Secretary Ball called in Ambassador Nehru today on American reaction to Goa. Said he hoped Ambassador informing his government fully of American views so there would be no misunderstanding of problems we face following Indian action. In response to Ambassador's question Ball said he not distinguishing between US Government's views and non-official opinion because our ability achieve our governmental goals greatly influenced by Congressional and public opinion. Full effect of Goa action on American opinion yet to become evident but we particularly concerned about impact on many facets U.S. policy, notably our support of UN including Congo operation and our foreign aid program. Additionally, we fear “chain reaction” on thinking of other nations on disputed territories elsewhere, as in West New Guinea. Forces in US opposed to present policies would cite Indian action as further argument we on wrong track. Added personal view that Krishna Menon visit to New York just now further complicates the situation. Looks as if by sending or allowing Menon come straight to New York GOI flaunting its action in Goa rather than, as it has argued, cleaning up a “necessary” situation as quickly and tidily as possible.

Ambassador stated he had already reported many of these points [and] would restate them to his government as views of USG.1

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/12-2361. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Talbot and approved by Ball. Repeated to Lisbon.

1 On December 29, Prime Minister Nehru sent an 8-page letter to President Kennedy justifying India's absorption of the Portuguese colonies. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 11/1/61-1/14/62)

78. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 78. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, December 28, 1961.

McGB:

Ayub's reported decision to bring Kashmir dispute before SC in January bodes nothing but trouble. Paks are seizing opportunity created by Goa.

But a tendentious debate in UN will move us away from Kashmir settlement rather than toward it. It will also put us in painful spot of having to say something which will offend one side or the other.

Hence, we ought to head off SC debate if possible. For example, if Galbraith could talk Nehru into giving private assurances that he would discuss problem with Paks after the February elections, we might use these to get Ayub to backtrack.

I have mentioned the above to Phil Talbot, who has a working group just starting on Kashmir. We'll also want Galbraith's opinion when he gets here. I am cluing you mainly because we may want to make a louder noise to State.

Bob K

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert W. Komer, 11/61-12/61. Secret. Copies were sent to Schlesinger and Rostow.

79. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 79. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, December 28, 1961, 11 p.m.

1918. I had extremely important meeting with Nehru this afternoon on which I urge most prompt followup.1 Following Shafqat's statement to Rountree a couple of days ago that Pakistanis were planning to take Kashmir issue to SC, the Indian newspapers this morning carry stories of this intention. I went in to see Prime Minister this afternoon ostensibly to say goodby but in fact to urge direct discussion along lines of Ayub-Rountree-Galbraith talk. I concentrated on this for an hour. At first he was disinclined and a bit distant. I pictured unhappy consequences of a SC debate on this issue for all concerned. I asked him directly if he were attracted by idea of a verbal slugging match between Zafrullah Khan and Krishna Menon. He said no. I pointed out that it would revive Goa antipathies, transfer them to Kashmir and have a further bad effect on American public opinion. I reminded him that he was being unfaithful to the comradeship of democratic leaders by making matters worse for the President. He said he had no desire to do this. I then asked him to consider the affirmative gains. By taking the lead in asking Pakistan to discuss the question India would rehabilitate her moral position, affirm her support of orderly process and persuade her critics she had generosity of spirit. He asked what could be talked about and here I improvised, noting that all problems including canal water dispute had seemed impossible until the effort was made. Ingenuity and imagination might partly modify, partly circumvent the territorial question, give the Pakistanis firm guarantees on the river sources, provide access to the valley, make it a free trade area, so forth and so on. I noted I had made same points to both Nehru, Ayub without explosion. He said he was attracted by these ideas and I then pressed him on the shortness of time involved. He then said he was leaving town for two weeks, very soon thereafter would be out campaigning and noted that the discussions were difficult while an election was going on and his need to prepare public opinion including Kashmir Government. I said Rountree and I had pointed out to Ayub the improbability of progress before the Indian elections. But the important thing was to get a clear manifestation of will to act and any case preparatory discussions were essential for success. I urged that a prompt invitation go to General Burki with a view to laying the ground for a Nehru-Ayub meeting. This would affirm Indian willingness to move further on the matter.

The foregoing will give the flavor of a much longer discussion. In the end in response to a pin-down question, he said I could cable affirmation of his sympathy for the idea and went on to say he would try to put steps in train about General Burki's visit before leaving tomorrow and take matter up on his return.

Comment: I feel it very important that the Pakistanis know confidentially of this effort and respond agreeably to any initiative while holding their fire on the SC. There is some chance that by real effort we can get Nehru to negotiate after the election and give an earnest of progress. SC debate would be bad for the Indians as well as ourselves and while doing nothing real for Paks would of course harden all lines. It would also be opportunity for another Soviet intervention on behalf of India which one sector of Indian public opinion will cheer. Would urge that Rountree indicate discussion and make these points to President with request for total discretion until I can do more here. Pakistanis will be aware that having asked for a strong “intervention” with Nehru on the Kashmir issue, they have had it. We have right to hope accordingly they will take advantage of it and not pursue the unpromising course of the New York debate.

I told Nehru that the matter was of so much importance that I would plan to remain in Delhi rather than proceed to Switzerland as planned and on to the States. He queried as to why since my absence would coincide roughly with his. (I had previously told him reasons for journey.) Accordingly, I will plan to leave as scheduled tomorrow evening but will remain available next week through Martin, Geneva.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-2861. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Karachi and USUN.

1 McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of this telegram to General Clifton on December 30 for President Kennedy. He described it as “Galbraith at his formidable best,” and noted that the Department of State was instructing Rountree to take the same line with Ayub. He added, however, that Talbot was afraid that “Ayub won't play.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Kashmir, 1/61-1/62)

80. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 80. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, December 29, 1961, 9:58 p.m.

1280. New Delhi's 19191 repeated Karachi 144 and USUN 102. In view of GOI's expected invitation to GOP to hold discussions as a first step toward Nehru-Ayub meeting Department believes GOP has good reason reconsider intention to take up Kashmir question in UN January 17. If GOP's reason for taking Kashmir issue to UN is to pressure India into bilateral talks (Karachi's 1096 to Department,2 32 to USUN and 176 to New Delhi) this apparent willingness by India to initiate bilateral discussions presumably removes need for such pressure.

You should see Ayub soonest and, referring to Ayub's conversation with President, President's conversations with Nehru, and Rountree-Galbraith conversations with Ayub, inform Ayub Galbraith has had further conversations with Nehru and Desai which give us reason believe Indians intend take initiative leading to bilateral Ministerial discussions.

You may tell Ayub that as friend of Pakistan we are taking it upon ourselves to relay our understanding that Indians are prepared hold discussions because we believe if initiative materializes this would be most promising means starting bilateral negotiations. We also wish suggest that if Kashmir case is introduced at UN January 17 prospects of successful talks may be seriously affected. You may also wish to remind Ayub that in our opinion he cannot expect any constructive action out of SC. Therefore we are constrained to inquire whether, in light of Ambassador Galbraith's report, he would re-examine his intentions to go to UN in January.

In conclusion you may wish point out that expected move by GOI appears to be result of efforts made by President Kennedy following Kennedy-Ayub talks in July; and you may express our earnest hope that Ayub will take full advantage of this welcome development.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-2861. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted in SOA by Weil, Horgan, and Henry W. Spielman; cleared with Sisco and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Talbot.

1 In telegram 1919 from New Delhi, December 28, Galbraith reported that the arrangements to initiate direct discussions between India and Pakistan, which were outlined in telegram 1918 from New Delhi (Document 79), had been confirmed by the Ministry of External Affairs. (Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-2861)

2 Dated December 28. (Ibid.)

81. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State 81. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of StateSource

Kabul, December 30, 1961, 6 p.m.

429. Reference: Embassy telegram 428 to Department.1 Following is text Foreign Office note re movement aid goods now in Pakistan; short unnecessary words omitted:

Complimentary opening.

“Have honor refer talks December 23 between Foreign Minister Naim and Ambassador Byroade.2

“In these talks, American Ambassador expressed his government's desire and decision continue American aid Afghanistan and gave assurance his government's willingness bring in equipment material for implementation American aid projects Afghanistan through transit channels other than Pakistan, while transit through Pakistan blocked. Use transit facilities through Iran was especially mentioned.

“Taking note American Government's agreement as expressed by Ambassador Byroade, Minister Foreign Affairs reiterates expression by Foreign Minister Naim regarding RGA agreement to transportation equipment material bearing title USG and destined for different aid projects Afghanistan, at present blocked in Pakistan and at Peshawar, Quetta and Chaman because of Pakistan's illegal and unilateral decision August last.

“RGA agrees to importation American Government aid material and equipment presently blocked in transit through Pakistan on following lines: 1. Importation transport equipment material defined above can be implemented through American offices and the facilities at their disposal.

2. Responsible authorities of RGA at Torkham and Spin-Baldak will duly execute customs formalities on above mentioned equipment and material.

3. Transportation and import above mentioned equipment material will be accomplished in 8 weeks beginning 15 January 1962.

4. This temporary arrangement shall be considered exceptional special case and will by no means affect declared Afghan stand regarding Afghanistan's right of transit through Pakistan in its traditional and established form, a right which is fully reserved by RGA. On receipt confirmative reply this note, Ministry Foreign Affairs will duly inform pertinent offices Torkham and Spin-Baldak to facilitate customs procedures for duration set forth in numbered paragraph three above.”

Note concludes with complimentary closing.

Byroade

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/12-3061. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Karachi and Tehran.

1 In telegram 428 from Kabul, December 30, Byroade reported that on December 28 he had discussed an earlier draft of the note conveyed in telegram 429 with Etemadi of the Foreign Office. The draft had stipulated that the border would be opened for a period of 6 weeks. Byroade stated that the time frame proposed was insufficient. On December 30 he discussed the note again with Naim and Etemadi, and Naim indicated that he would extend the border opening to eight weeks. (Ibid.)

2 This conversation was reported in telegram 418 from Kabul, December 23. (Ibid., 689.90D/12-2361)

82. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 82. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, December 31, 1961, 7:46 p.m.

245. Ref: Kabul 432.1 Following is revised Text Note.

Begin Verbatim text:

“Embassy presents compliments and has honor refer to arrangements proposed by RGA for movement into Afghanistan of US aid goods presently in Pakistan.

“The Embassy notes that the RGA is prepared to make arrangements for the movement of US financed goods and desires to cooperate fully in this effort. The USG agrees to utilize its facilities to complete the movement of these goods. The Embassy would welcome the early designation by the RGA of a particular office or officer with whom all arrangements should be made.

“The USG is concerned that it may not be possible to complete the operation within eight weeks. Success depends, inter alia, on expeditious documentation procedures, the timely availability of trucks and drivers and the maximum practical extension of the operating hours at all transfer and documentation points. USG welcomes assurances which His Royal Highness, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, gave Ambassador Byroade with respect to these matters.

“As Ambassador Byroade has informed his Royal Highness, The Minister of Foreign Affairs, it is the intention of the United States to continue its assistance program in Afghanistan and the US is willing to utilize, as far as is practical and financially feasible, the transit route running through Iran. The US must, however, for reasons of cost and feasibility, regard this route as a temporary alternative to the traditional route through Pakistan. The US will continue to make available its good offices in the effort to achieve the goal of resumption of normal transit through Pakistan.” End Verbatim text. Complimentary close.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/12-3161. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Talbot, cleared in substance by Gaud in AID, and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to Tehran.

1 In telegram 432 from Kabul, December 31, the Embassy transmitted a suggested draft reply to the December 30 note from the Afghan Government relating to the movement of AID goods stored in Pakistan. (Ibid.)

83. Letter From President Ayub to President Kennedy 83. Letter From President Ayub to President KennedySource

Rawalpindi, January 2, 1962.

My Dear President, The forcible taking of Goa by India has demonstrated what we in Pakistan have never had any illusions about—that India would not hesitate to attack if it were in her interest to do so and if she felt that the other side was too weak to resist. Krishna Menon, in fact, blatantly said as much in his statement of the 23rd of December.

The inability of the United Nations to prevent aggression has added to the loss of public confidence in its efficacy.

We had decided to take our Kashmir case to the Security Council after the Indian elections. In view of the recent developments, however, I have come to the conclusion that to re-affirm our continued faith in the United Nations, as the only force which might provide an alternative to naked aggressions of the kind we have just witnessed, it is imperative that the Kashmir question be raised now.

It is not our intention to ask the Council to discuss the substance of the question at this stage. Our Permanent Representative will ask in the first instance for a directive from the Security Council to the United Nations Representative for India and Pakistan, Dr. Frank P. Graham, to set forth his own views of what needs to be done by Pakistan and by India to comply with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and of the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan. My Government regards this step as an essential preliminary move without which the deadlock in the Kashmir question cannot be broken. We are asking for this step to be taken about the middle of this month.

It is my understanding that a directive of the above kind can be given to Dr. Graham without the adoption of a formal resolution by the Security Council and the attendant risk of a Soviet veto, provided a clear majority of the members of the Security Council express themselves in favour of a directive for the reason that Dr. Graham's recommendations would enable them to appraise the present status of the case correctly.

The details of this procedure will be explained by Ambassador Zafrulla Khan to your Delegation in New York and by Ambassador Aziz Ahmed to the State Department.

I have been advised that the Presidency of the Security Council in February 1962 will be held by the United States. In view of the crucial role of the President of the Council in the scheme of things that I have mentioned, Pakistan places the utmost reliance on his goodwill and support to surmount the initial procedural difficulties that may be raised by the Soviet Union and Romania in the course of action of the Security Council.

I am confident, Mr. President, that you will appreciate the reasons for my decision and that I may rely on your sympathetic understanding and fullest support.

I cannot end this letter without expressing the gratitude of the people of Pakistan, of their Government and my own sincere appreciation for the consistent and unwavering support that has been extended by the United States Government to Wilsonian principle of self-determination of peoples, whether strong or weak, and for upholding the Purpose and Principles of the Charter of the United Nations in the observance and implementation of which alone rest all our hopes for the future.

With kindest regards, Yrs Sincerely,

M.A. Khan

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-262. No classification marking. The salutation and closing of the letter are handwritten.

84. Memorandum of Conversation 84. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, January 3, 1962.

SUBJECT

Post-Goa Situation: Pakistan's Fears of Indian Intentions

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

H.E. Aziz Ahmed, Ambassador of Pakistan

Mr. Mohammad Masood, Minister, Embassy of Pakistan

Mr. Salman Ali, Counselor, Embassy of Pakistan

SOA-T. Eliot Weil

NEA-Mr. Phillips Talbot

At the beginning of the conversation the Secretary informed the Ambassador that he had just received a message from Ambassador Rountree stating that he had informed the Pakistan Foreign Minister of Ambassador Galbraith's report that the Indians planned to approach the Pakistanis with a view to arranging bilateral talks on the subject of Kashmir, and that President Ayub had appeared receptive to the idea.

The Ambassador mentioned his Government's plans to raise the Kashmir question in the Security Council later in the month and said President Ayub had appointed him a Special Representative to visit Venezuela and Chile [whose representatives are scheduled to preside over the Security Council in March and April].1 The Ambassador said he was planning to depart on the evening of January 9 but [if this new development resulted in postponement of Pakistan action in the Security Council] he might now be able to delay his departure.

The Secretary remarked that no serious talks were likely to occur during the Indian elections, but that India and Pakistan had two almost legendary debaters who would probably clash if the Kashmir matter were brought to the Security Council. Smiling, the Ambassador said he did not know whether Sir Zafrullah would like being compared with Krishna Menon, but his Government had no desire to embarrass Nehru during the Indian elections.

The Ambassador then said his Government had instructed him to discuss with the Secretary the post-Goa picture in South Asia as set forth in an aide-memoire which he handed to the Secretary (copy attached).2 The Ambassador offered “a few words in explanation” of certain portions of the aide-memoire. He emphasized India's inconsistency in using one justification for its occupation of Junagadh and another justification for claiming all of Kashmir and for occupying Hyderabad. He stressed his belief that India had no intention of fighting Communist China and asked why, if India does intend to fight Communist China, it does not settle its differences with Pakistan and seek Pakistan's assistance. With reference to the United States military sales agreement with India, the Ambassador said Pakistan did not want to take an obstructionist position, and that Pakistan would go along with the United States provided the United States and Pakistan were satisfied with the bona fides of India's requests for military supplies and with India's foreign policy. He said his Government believed there might be a reconsideration of the quantum of aid if India is diverting most of its foreign exchange for arms and is not making a proper effort to develop its economy. He said India must be deterred from foreign adventures. He then referred to the two requests in the aide-mémoire—for a public statement by the United States, and for steps to increase Pakistan's strength—and added that there might be “other courses”.

The Secretary asked the Ambassador whether he could comment further on his impressions of agitation in India to take over Pakistan. The Ambassador said “numerous statements” had been made and that extremist organizations, such as the Jan Sangh, were gathering strength as Congress strength declined.

The Secretary said he would like to comment in a very preliminary way on the very important questions raised by the aide-mémoire. He said Goa and a possible attack on Pakistan were two quite different things. He said if the question of Goa had been taken into the General Assembly we would have almost certainly have failed to succeed in our objective. As Ambassador Stevenson had pointed out, it was true that the case involved “a double standard.” It was a muddled issue, involving the question of colonialism, the U.K.'s commonwealth tie with India and alliance with Portugal, and the obvious unwillingness of any UN members to fight India over Goa. The Secretary pointed out that the case of Pakistan was quite different. There was no colonial issue, Pakistan had allies, and there was a United States military presence in Pakistan. The situations were as different as night and day.

The Ambassador said that in the case of Goa, where the use of force was the issue, India was able to get the sympathy of the Afro-Asian group. In the case of Kashmir, the Soviets had said Kashmir belonged to India. The Pakistanis feared they were no match for the Indians in the propaganda field, and that the Indians could even make a case for an attack on Pakistan. He said that in 1950 Indian troops were “poised for an attack on East Pakistan” and it might have been just providential that the attack did not materialize; but that when the Indians wanted “to make propaganda” they told the Hindus in East Pakistan to move out as refugees, and the Hindus followed these orders.

The Secretary said he could not imagine that the Government of India would try to confuse people on the issue of an attack on Pakistan, or that the Afro-Asian bloc would support India in this matter. The Secretary also pointed out that the U.S.S.R. attitude on Goa had nothing to do with the United States position. The Ambassador replied that if India decided to attack Kashmir or Pakistan, the U.S.S.R. would welcome the confusion and would presumably encourage India.

In this connection the Secretary observed that the Goan development might well mean that India would be forced to consider how to work things out with Pakistan. He asked the Ambassador to let him give the aide-memoire some study and said he would see the Ambassador again.

* Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Weil and approved in S on January 15.

1 All brackets are in the source text.

2 The aide-mémoire is summarized in Document 88, but not printed.

85. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State 85. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of StateSource

Kabul, January 3, 1962, 7 p.m.

436. Deeply appreciate quick and helpful holiday response by Department and Rountree on question moving US supplies out of Pakistan. It is therefore with more regret than usual that I report we have run into difficulties as result Foreign Ministry refusal accept text of note proposed by Department as basis for proceeding with movement goods.

Thinking it best we reserve a level for final negotiations, I asked DCM give proposed note to Etemadi and explain its contents. Etemadi, after much shuttling back and forth to Naim, finally gave us four points on which our text was not acceptable. These were as follows: 1. Failure of our note to refer specifically to their note.

2. Objection to word “proposed” in first sentence.

3. Change from “US owned” to “US financed” goods in first sentence, second paragraph.

4. Use of phrases “as far as is practical and financially feasible” and “for reasons of cost and feasibility,” last substantive paragraph of note.

It quite clear that RGA concern on all four points based not on question of substance but upon their public position, with eye on future Pakistan propaganda. It seemed, therefore, that points two and three could be easily met, while points one and four presented more difficulty. Use of word “proposed” was unfortunate. While it is true that RGA note appears to “propose,” yet we should not forget that this arises out of our previous proposal to move US goods out of Pakistan with use American teams. Similarly, the difference between US “owned” and “financed” goods is a technicality presenting no real problem. RGA simply desires that no goods under Afghan title be brought in under this agreement. This could be handled by defining goods intended more specifically.

With Hannah, I saw Naim and Etemadi this morning in effort resolve these difficulties and explained our disappointment that RGA had not seen fit accept simple text note which I convinced Washington thought to be helpfully drafted. Told him I was ready recommend Department drafting changes on points two and three which I thought he would find satisfactory, adding, however, I had no leeway on point one. If RGA insisted upon direct acknowledgment their note, it would be incumbent upon us to take exception to some of the phraseology of Afghan note. This I thought would not be helpful, either in problem of immediate movement of goods, or toward eventual solution transit problem. I therefore proposed, with understanding it on ad referendum basis, the following substitute paragraph to meet first three Afghan points, explaining that closest link I could make between our note and theirs was a reference in our note to same conversation mentioned in introductory paragraph Afghan note: “The Embassy of the USA presents its compliments to the Royal Afghan Ministry of Foreign Affairs and has the honor to refer to the understandings reached between His Royal Highness, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and Ambassador Byroade on December 23, regarding the movement into Afghanistan of US aid goods, presently in Pakistan, and under the title of the Government of the USA or American or other foreign contractors.”

Naim said he would accept this redraft to meet their first three points.

Discussion on point four above lasted about an hour. It was difficult for some time to determine real basis his objection on this point which obviously he considered important. It eventually became quite clear to both Hannah and myself that his only valid objection was based on public impression and fear of Pakistan propaganda. He reasons that the language in US note would imply to Pakistanis that US applying pressure on Afghan by a partial or veiled threat to limit its aid program as result use Iranian route. This would be used by Pakistanis to Afghan disadvantage so as to weaken Afghan position vis-a-vis Pakistan. He made one additional point in this discussion. He said he had received report from Afghan trade delegation in Tehran which indicated their negotiations so successful that he doubted cost factors through Iran would henceforth be real problem for US. I said I hoped this correct, but could not base today's negotiations upon this factor. Nor could I accept it myself without substantiation.

When it became apparent that Naim would accept none of the drafting compromises I suggested in effort meet his problem re publication while still retaining our qualifications on use Iranian route, and that further discussion along this line could only lead to complete stalemate, I made what I had previously decided would be my final fallback position for recommendation to Department. I asked for and received, again, Naim's assurance that there was no misunderstanding in substance between us and that his concern stemmed from public relations considerations. I then said I would propose to Washington deletion these particular phrases from notes provided he would agree with me to formal secret minute which would make it absolutely certain there was no actual misunderstanding between governments. Believe this procedure a new one for him, but he said he would entertain idea and seek clearance his government as well if we could agree on wording. Two hours later Hannah gave Etemadi a suggested text which I felt satisfactory for negotiating purposes. Text follows with small words omitted: “Following secret understanding reached connection exchange notes between Royal Afghan Ministry Foreign Affairs (No. 3180 dated December 30, 1961) and Embassy USA (No. 24, dated January 2, 1962):

“In discussions between His Royal Highness, Minister Foreign Affairs and Ambassador Byroade January 3, 1962, American Ambassador explained it is intention USG continue assistance program Afghanistan and, in doing so, to utilize route through Iran, giving due consideration factors which, in absence actual experience, cannot yet be fully defined. These factors concern question cost and question feasibility based on practical and physical nature that line communication. His Royal Highness, Minister Foreign Affairs stated he understood this to be position USG.

“It was further understood by both parties that this understanding would remain secret but would become part of record in connection exchange notes described above.”

Upon receipt above draft, Etemadi said he had no authority discuss text but would deliver to Foreign Minister. It was agreed that if Foreign Minister found text satisfactory, he would present to his government and I would propose to Department. Etemadi gave his personal opinion that RGA would not approve the whole idea of secret minute. Two hours later Etemadi telephoned Hannah to say Foreign Minister had concluded that text had only the barest minimum chance of being accepted and that therefore I should not propose it to Department. Etemadi made no proposals for modification, and in answer to question replied that Foreign Minister did not feel he could recommend acceptance to Afghan Govt. Subsequently, Hannah phoned Etemadi at my instruction to ask him relay my deep disappointment to Foreign Minister, my belief that we had come more than half way to meet RGA legitimate points particularly re publicity but had observed very little inclination understand our problems, and finally that I was at loss how to proceed since I had no new suggestions to offer.

It is too early to form final conclusions as to meaning this encounter. I would not recommend at this time that US accede to Afghan demand. It is possible that upon more mature consideration Foreign Minister will modify his view and adopt more tractable attitude. I am not hopeful that this will happen quickly since I suspect that his sudden change of action on the secret minute concept resulted from a lunchtime consultation with Daud.

Etemadi's remarks to Hannah expressing fear that Pakistanis might obtain access to secret minute suggest Naim may fear a leak to GOP. Perhaps significantly, Naim suggested at one stage this morning that we await return Afghan delegation from Tehran in hope that terms brought back from Tehran would suffice to obviate necessity for US to make any qualifications re cost and feasibility.

Byroade

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-362. Secret; Niact. Received in the Department of State on January 4 at 12:41 a.m. Repeated to Karachi and Tehran.

86. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 86. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, January 5, 1962, 2:03 p.m.

247. Re Kabul's 436.1 Dept disappointed turn events but does not wish lose this opportunity for first break in impasse. Concur your redraft para one in order take care of first three objections of RGA. With respect fourth objection you should state following to Naim:

By being explicit on our qualifications we are not motivated by desire exert pressure on RGA. On the contrary, US efforts have been directed towards ameliorating situation for RGA. However, since exchange of Notes constitutes formal agreement, Dept must not make commitment which in fact it may not be able fulfill. For example, if Iranian route were to prove impracticable for sustained heavy truck traffic, USG would not wish to be accused of bad faith. Furthermore Dept must consider Congressional reaction to unqualified commitment. Talbot made above points Jan. 4 to Amb. Maiwandwal who presumably will cable FonMin. We are willing compromise and delete “as far as practical and financially feasible” but must include qualifications in next sentence in order cover ourselves legally and with Congress.

However Dept has concluded it could not agree publication our Note along with RGA Note unless second para latter revised to delete “illegal” and to substitute “Karachi, Peshawar, Chaman and Quetta” for “Pakistan and …”

Dept understands reasons for RGA desire make public explanation its decision. Since differences over language of Notes could cause lengthy wrangle, Dept suggests press statement be issued by RGA in lieu of RGA and proposed US Note which would remain as confidential exchange. If press release issued by RGA, and US not associated with it, Dept would be more relaxed on language concerning Iranian route since US not bound by RGA statement.

Suggested draft follows.

“In recent discussions between the Royal Afghan Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ambassador Byroade, the American Ambassador reaffirmed the desire of the USG to continue its aid programs in Afghanistan. The Royal Afghan Government is prepared to make arrangements for the movement of all US aid goods under the title of the USG or American or foreign contractors which have been consigned to Afghanistan through the port of Karachi and have been held up since the break in diplomatic relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan on September 6, 1961. The USG agrees to utilize its facilities to complete the movement of these goods. The US stated that it is willing to utilize temporarily the transit route running through Iran.

“The RGA wishes to emphasize that this temporary agreement in no way prejudices the RGA position that it has an inherent right to free access to the sea through Pakistan.”

You may draw on additional following points as appropriate: I. US is confident Pakistan will cooperate in these arrangements to move goods into Afghanistan.

II. US does not anticipate that GOP will make use this agreement for adverse propaganda purposes, but, if RGA wishes, US prepared inform GOP we would look with disfavor on any attempt use agreement to which we are a party for propaganda purposes.

III. US wishes remind RGA that Merchant's terms of reference still apply US offer good offices—i.e. offer confined to helping both sides seek ways resolving transit impasse without reference to any political disputes involved. We believe Afghan Note contains unnecessary references to political matters and, if made public, might cause Pakistan adopt uncooperative attitude.2

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-362. Secret; Niact. Drafted in SOA by Gatch, Naas, and Metcalf; cleared by Gaud; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi and Tehran.

1 Document 85.

2 In telegram 444 from Kabul, Byroade reported that he had met with Naim and had carried out the instructions outlined in telegram 247 to Kabul. Naim agreed to put the Department's revised proposal before the Afghan Cabinet, but indicated that he felt there was little prospect that it would be accepted. (Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-862)

87. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 87. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, January 6, 1962.

McGB

A New Look at Pakistani Tie

The offensive Pakistani demarche to Rusk on 3 January (State to Karachi 1294)1 and presumably Ayub's letter to the President,2 which in effect lecture us on how we ought to conduct our policy toward India, crystallize my latent feelings that we ought to consider a new tack in our relations with Pakistan. Our basically different views on how to deal with the Afghan, Kashmir, and Indian problems have been apparent in the series of exchanges the New Administration has had with Ayub.

Ayub's main concerns are Pakistan's position versus Afghanistan and especially India—he isn't really much interested in the larger conflict in which we are involved. He patently views his alliance with the US primarily as insurance against Indian and Afghan threats, and as a means of leverage vis-à-vis Nehru and Daud.

One can understand and sympathize with Ayub's preoccupations. As the weaker power on the subcontinent, fearful of eventual Indian attempts to reunify it, he sees a need both for an aggressive stance and for an outside counterweight to India. One can also sympathize with the Pakistan case on Kashmir and Pushtunistan. But to the extent Ayub uses his alliance tie to push us into supporting his forward policies vis-à-vis India and Afghanistan, he forces us into a position which runs contrary to our larger strategic interests in the area.

And this is what he is trying to do. His “post-Goa” letter makes this abundantly clear. I am well aware that we always try not to fall into this trap, but in our very forthcoming policy toward Pakistan, and in our concern lest we offend a staunch ally, do we lean over too far? I fear that in the Ayub visit last July, and the many exchanges since, we have failed to get across to him the limitations on, as well as the benefits from our support. Instead he seems to have gotten the feeling that we are so attached to him as an ally that he can pursue his own aims with renewed vigor, and drag us along with him. Whatever the merits of the Pak case on Pushtunistan and Kashmir, it is Ayub who has taken the tactical initiative on both issues. Now he wants us to lower the boom on India. Meanwhile, we continue to shower him with favors (the latest a forthcoming $500 million commitment to the consortium supporting his new development plan).

What do we get from our Pak alliance? True, we get some highly important facilities, and I am the last to deprecate their value. However, I'm not sure that we've gotten a lot else from it so far, except a paper commitment to SEATO and CENTO on which it is hard to see how Ayub could effectively pay off in more than peanuts.

I would presume that, broadly speaking, our strategic interest lies in having a strong and stable subcontinent as a counterweight and counter-influence to the Communists in Asia. Essentially, this goal requires us to ameliorate and eventually dissipate the tensions between the countries within the subcontinent, not only in our long-range interest but in the interest of their own survival against a much larger threat. Thus, our aim must be to resolve such disputes as Kashmir and Pushtunistan which essentially distract and divert these countries from the goal we have in mind.

But if we must choose among these countries, there is little question that India (because of its sheer size and resources) is where we must put our chief reliance. True, the Ayub regime is far more “pro-Western” than the Indians (though it is questionable whether most Pakistanis are really less neutralist than Indians). In any event, are we more interested in a Western-oriented weak ally or a strong neutralist India able to defend its own national interests (which happen to broadly coincide with ours).

What has moved India toward us in the last few years? Essentially it isn't our policy or our increasing generosity in supporting India's ambitious five-year plans. It is the Chinese pressures on the northeast frontier. Over time, the conflict of interest between Peiping and Delhi will almost certainly grow rather than decrease. And sooner or later the Indians will come to realize that the arena of conflict is not only along the Himalayas but in Southeast Asia as well.

On the other hand, Pakistan's chief preoccupation will long remain India. Ayub's whole policy is built around this central theme (as his post-Goa letter makes abundantly clear). I question whether it is in our strategic interest to cater even indirectly to his concerns, beyond reinsuring him against Indian attack.

Would Ayub go neutralist if we were tougher with him? I wonder. As the weaker power on the subcontinent he needs external support. And where can he get it? The Russians, no more than we, are going to give Pakistan priority over India. Could the Chinese help much? In the last analysis, Pakistan needs the U.S. connection more than we need it.

What I am leading up to is my growing conviction that we had better take a new tack in our approach to Ayub. Instead of showering him with consortium aid, instead of using kid gloves on the Pak/Afghan transit issue, instead of letting ourselves be dragged along on Kashmir, and instead of allowing him to think that he can continually get more military aid from us to use against India, perhaps we had better give him a clear idea of the limitations on our ability to come to his support. Otherwise, we are simply storing up more and more trouble. If the objective of our policy is to achieve compromise solutions on Pushtunistan, Kashmir and related intra-SOA disputes, we are going to have to start leaning a bit more on one side or the other. Whatever the merits of either side in the dispute, it is pretty clear where we'll have to lean.

We should guard against regarding such disputes as Pushtunistan and Kashmir as intractable quarrels which only time will solve. History suggests that more often they flare up eventually into serious crises, especially when agitated by an activist like Ayub.

In sum, so many problems are piling up in our relations with Pakistan that before we approve a new consortium which will involve some $500 million in U.S. cash, perhaps we had better take a new look at our Pakistan relationship and ask whether we are giving too much and not getting enough in return. I urge we do this before we have played a hole card in firmly committing ourselves to massive development aid.

R.W. Komer3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert Komer, 1/62. Secret. Copies were sent to Kaysen and Rostow.

1 Telegram 1294 to Karachi, January 3, summarized the conversation on that day between Rusk and Ahmed and the aide-memoire presented to Rusk by Ahmed. (Department of State, Central Files, 753D.00/1-362) For a memorandum of the conversation, see Document 84.

2 Document 83.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

88. Paper Prepared by the Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs 88. Paper Prepared by the Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian AffairsSource

Washington, undated.

UNITED STATES RELATIONS WITH SOUTH ASIA: MAJOR ISSUES AND RECOMMENDED COURSES OF ACTION

I. Basic Problems and Strategy

In the wake of (a) Goa, (b) intensified Indo-Pakistani and Pak-Afghan disputation and (c) growing Chinese Communist and Soviet capabilities to press southward our basic interest still calls for policies that will: (1) Vigorously support the growth of viable non-Communist governments;

(2) Reduce intra-area tensions and

(3) Increase participation by both India and Pakistan in causes beneficial to the Free World.

Our political and economic policies are well-charted and reasonably successful in strengthening the domestic structures of these countries. Similarly, within the bounds of current capabilities, our general posture of defense against Soviet bloc pressures in this region are not per se an immediate cause of concern. The chief proximate threat to the success of our policies in South Asia arise from the pervasive, corrosive intra-regional disputes. In the end these troublesome controversies probably cannot be greatly ameliorated either bilaterally or mainly through the influence of the United Nations or other nations such as Britain; the United States must continue to play a major role. The problem is what additional instruments we should use to influence the governments concerned.

The policy issues we face immediately include the Afghan-Pakistan trade impasse, the Pakistani intention of raising the Kashmir dispute in the United Nations, the recent Pakistani requests and suggestions to the United States that we restrict aid to India and give additional positive reaffirmations of the U.S.-Pakistan alliance, suggestions emanating from India that American arms would be welcome to increase India's capabilities vis-a-vis the Communist Chinese, and the aftermath of the Goan invasion.

Compared with most states in Southeast and Southwest Asia, India and Pakistan enjoy a relatively high degree of political stability and sustained economic growth. India's size and strength, plus its historic role in the vanguard of Asian nationalisms, give it the political influence with other countries that can be damaging to the United States when India and the United States are at cross purposes (as in some colonial issues) or extremely helpful when we can cooperate (as in the Congo or, hopefully, in achieving peace and security in Southeast Asia). India stands sometimes on the side of the Bloc, sometimes on our side and always on its own side (Goa, Kashmir).

Pakistan, though less than a quarter as populous as India, politically and economically behind the Indian pace and less influential with other countries, ranks as another country of major importance to the United States because of its location, size and policies. Its most important policy is its alliance with the United States. From this it expects a place at the councils of the free world, military and economic strengthening beyond the usual level of aid for an unaligned nation of its size, and assured American protection against India. We expect the alliance to give us Pakistan's general support in the United Nations, a South Asian anchor position for our system of pacts around the rim of the Communist Bloc, and certain special facilities.

In general political terms India's weight in international affairs can do more to help us or harm us than can Pakistan's. To have to choose between the two countries would, however, be a failure of policy: we need both.

Afghanistan is a traditional buffer area between Russia and South Asia. While less important to the Free World than either India or Pakistan, for it to come under Communist domination would greatly aggravate the problems of defense for Iran as well as India and Pakistan. Its conflicts with Pakistan over “Pushtunistan” and related problems are the single greatest threat to its retention in the Free World.

The bitterest of the regional disputes in South Asia arises out of events in the late 1940s. In the 1960s South Asia will face new and profoundly different situations which can be met only if Afghanistan, Pakistan and India perceive the necessity of much closer cooperation than they have ever yet achieved. With economic development village economies are giving way to regional cash economies; these can ripen far more effectively when trade and exchange flow freely across the sub-continental borders. Economic cooperation will also be essential to successfully meeting the competition of the European Common Market. The advantages of close political cooperation are self-evident. In military defense, joint or coordinated policies in the face of the threat from the north will greatly strengthen each country, and therefore the Free World generally.

Moreover, it is essential to our interests that these countries find ways of compromising their bitter disputes. Hundreds of millions of dollars of our aid to India and Pakistan are in effect dissipated by their feud over Kashmir. The stability and strength that we need in South Asia as a condition of our global defenses against Communist pressures is also jeopardized. To overcome these difficulties and to settle these disputes it may be necessary for the United States to undertake further new initiatives. It is also essential to United States global security interests that we maintain in these countries an image of strength, and of determination to support their efforts to maintain independence in the face of Soviet and Communist Chinese pressures.

In our dealings with South Asian governments we must bear in mind the fact that individual leaders and oligarchies can exert tremendous influence on millions of constituents. The importance of personal diplomacy cannot be overestimated. In our discussions with South Asian leaders it is important that we keep them aware of United States interests in the area; that we impress them with our disapproval of their self-destructive squabbles; and that we constantly remind them of the grave consequences of their failure to cooperate in the face of the growing danger of Sino-Soviet expansionism.

II. Our Stake in South Asian Intra-Area Disputes

The intra-area disputes confront us, with several direct, immediate policy issues. These are discussed in the following paragraphs:

A. Pakistan-Afghanistan Disputes

1. “Pushtunistan”

The “Pushtunistan” question continues to affect directly every aspect of Afghanistan-Pakistan relations and United States relations with both countries. Pakistan flatly rejects the Afghan claim that for historical, ethnic, cultural and linguistic reasons Afghanistan has a special interest in the four to five million Pushtu-speaking peoples in Pakistan and that these people should be given the right of self-determination. In the last two years the Government of Pakistan has dealt increasingly firmly with Pushtun tribal unrest and relations between the two countries have correspondingly worsened. There is little likelihood of a solution of the “Pushtunistan” question in the foreseeable future. Pakistan has a strong legal position. Most nations, including the United States, recognize the Durand Line as the international boundary.

Policy Issue: Whether the United States should seek to establish conditions of mediation for this dispute.

We recommend that we not do so, but continue to work toward the obsolescence of this problem through resolution of the associated transit trade issue, on which we may have more leverage.

2. The Afghan Transit Trade Issue

The complex of actions and counter actions which led to the disruption of the traditional transit trade route through Pakistan into Afghanistan in September has opened the door for rapidly and sharply increased Soviet influence in Afghanistan. Because a substantial part of the transit trade consists of United States aid supplies and equipment (which we ship to Afghanistan with ample political as well as economic justification) we believe we have some leverage with Afghanistan, though very little with Pakistan except at the possible cost of a degeneration in our relations with Pakistan.

Policy Issues: (a) Whether we should make efforts to keep the aid pipeline open to Afghanistan if it can be done at moderate extra costs for shipments by a temporary alternative routing through Iran.

We believe this should be done and that it is desirable to add the necessary amount to the Afghan aid bill to continue the movement of selected aid goods to Afghanistan. This will indicate to the Afghans our intention of continuing a portion of our aid programs while the Pakistan route is closed. At the same time we recommend that after the Afghans and Pakistanis have had an opportunity to realize the dangerous consequences of their stubborn positions, we make a new diplomatic approach.

(b) Whether the United States should be prepared to support the development at substantial cost of a permanent alternative transit route through Iran for Afghanistan.

This issue will become acute if the trade impasse shows no significant prospects of improvement over the next one or two years. We recommend no immediate action in support of the development of a permanent alternative route for the reason that it would release Afghanistan from pressures for seeking a resolution of its issue with Pakistan.

B. India-Pakistan Disputes

1. Kashmir

If Pakistan, as it now intends, raises the Kashmir issue in the Security Council in January we can expect a deterioration in the relations between the two countries and a setback in prospects of progress toward the resolution of this overriding issue between Pakistan and India. Possibly even more important, the United Nations debate and the position the United States takes with respect to the issue in that forum probably could lead to a noticeable deterioration of United States relations with one or the other of the two countries.

Tension between India and Pakistan over Kashmir has risen markedly in recent weeks. India's seizure of Goa by force, and the inability of the UN to prevent this, has raised Pakistan fears that India may have in mind the eventual forceful seizure of Pakistan-occupied portions of Kashmir. The Goa action has also served to embarrass India internationally with Western nations. The initial Pakistan reaction to Goa was to advance the prospective date for presentation of Kashmir in the Security Council to mid-January. At the same time, Indian leaders, in the normal course of their election campaign, have been calling for the return to India of the portion of the state of Kashmir which Pakistan now occupies.

Meanwhile, following Ambassador Galbraith's initiative, he and Ambassador Rountree have been quietly attempting to stimulate ministerial-level talks between India and Pakistan which would hopefully lead to Nehru-Ayub talks after the Indian elections in February. (If Pakistan adopts a constitution this winter, the top-level talks would probably have to follow Pakistan elections in the spring.) At the same time we have been making representations in both Karachi and New York with the Pakistan representative in New York and giving the reasons why we believe submission to the Security Council would be of no value to Pakistan.

No progress toward a solution of the Kashmir problem is seen possible through Security Council action. Any resolution putting pressure on India would receive a Soviet veto. This the Pakistanis know, but they seem to feel that drawing UN attention again to the problem would at least draw world attention to India's intransigence and might serve as a form of pressure on India towards concessions in eventual bilateral talks.

Clearly no final political solution of the Kashmir dispute is presently possible or in view in the near future. At the same time, other aspects of the Kashmir problem—hydrological, economic, humanitarian, military—appear as possible subjects of bilateral talks in the present context when it seems impossible totally to avoid consideration of the Kashmir issue.

Policy Issue: Whether the United States should continue its active efforts to reduce Indian-Pakistan tensions over Kashmir and, if so, how far we should go. We do not believe that the size and pace of the economic assistance program should be used directly as instruments. It is possible our efforts may result in some impairment of the alliance relationship with Pakistan in view of Ayub's original expectation of full United States support in the Security Council.

We should continue intensive diplomatic efforts with the objective of leading to bilateral negotiations and of discouraging Pakistan from raising the issue in the Security Council.

We should impress upon both parties that their failure to settle traditional problems is not only diverting their attention from problems of greater importance to their future security and that of the Free World, but also jeopardizing the interests of countries outside the area desiring to assist them.

2. Recent Requests and Suggestions Made by the Pakistanis

Pakistan professes to fear that India's success in Goa will lead to aggression in Kashmir. Against this background the Pakistanis presented an aide-memoire to the Secretary on January 3, 19621 which took the following positions: (a) That the 1951 U.S. military sales agreement with India should be terminated and that India should not receive military equipment until it renounces “aggressive intentions and needs the equipment only to fight the Chinese”;

(b) That U.S. economic aid to India should be limited to a level that would prevent India from diverting an “unduly large part of its own resources to build up its military machine”;

(c) That the U.S. take action to “deter India from committing aggression against Pakistan” by a public statement to the effect that the United States would come to Pakistan's assistance if attacked—an undertaking similar to that contained in a confidential assurance given to the Pakistanis in 1959; and

(d) That the United States increase military aid to Pakistan.

Policy Issue: Whether we should restrict aid to India and give addition reaffirmations of the US-Pakistan alliance in both a material and public form.

We do not recommend acceding to the Pakistani suggestions except with respect to providing official reassurances that the United States guarantees to Pakistan are still in force. With respect to each point:

On point (a), we should observe to the Pakistanis that the President promised Ayub during his visit here that the United States had not changed its policy with regard to military assistance to India and that Ayub would be consulted prior to any contemplated change.

On point (b), we should point out that the United States provides no hard currency support to India which she could directly apply to military purchases and that all of our economic assistance is involved in specified projects or commodity purchases. In our opinion India would spend approximately the same amount of its own resources on its armed forces, in the light of its security interests as it sees them, regardless of the level of United States and other aid. The sacrifice would fall in the economic sector.

On point (c), we recommend that Ambassador Rountree be authorized to assure President Ayub that United States guarantees to Pakistan are still in force, including the undertaking contained in our note of April 15, 1959,2 to which the Pakistanis specifically referred. Apart from the request for this assurance contained in the Pakistani aide-memoire of January 3, President Ayub very recently separately asked Ambassador Roundtree for such an assurance, though not necessarily to be publicly given. The Department is opposed to publicly reaffirming at this time the assurances we have given to Pakistan.

On point (d), we believe the Pakistanis should be informed that the level of the United States commitment for military aid for the next five years has been settled upon between the two governments and that we intend to fulfill the commitment. The prospects of our increasing the level of military aid in the forseeable future is not favorable.

C. Country Problems

1. India

Economic Aid

In our effort to help India achieve economic and social development as a basis for a viable political structure and defense against Bloc pressures, we utilize massive economic aid programs and technical assistance.

Our economic aid programs serve, inter alia, to prevent India from depending on Bloc countries for a major portion of its foreign aid.

As a result of India's forcible occupation of Goa, we have postponed the signing of certain agreements pertaining to our aid program, but have proceeded with normal program planning within the United States Government.

Policy Issue: Whether to show our displeasure over Goa by cutting our future economic aid, a recommendation which may emanate from Congress.

We recommend, in view of our important security interests in South Asia, that we continue the announced policy of continuing aid at intended levels; and that at some time in the near future—taking into consideration the climate of opinion in the United States, and the behavior of the Indian Government—we resume signing agreements without undue publicity.

Military Sales

Since 1951 we have sold to India relatively small quantities of military equipment—mainly consumable or replacement items. The Indians have recently shown an interest in the purchase of aircraft, missiles and electronic devices, the sale of which would generate protests from Pakistan, and at the same time help to prevent the Indians from turning to the Bloc for similar items.

Since Goa we have informally suspended active consideration of possible sales of major military items to India. This question, of course, involves agreement among a number of Departments and agencies.

Policy Issue: Whether to sell major military items to India.

We recommend that in the near future we resume consideration of such sales on a case-by-case basis—taking into account all political and military factors such as the military situation on the Tibetan border.

2. Pakistan

In addition to far-reaching questions discussed elsewhere in this paper, the only immediate issue requiring decision is the extent of United States participation in the Pakistan Consortium for 1962-63. This is set out below. Because of their sensitive nature, problems relating to our special facilities and installations in Pakistan are dealt with in a separate paper.

Extent of U.S. Participation in the Pakistan Consortium

At the IBRD Consortium on Pakistan in June 1961, $320 million in aid was committed toward Pakistan's development requirements for FY 1962. Out of this total the United States committed $150 million. President Ayub has protested this result as entirely inadequate to meet Pakistan's needs. A further meeting of the Consortium is scheduled for January 24-26 in Washington where commitments to meet Pakistan's requirements for the two years, 1962-63, estimated at $945 million, will be sought.

Policy Issue: Since this is a multi-year commitment, a Presidential commitment will be required. This recommendation is being forwarded through normal channels.

We recommend that the United States offer to commit up to $500 million of this total of $945 million—the exact amount to depend on the commitments of other members of the Consortium and availability of U.S. funds.

3. Nepal

U.S. Posture

In the face of intensive Bloc efforts to detach Nepal from India's sphere of influence, the United States extends economic aid and technical assistance, and endeavors to persuade the King to reestablish a representative government, dissolved in December 1959. Recent press reports of disturbances in Nepal have not been confirmed.

Policy Issue: Whether to continue our efforts to influence the King to reach an accommodation with the Nepali Congress Party, or to support a rebellion intended to destroy the King's power and to establish a new government.

In view of the inevitable chaos which would be exploited by the Communists, and in view of the Nepali Congress' presumed inability to establish a viable government, we continue to favor efforts to bring about an accommodation between the King and the Nepali Congress.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90/1-1062. Secret. The paper was transmitted to the White House under cover of a memorandum from Battle to Bundy dated January 10. The Secretary approved the paper for discussion with the President on January 11 at 5 p.m.

1 Attached to Document 84; not printed.

2 See Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, vol. XV, pp. 708-709.

89. Editorial Note 89. Editorial Note

On January 11, 1962, Pakistan requested a meeting of the U.N. Security Council to consider further action concerning the dispute between India and Pakistan over Kashmir. In a letter to the President of the Security Council, Pakistan stated that it was forced to request the meeting because efforts to develop direct negotiations with India on the issue had failed, and recent public statements by Indian officials had exacerbated the dispute. (U.N. Document S/5058)

India responded, in a January 16 letter to the President of the Security Council, that the Council should refuse to comply with Pakistan's request. India stated that, contrary to Pakistani allegations, avenues for direct negotiations concerning Kashmir were always open. Pakistan, India argued, was trying to exploit the Council as a propaganda forum on the eve of India's general elections. (U.N. Document S/5060)

Pakistan repeated its request for a Security Council meeting in another letter to the President of the Security Council on January 29. (U.N. Document S/5068) The Security Council met in response to Pakistan's requests on February 1. After listening to divergent statements on the Kashmir issue by Sir Muhammad Zafrulla Khan, Pakistan's Permanent Representative to the United Nations, and Chandra S. Jha, India's Permanent Representative to the United Nations, the Council decided to postpone further consideration of the problem until after the Indian general elections. (U.N. Document S/PV.990)

90. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 90. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, January 12, 1962.

McGB

South Asia Issues Decided at Meetingwith President 11 January 1962

1. Kashmir Dispute. Upon the Acting Secretary's proposal, the President agreed that we should propose to both sides a high-level mediator. It was agreed both sides looked to us on this issue. An effort will be made to get Eugene Black right away, with second choice David Lilienthal. To justify Black's use, we could say that Kashmir dispute jeopardizes IBRD stake in Indus Waters settlement.

2. With respect to Pakistani Resolution in SC, the President felt that in view of his commitment to Ayub, we would have to vote for relatively innocuous Pakistani resolution in SC, and had better tell Nehru if necessary However, we should attempt to persuade Paks against SC, arguing that it would undermine our other commitment to Ayub to get Indians to negotiate. State is to get a letter off pronto to Ayub urging him to call off SC action.

3. Upon State's recommendation, President approved going ahead and starting to release aid to India into the pipeline, after waiting a week. A small DLF loan for $5-6 million which had been pending for a long time would be a good thing to start with.

4. Military Sales to India. We should hold up action until after the Indian election to avoid helping Krishna Menon. In any case, even then we should hold off on big items like C-130s. The President wanted it emphasized to both India and Pakistan that their “arms race” was ruining our economic aid program by diverting their assets from economic development.

5. Commitment to Pakistan Consortium. The President was concerned about so much aid going to India and Pakistan, in contrast to Latin America, for example. He directed a restudy to determine whether we could tighten up and increase interest rates on long term development loans. The purpose would be to make it easier to sell larger aid programs on the Hill, recognizing that we wouldn't actually get the money back anyway in many cases. However, we shouldn't worry about problems which wouldn't be upon us until ten years from now. The President did agree to go ahead on the $500 million commitment to Pak consortium, contingent upon remainder of $945 million being found elsewhere.

6. Pakistan and Transit Trade. The President was very reluctant to agree to the extra outlays ($150 a ton as opposed to $50) required to ship aid goods to Afghan over temporary Iranian route. He could not see why we should pay extra to ship what was after all aid to the Afghans. He agreed to the eight week moratorium proposal permitting US aid goods already in Pakistan to go forward by the direct route but reserved judgment on the Iran route. When Assistant Secretary Talbot pointed out that Afghans would not accept moratorium proposal unless we agreed also to go ahead with subsequent shipments via Iran route, the President's inclination was to let them stew, and tell them that Congress would not accept such a huge increase in transport costs. However, he reluctantly accepted Talbot's plea that we take a gamble for a few months, using a quarter of the estimated $2 million it would take to ship the remainder of our aid over the Iranian route during 1962.

Bob K.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Regional Security Series, South Asia, 1961-963. Secret.

91. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 91. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, January 12, 1962, 9:47 p.m.

255. From Secretary. Department appreciates your strenuous efforts to accomplish temporary opening border but believes if Afghans are serious in desire receive aid goods they will withdraw demand that political propaganda in their note be included in joint publication. We must bear in mind following: 1) Whatever their motives, Pakistanis have consistently given assurances they continue to honor transit agreement.

2) Afghans closed border.

3) Despite offer of practical assistance in clearance processes, Afghans have refused cooperate in opening border to normal traffic and have caused USG substantial inconvenience and expenditures in importing items for official use.

4) When Afghans offered USG opportunity move its aid goods proposal was based on amount which could be moved in fixed time rather than on total amount then in Pakistan.

While not condoning GOP's arbitrary action designed retaliate against Afghan subversive activities in Pakistan territory, Department considers it damaging to US interests to associate USG with objectionable Afghan references to Pakistan in publication of exchange of notes. Receipt of King's letter1 re US offer good offices which omitted any reference to political aspects transit traffic problem was taken by USG as acceptance President's terms of reference—i.e., transit traffic problem would be handled separately from over-all political disputes. Department clearly recognizes joint publication notes now under consideration would inevitably associate USG with any statements appearing in Afghan note. To do so would not only constitute sign of weakness which would increase difficulties in future dealings with Afghans, but would provide GOP with legitimate basis for protest, and reduce possibility early settlement transit trade problem.

USG has made substantial concession to squabbling governments by indicating willingness move certain aid goods through Iran to Afghanistan while Kabul and Rawalpindi maintain adamant positions. It is hoped this concession can be justified on ground it is in our interest to give Afghans evidence of willingness to continue aid in face of Soviet exploitation of impasse. On other hand to yield to Afghan insistence on introduction propaganda into joint publication of notes might well destroy future usefulness USG good offices in dispute and provide Pakistanis with justification for withdrawing promised cooperation in moving aid goods during temporary opening of border.

Fact Afghans have insisted on inclusion propaganda despite US insistence on dealing with transit problem without bringing in political issues as such, raises question as to sincerity their intentions. Afghans should be reminded of terms of references for USG good offices. Political clauses in their note constitute built-in time bomb which seriously threatens implementation of RGA proposal.

Department suggests you talk with appropriate officials using as much of foregoing as you deem appropriate and use best efforts convince them that publication note in present form would prove counterproductive. Remind them of flexibility and friendly cooperation manifested by USG since border closed and reiterate US willingness cooperate in moving goods from Pakistan into Afghanistan on condition that RGA note, which has not been officially accepted in toto by USG, confine itself to transit traffic problem as such.

Department would accept following in place of existing third paragraph in RGA Note (Kabul tel 429)2

“Taking note American Government's agreement as expressed by Ambassador Byroade, Minister Foreign Affairs reiterates expression by Foreign Minister Naim regarding RGA agreement to transportation of aid goods procured under US program and consigned Afghanistan through Karachi and held up since the break in diplomatic relations September 6, 1961.”

If RGA accepts this modification in its Note you authorized agree exchange and publication.

Department recognizes possible public reactions in US if Afghans refuse alter their note, and aid goods now in Pakistan are held up indefinitely. Nevertheless Department reiterates belief that yielding to Afghan demand to publish political propaganda in these circumstances would increase difficulties of future dealings with Afghans and understand-ably affect GOP willingness cooperate in moving goods.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-1262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Weil and Naas; cleared by Talbot, McGeorge Bundy, Assistant Legal Adviser for Near East and South Asian Affairs Warren E. Hewitt, and with AID; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Karachi and Tehran. An attached handwritten note from the Secretary's Special Assist-ant Emory Swank to Rusk indicates that this telegram arose out of the previous evening's meeting with President Kennedy.

1 See Document 49.

2 Document 81.

92. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 92. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, January 12, 1962, 10:56 p.m.

256. Eyes Only Ambassador. President, who considered transit trade impasse January 11, desires USG should continue maximum efforts to assist resolution this dispute. He is agreeable using some funds meet commitment in US draft note to Afghans re utilization Iranian route. However in view fact Afghans have capability of permitting entry aid goods via cheaper traditional route, President is opposed to use of Iranian route at added costs over extended period.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.9OD/1-1262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Talbot and Weil; cleared by Hewitt, Gaud, and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Karachi and Tehran.

93. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 93. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, January 15, 1962, 6:14 p.m.

2383. Deliver following to MEA soonest for Nehru.

Begin verbatim text:

“Dear Mr. Prime Minister: You know of my deep concern over relations between Pakistan and India and my firm conviction that peace and progressive development for the people of Asia require a resolution of problems as between these two countries. These problems, and particularly that of Kashmir, are difficult. But in the last fifteen years numerous and important issues between Pakistan and India have been resolved. It would surely be a tragic error of pessimism to assume that nothing can ever be accomplished on the one major problem that now remains. Above all it would be a misfortune if the search for solution by the statesmen most concerned were at any stage to be impeded by the desire of anyone else to exploit controversy for its own sake.

In recent months I have talked with the leaders of both countries. It is my sincere belief, influenced I do not doubt by my feelings of friendship for both heads of state, that a real possibility of accommodation does exist. This possibility will not be served by public debate and recrimination. It can be served by patient and continuing discussion and negotiation. In this effort the United States willingly proposes the services of a good and sympathetic friend. We have a deep and active concern for the peace and development of both countries and we cannot be without interest in the external dangers which they face in common. So I am writing to inquire whether you would be willing to request a trusted friend of both countries—I have in mind Mr. Eugene Black of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, who would be prepared to respond to such a request—to explore with each head of government the outlines and prospects for negotiations and discussions which hopefully might lead to a final resolution of this troubled and contentious matter. If you agree to this approach, I would, of course, expect that other steps which would work against, rather than for, a solution—including an appeal to the Security Council of the United Nations—would be suspended. And I would also hope that, in a spirit of reconciliation, responsible leaders on both sides might avoid work or action that would be prejudicial to the settlement we seek.

I am sending a letter in similar terms to President Ayub.1

Sincerely, John F. Kennedy”

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-1562. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Talbot, cleared by Ball and McGeorge Bundy, and approved in S/S by Melvin L. Manfull. Repeated to Karachi.

1 Transmitted in telegram 1398 to Karachi, January 15. (Ibid., 711.11-KE/1-1562)

94. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 94. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, January 15, 1962, 8:09 p.m.

260. From the Secretary. Kabul's 452.1 I understand how difficult your official and personal position has become as result events past three weeks and I appreciate your willingness delay departure. Before getting to specifics regarding your meeting with Naim, I believe following observations may help remove any misunderstanding our position.

In our strenuous efforts serve Afghan and American interests by keeping aid flowing to Afghanistan despite troublesome Pak-Afghan dispute, we have never been willing to let Afghanistan use these efforts for propaganda advantage against Pakistan or vice versa. We object to being associated with publication of Afghan note only because terms “illegal” and “Pakistan and Peshawar, Chaman and Quetta” carry legal meaning which we cannot accept. Afghanistan's insistence on retaining these terms has increasingly suggested to us Afghans intend use them propagandistically. Therefore we cannot now agree to joint publication notes if these terms remain.

We have no other objection to the Afghan note. We would agree publication of notes jointly if these terms deleted or we would agree to other alternative procedures specified below. Our prime immediate object remains to get border open so aid goods now in Pakistan can be moved directly into Afghanistan.

FYI. At time President authorized some funds for added costs transit reported Deptel 2562 to honor our pledge to use Iran route as a temporary alternative to the traditional route through Pakistan, the subject of authorizing funds for backhauling of aid goods via Iran or India was not raised. However he takes firm position we have made all advisable concessions to Afghan's sensibilities and if these insufficient to move stalled aid goods we will reconsider aid program. End FYI.

In view foregoing US prepared follow any one of following three courses of action in conjunction with RGA. Latter two are successive fall-back positions if first proposal not acceptable RGA.

A. The US will agree to the publication of exchange notes if para 3 RGA note revised to remove political content. We do not regard our language Deptel 255 as sacrosanct as long as political allusions mentioned para two above omitted.

B. The US will agree to confidential exchange of RGA note as presently phrased and revised US draft (Kabul tel 451)3 with subsequent RGA press release along lines suggested Deptel 247.4 US also willing, if you believe it might be helpful, agree associating itself with RGA in joint communique along same lines as press release—i.e. without reference political issues. Within these limits you authorized use your discretion in agreeing on language press release or communique.

C. Failing obtain agreement on either above proposals, you may tell Naim US will not object to RGA publication by itself of RGA note as originally drafted. In this case either Embassy or RGA could issue press release (preferably before publication RGA note) acceptable to you stating that negotiations have been held, and that the border will be temporarily reopened. Mention of Iran route in this release also authorized if necessary Under this procedure RGA accepts our note which remains confidential and basis of agreement.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-1462. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Naas, Gatch, and Talbot; cleared by Hewitt, Gaud, Ball, and Bromley Smith; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Karachi.

1 In telegram 452 from Kabul, January 14, Byroade expressed himself as “gravely disappointed” in what he saw as a change in the Department's position as outlined in telegram 255 to Kabul (Document 91). He felt that to demand new changes in the Afghan note would be to risk the loss of an opportunity for a breakthrough in the transit impasse, and would encourage the Afghan Government to maintain a rigid position. (Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-1462)

2 Document 92.

3 Telegram 451 from Kabul, January 12, transmitted the text of the U.S. note, as revised in accordance with instructions from Washington. The Embassy also confirmed that the Afghan note remained identical to the note initially transmitted in telegram 429 from Kabul (Document 81), except for the substitution of January 22 for January 15 as the date on which the border would be opened for the transit of U.S. aid material. (Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-1262)

4 Document 86.

95. Letter From President Kennedy to Prime Minister Nehru 95. Letter From President Kennedy to Prime Minister NehruSource

Washington, January 18, 1962.

Dear Mr. Prime Minister: I appreciate your writing me at length and in personal vein on the Goan matter.1 Your letter, incidentally, was delayed in transmittal and it reached my desk only in the last few days.

You have my sympathy on the colonial aspects of this issue. There is, I am sure, a feeling in your part of the world that this is a matter we do not quite understand. I believe we do understand. Sometimes, perhaps, we are inclined to talk a little too unctuously about the colonial origins of the United States, now nearly two centuries in the past. But, like many others, I grew up in a community where the people were barely a generation away from colonial rule. And I can claim the company of most historians in saying that the colonialism to which my immediate ancestors were subject was more sterile, oppressive, and even cruel than that of India. The legacy of Clive was on the whole more tolerable than that of Cromwell.

But I should like to say a word about the more immediate issue, that of the effect of the Goan episode on the relations between our two countries. It has not been good, but there may be useful lessons from the experience.

One difficulty was, of course, that the action followed so soon after your visit. I had naturally hoped that the candor of our exchange might have extended to all of the problems with which we were mutually concerned. I confess to a feeling that we should have discussed this problem; it is at least possible that if we had talked about it, our efforts to help prevent a solution by force could have been more helpful.

I have also been disturbed by the chain effect of this action on other parts of the world. Public opinion does not easily differentiate between the use of troops for good and bad purposes. And all countries, including of course the United States, have a great capacity for convincing themselves of the full righteousness of their particular cause. No country ever uses force for reasons it considers unjust.

Probably we should be glad of the existence of this adverse reaction, discriminating or otherwise, to the setting of armies in motion. We both want a world in which disputes are settled and oppression is ended by alternative means; it is good that on this matter opinion is with us. I fear that the episode in Goa will make it harder to hold the line for peace in other places.

But my major concern was and continues to be the effect of the action on our joint tasks, especially in terms of its impact on American opinion. Unfortunately the hard, obvious fact for our people was the resort to force—and by India. This was a shock to the majority who have admired your country's ardent advocacy of peaceful methods, and a reinforcement to those who did not enjoy what they called “irresponsible lectures.” Moreover, the action occurred at a time when our joint efforts in the Congo were subject to especially harsh criticism here and it added a new dimension of criticism. Critics asked how we could claim to work with you for peace in the Congo while force was being used by you in Goa. The action brought also some setback for our efforts to develop the strength of the United Nations and confidence in its effectiveness. In the next few weeks, as we seek authorization by the Congress to purchase the bonds of the United Nations, I fear we shall hear a good deal about the failure to find a non-violent solution in Goa. Yet the finances of the UN depend upon this action in our Congress.

There is also the problem of aid appropriations. This, I should make clear, is not a question of strings; nothing could be farther from my thought than to make our assistance to India Contingent on her acceptance of our particular wishes in foreign or domestic policy We seek to help develop independence, and independence exists to be used. Still we must both weigh the effects of action by one country on public opinion and political action in the other. We both lead countries that are not easily governed. You are justified in asking that American action be considerate of the problems of Indian democracy. I should not willingly do anything to make your problems more difficult—shall hope, when something bears on Indian public opinion, to consider this closely, and to be informed if I am ever indifferent. Similarly I think it is reasonable that American public opinion should be a subject of concern to you. Each year our appropriations to help, not India alone, but also the other developing countries of the world, involve our most difficult political battle. This aid is of prime importance—to help countries to independence, to show compassion for the less fortunate, to ease the strains and passions that arise from poverty. I hope that you will agree that we have a common concern in maintaining the political atmosphere and the public attitudes that are sympathetic to this effort. If India had large-scale aid programs to other countries, would you not face a similar problem if one of those countries should adopt a course of armed action? And what is worse is that these difficulties spread out and affect not just one country, but the whole principle of disinterested aid.

You and I stand for cooperation and understanding, but not all our countrymen agree with us—and some of them would like nothing better than to see our hopes disappointed. It is not an accident that the men who are taking most advantage of the Goa matter here are the same men who are already attacking our aid programs and our support of the UN. They are also the men who would noisily advocate certain armed adventures by the United States. I hate to see our common purposes impeded in this way.

I feel, Mr. Prime Minister, that you would wish me to write you candidly of matters as I see them. I do so in no mood of self-righteousness, and with no feeling that our own policy is above reproach. Indeed, I trust that you will continue to make clear in equal candor your views on matters of common concern. Meanwhile, you can count on me to do all that I can to ensure that any damage to our common interests is temporary. Good and fruitful relations with India have been a matter of great concern to me for many years, and I have taken satisfaction in the progress we were making together before this episode. I believe we can and must get back on this high road, and I shall work steadily toward this end.2

Sincerely,

JFK3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 1/15/62-3/31/62. No classification marking.

1 See footnote 1, Document 77.

2 Nehru responded on January 30 with a letter in which he reiterated his position with respect to Goa. He wrote that his government had weighed many of the considerations put forward in Kennedy's letter of January 18 and had taken a necessary action which was “the lesser of two evils.” Nehru's letter was delivered to the White House on February 6, under the cover of a note from the Indian Ambassador. (Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Countries Series, India, Security 1962)

3 Kennedy's initials appear in an unidentified hand, indicating Kennedy signed the original.

96. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State 96. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of StateSource

Kabul, January 18, 1962, 5 p.m.

459. For the Secretary. Your helpful message (Deptel 260)1 encoded Washington Monday night arrived at this post on Thursday morning. Hannah and I saw Naim and Etemadi at noon today.

Certainly agree that first alternative proposed by Department preferable solution and ordinarily would have been prepared stick at this as negotiating tactic in first meeting. However, in view of several local factors, including deplorable state situation as regards our contractors, decided to seek complete agreement today if at all possible. Following Naim's negative reaction successively to proposals contained in paragraphs A and B of Deptel 260, I therefore proceeded to that of paragraph C. Based on broad authority given me by your telegram, I have reached agreement with RGA along following lines: RGA note will be published and our reply will remain confidential. In finally agreeing to this alternative, I insisted upon change in last substantive paragraph of RGA note, as felt we should not accept phrase “on receipt of confirmative reply to this note” as this would imply that confirmation reply to entire contents had been made on behalf USG, whether privately or publicly. Naim agreed to following substitution: “on receipt of confirmation of the above mentioned statements made by Ambassador Byroade, the Royal Ministry, etc.” It seems to me that this is acceptable from our point of view as it in effect excludes our association from objectionable phrases RGA note and does not even indicate our reply given in write up. Of far less importance, the words “the traditional route of” were inserted between the words “through” and “Pakistan” in second paragraph Afghan note. The commencement date in numbered paragraph three was changed to January 29.

The text of our note remains in substance the same except for slight modification first sentence paragraph 2 which now reads as follows: “The Embassy notes that the RGA agrees to make arrangements for the entry of the above mentioned goods, and to cooperate fully in this effort.”

No other changes made except minor ones without substance for grammatical reasons or for assistance in translation. Order that exact text be available, Embassy will cable complete text to addressees this message. Both Afghan and Embassy notes will be dated January 18. Publication date for Afghan note was set for evening January 21, Kabul time.

Naim and I had rather confusing discussion on subject separate press release by US. This, of course, would merely be placed in USIS bulletin here and would not have normal significance in view absence International Press. It might, of course, be carried locally and picked up by Pakistanis. I agreed to wording given below for such possible statement. RGA does not care whether we use it or not. Will therefore leave decision up to Department, with comment that I would prefer to drop press release idea rather than try to renegotiate [garble]. It would not be published here until next Monday and would appreciate early guidance to post as to whether to use or not. Text follows:

“In recent discussions between the Royal Afghan Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ambassador Byroade, the American Ambassador reaffirmed the desire of the US to continue its aid programs in Afghanistan. The US has also stated that it is willing to utilize the transit route running through Iran while continuing to hope for resumption of transit via the traditional route through Pakistan.

“The Royal Afghan Government has decided to admit all US aid goods under the title of the USG or American or other foreign contractors, which are destined for the different aid projects in Afghanistan and which have been consigned through the port of Karachi but have been held up since September 6,1961. The USG has indicated its willingness to utilize its offices and its facilities to move these goods. The RGA has indicated its willingness to allow 8 weeks, beginning January 29, 1962, for the movement of these goods.”

I depart Kabul tomorrow morning2 convinced it was in our overall interest make this particular agreement, and greatly appreciate under-standing and help of Department to make agreement possible. I am sorry my clients seem so difficult to get along with. One can, perhaps, understand them a little more easily if he lives here but not much.

Byroade

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-1862. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Karachi and Tehran.

1 Document 94.

2 Byroade was replaced as Ambassador by John M. Steeves, who was appointed on February 7 and presented his credentials on March 20.

97. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 97. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, January 18, 1962, 9 p.m.

1221. Foreign Secretary Dehlavi called me to Foreign Office 6 p.m. today and handed me following message dated January 18 from President Ayub now in Sibi to President Kennedy. Comments contained immediately following message:

Begin Verbatim Text:

“Dear Mister President,

Please accept my sincere thanks for your message of January 15,1 on the Kashmir issue.

I would also like to express to you my gratitude for the deep concern and interest that you have shown over the relations between Pakistan and India and the efforts that you have been personally making to bring about negotiations between the two countries to relieve the dispute, which is, as you have truly said, the one major problem that now remains between the two countries.

I entirely agree with you that it would be a tragic error to assume that this problem cannot be settled. I do not think I should tire you by setting forth the efforts that I have been making during the last three years to persuade Prime Minister Nehru to enter into direct negotiations with me, to find an equitable and realistic solution of the Kashmir dispute. At no time, however, have I had any assurance that the Indian leader was ready to enter into discussions with me except on his own terms.

You have inquired whether I would be willing to request a trusted friend of both India and Pakistan—Mister Eugene Black—to explore with Mister Nehru and myself, the prospects for negotiations and discussions which might lead to a final solution of the problem. I am deeply grateful to you for this constructive initiative and I welcome it as yet another manifestation of the deep concern of the United States and yourself personally for the peaceful existence and well-being of the peoples of the sub-continent.

I know Mister Black to be a man of high stature in international life and as a statesman who has given proof of his talents for mediation and conciliation.

While my final answer to your inquiry must necessarily be formulated after taking into consideration Prime Minister Nehru's reactions, I consider your offer to assist in negotiations between Pakistan and India by making available the good offices of a trusted statesman of international prestige as one that I could readily accept.

You have said that if I agree with the approach to the Kashmir problem suggested by you, you would expect that the appeal of Pakistan to the Security Council would be suspended. I must, of course, attach the utmost weight and importance to any suggestion that you feel it necessary to make. At the same time, may I assure you that the decision of my government to make the appeal has been prompted solely with a view to ending the intolerable impasse in which the question of self-determination of the people of Kashmir has become embedded for the past 13 years.

There is another consideration of a basic nature which is at the back of our appeal to the Security Council. The political independence and territorial integrity of Pakistan, and indeed its very existence, have never been free from threat by India. Confident of its growing strength and encouraged by the failure of the world to thwart its successful recourse to force in the past, our colossal neighbor has become more emboldened than ever to proclaim its aggressive intentions towards Pakistan. Since the danger of an armed attack by India is real and ever present to us, Pakistan is under the obligation and has indeed the right to invoke the political and moral protection of the United Nations. in the attempt to safeguard its security. It would be neither wise nor statesmanlike, for comparatively small countries like Pakistan, to discard the instrumentality of the United Nations whenever they feel themselves threatened by more powerful neighbors. Therefore, our motivation in appealing to the Security Council flows from our deep concern for the future of our country, and from our anxiety to guard against a mounting threat to its very existence. That this threat has become more grave and imminent is manifest not only from the recent statements of the Indian Prime Minister, the Defense Minister, Mister Krishna Menon, and the President of the Ruling Congress Party, Mister Sanjiva Reddy, but also from the fact that 85 percent of the Indian Armed Forces, including their armoured formations, are now concentrated within striking distance of our borders. This situation is causing grave concern in Pakistan.

I hope you appreciate that in the circumstances suspending our proposed action in the Security Council at this stage would shock public opinion in Pakistan and provoke severe criticism as [of] the value of our present alignments. This is scarcely desirable, particularly at this time when we are about to introduce our constitution.

The Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations is an eminent statesman and I have no doubt that insofar as his interventions in the Security Council are concerned, they will rise above the level of mere controversy and recrimination.

Yours sincerely

Mohammed Ayub Khan.”

End Verbatim Text.

Rountree

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-1862. Secret; Niact; Eyes Only; Limit Distribution. Repeated to New Delhi and USUN.

1 See footnote 1, Document 93.

98. National Security Action Memorandum No. 125 98. National Security Action Memorandum No. 125Source

Washington, January 22, 1962.

TO

The Honorable Fowler Hamilton

Administrator

Agency for International Development

SUBJECT

Pakistan Consortium

I have made the determination requested by you in your memorandum of January 18, 19621 with respect to the Pakistan Second Five-Year Plan. In it you are authorized to make a pledge at the forthcoming Pakistan Consortium meeting which would bring our contribution up to $500 million out of the $945 million needed by Pakistan, subject to a number of conditions. One of these conditions is that pledges from other Consortium members must be sufficient to assure that the target will be substantially met.2

I am concerned at the prospect that the total amount of the pledges as indicated so far may be insufficient to meet the agreed upon target, since a failure to provide what competent analysts have determined to be Pakistan's needs would seriously weaken the image of the United States and the West as determined to advance the development of our staunchest partners. In the event that a shortfall threatens, therefore, I would like you to consult with me immediately in order to determine what steps may best be taken.

Sincerely,

John F. Kennedy3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 125. No classification marking. Copies were sent to the Secretary of State, the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, and the President of the Export-Import Bank.

1 Not found.

2 The conditions established by President Kennedy were met when the Pakistan consortium reconvened in Washington on January 24, under the auspices of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The consortium, which had initiated consideration of Pakistan's development plan in June 1961, endorsed Pakistan's request for $945 million in aid for the years 1961/1962 and 1962/1963. Of the $945 million, the United States committed to provide $500 million. (Telegram 1496 to Karachi, January 26; Department of State, Central Files, 890D.00/1-2662)

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Kennedy signed the original.

99. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 99. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, January 26, 1962, 2:46 p.m.

1495. Following based on uncleared memcon:

During call on President Jan 24 Amb Ahmed expressed Pakistan's heightened fears of India's aggressive intentions against Pakistan-held portions Kashmir and Pakistan itself. Citing recent statements by Jha, Menon, Reddy, Nehru and in GOI booklet “Kashmir and United Nations,” Amb argued GOI believes that prospective Soviet veto would protect it against adverse Security Council action and that Allies would be fearful of coming to Pakistan's aid if latter attacked lest general nuclear war result. Emphasized that Pakistan has always felt India to be aggressive. President, questioning validity of these views, pointed out that for India Pakistan is very different matter from Goa. Goa action over in 24 hours; no one thinks India could deal with Pakistan that way.

Speaking along lines of aide-memoire presented Dept January 3 (Deptel 1294 to Karachi),1 Amb said Pakistan asking USG to consider how GOI can be deterred from aggressiveness.

Pak had suggested (1) US terminate 1951 military sales agreement with India, since India violated agreement by Goa aggression; (2) US review quantum of aid to India, which at present levels (along with aid from other Western countries) frees India's entire foreign exchange earnings for military purchases and other domestic needs outside development program; (3) public restatement of past assurances that US would come to Pakistan's aid if it attacked; and (4) stepped up military assistance to strengthen Pakistan against Indian threat. Amplifying these requests, Amb said Pak would not oppose future US military aid to India if USG convinced India sincerely proposing oppose ChiComs but Paks doubt India seriously intend take on ChiComs. He urged importance of deterrent actions because any new fighting over Kashmir would not be localized. To contrary, it would become total war between India and Pakistan involving not only armed forces but massacres of Muslim minority in India and doubtless reprisals against Hindu minority in Pakistan. Ambassador said Pak recognizes subcontinent will stand or fall as whole since neither India nor Pakistan can withstand Sino-Soviet Bloc pressures alone. Pak does not regard itself as unduly pessimistic in appraising apparent Indian intentions since it is going by what Indian leaders themselves say.

President replied he not persuaded that likelihood of an attack by India was demonstrated by Goa action or by statements cited by Amb, even though we all know Krishna Menon and what he is like. Our concern with Indo-Pak dispute has led us, however, to suggest that Eugene Black might make helpful contribution. If both countries accept him, we hopeful of results though unlikely Black could do much till after Indian elections. Amb responded that Pakistan welcomes this suggestion though not very optimistic about its success because of India's apparent lack of desire to settle Kashmir issue.

Amb told President Pakistan public has noticed that USG has repeatedly given public assurance to India of American support if Pakistan should attack India but has given no comparable public assurances to Pakistan. Talbot intervened to explain assurances to India based on condition that if US aid to Pakistan is misused and directed against another country in aggression US would take appropriate action to thwart such aggression. Amb agreed this initial official USG statement but said some US spokesman in years past had omitted that condition and given India full assurances. He added Pakistan knows USG acting from highest motives and that Pakistan and US desires are the same, but believed public assurances to Pakistan now would have helpfully deterrent effect on Indian leadership.

President expressed our deep concern that full effects US aid siphoned off into disputes between two countries. Said we feel our aid goes down drain; that is why we suggested Black mission. Added we have no evidence that Indo-Pak situation now likely to degenerate into war.

President referred Pakistan consortium meeting. Said he had received Ayub's letter2 and answered it.3 USG bringing maximum effort to bear on other contributors to consortium as he hoped Pakistan aware; but USG would not make up any deficiency in their contributions. Other donors have their problems, so does USG. Amb acknowledged that Pakistan aware of and grateful for USG efforts in this consortium.

President commented further on dimensions our aid programs in India and Pakistan, which larger than whole Alliance for Progress this year. This true even though whole development assistance effort this hemisphere falls on US: no European nations contribute as they do to aid programs in subcontinent. Thus extremely important our aid be well used. US extremely disappointed at Indo-Pak troubles. We know how Krishna Menon, for example, exploits them, but from the point of view of the world as well as the two countries a last great effort should be made to resolve the Kashmir dispute. Otherwise, we could see that the fighting that might occur in the subcontinent would be except for a nuclear war the worst kind of war involving millions of people.

Ambassador expressed concern at reports that USG “would not take sides” on Kashmir issue. Said Pakistan not asking USG to take sides but only to support right of self-determination of peoples and let that right be exercised in Kashmir. Pakistan fully aware of the need to settle disputes with India and anxious to do so. Pakistani people uneasy, how-ever, because impression been given that US reaction to Goa was a directive to New Delhi saying that because India vital to US there will be no change in US policy toward India. Pak public also worried by reports US pressing Pakistan not go to Security Council. President said he is not aware of any special directive but of course we wish to continue friendly relationship with India as well as with Pakistan. As for Security Coun- cil hearing of the Kashmir case the Pakistan Govt knows our attitude full well.

On self-determination of peoples President commented that we don't have power to enforce UN resolutions unilaterally nor would Pakistan expect us to. On Goa, he said, US opinion is clear and will have an effect on our relationship with India for a long time. He thought Goa action could affect our entire aid program. Ambassador commented that consequences of Goa not merely economic, though that could be important Graver situation is fact that bulk of both India and Pakistan's armies are concentrated against each other and consequently immobilized against greater threat from north.

President noted that Ambassador had been somewhat critical of USG policies, at least by implication, but he sure Ambassador recognizes we are not always able to persuade others to do the things we wish, as for example our difficulty in persuading Pakistan of the rightness of our views on such matters as Red China, Afghanistan and Security Council action. Amb answered that on Chinese representation Pakistan had virtually eaten its words, despite promises to support Chinese Communist admission this year. Ayub had instructed Pakistan delegation at our request to vote for Chinese representation as “important issue.” President said he was thinking specifically of over-all issue of Chinese representation, but in generally merely wanted to point out that even its friends do not always see eye to eye with US, though US and Pakistan do pretty well together. Expressed his pleasure that Amb had come to see him and said he would consider Amb's comments though he thought Amb now pretty well understood his feelings.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-2662. Confidential. Drafted by Talbot, cleared by Kaysen, and approved by Talbot. Also sent to New Delhi.

1 See footnote 1, Document 87.

2 In a message delivered to Kennedy on January 16 through the Pakistani Embassy, Ayub referred to his discussions with Kennedy concerning economic assistance during his visit to Washington in July 1961. He recalled the understanding reached at the January 1962 meeting of the Pakistan consortium that the U.S. contribution would be a minimum of $500 million. Ayub noted that Pakistan had used what influence it had with the other members of the consortium to try to ensure that they would collectively provide the remaining $445 million, which he considered essential to Pakistan's economic development plans for fiscal years 1962-1963. If those contributions fell short of that amount, Ayub requested U.S. assistance in bringing the combined contributions to a total of $945 million. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, Subjects, Ayub Correspondence, 1/30/61-1/16/62)

3 On January 20, the Embassy in Karachi was instructed to inform Ayub, in response to his January 16 message, that Kennedy had instructed U.S. officials to make every effort to assure a successful consortium meeting, but the United States could not make up any shortfall in contributions from other members of the consortium. (Telegram 1440 to Karachi, January 20; Department of State, Central Files, 711.11-KE/1-1662)

100. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 100. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, January 26, 1962, 6:36 p.m.

1500. You authorized transmit following letter from President to Ayub:

“Dear Mr. President:

I have given close and sympathetic consideration to your several recent messages on developments in South Asia. Ambassador Rountree has Is reported fully to me on your conversation with him on 7 January, 1962.1 In turn, I have just personally discussed the many issues mutually confronting us with Ambassador Aziz Ahmed.

As a firm ally, Pakistan is entitled to the reaffirmation you have requested of the prior assurances given by the United States to Pakistan on the subject of aggression against Pakistan. My Government certainly stands by these assurances. I trust that you will agree, however, that a public statement to this effect would not be fruitful at this juncture.

In closing, let me reiterate my confidence in the ability of our two nations, working closely together, to achieve our common goals.

With warm personal regards, John F. Kennedy“

Inform Dept transmittal date.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.11-KE/1-2662. Secret; Niact; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Gatch; cleared by Hewitt, McGhee (in substance), and Bromley Smith; and approved by Talbot.

1 Rountree returned to Washington on January 7 and presumably reported directly to Kennedy on his conversation with Ayub. No record of Rountree's meeting with Kennedy has been found.

101. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 101. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, January 27, 1962, 2:57 p.m.

1505. Dept wishes take every feasible step exploit first break in impasse to achieve permanent solution. Believe your impending departure1 provides favorable opportunity to explore this problem and lines of resolution with Ayub. If your agenda for January 29 meeting crowded, you should seek at least one more session devoted solely to transit dispute. You will be able judge by Ayub's reaction whether you should press for some agreement in principle from GOP on possible solution or confine your efforts preparing ground for your successor. In light vigorous US effort get GOI to negotiating table on Kashmir and in wake successful consortium, seems at least possible Ayub may be in receptive mood on Afghan matter. In mentioning Kashmir and consortium, you might say you would like to leave Pakistan with at least a constructive start towards solution transit dispute. This is particularly true because of President Kennedy's deep interest in issue. It would be gratifying to be able to make favorable report upon your return to Washington.

At your discretion, present US views to Ayub in following general framework: 1. US considers temporary reopening significant break in dispute and notes with satisfaction cooperative attitude adopted by GOP. In interest of both countries, we think strenuous efforts should be made keep border open permanently on mutually acceptable basis. RGA has made forward step and we are confident GOP can also make step in return without doing damage either to its interests or public position.

2. We are increasingly concerned over way Soviets are exploiting situation. In addition to Soviet gains previously cited, we now have reliable reports of significant increase in Soviet activity with Afghan armed forces. All this helps no one but the Soviets. US belief has been strongly reinforced that best way to counter Soviet influence in Afghanistan is with vigorous US presence exemplified by US assistance programs.

3. Before going into specifics regarding possible solutions, at this point you should request Ayub give his present views on situation.

4. If Ayub still appears adamant on possible new moves toward Afghanistan, you should urge him at least make early appropriate public statement expressing his pleasure that border is open for aid goods and reaffirming GOP position on Afghan right of transit.

5. If Ayub appears receptive to discussing ways keeping border open, you should outline proposal in following paragraph and say you are prepared discuss details later at working level.

6. One major obstacle in resolving present impasse is RGA insistence on having Afghan officials performing freight forwarding duties in Pakistan and GOP refusal allow RGA reopen trade agencies and consulates on previous basis because of improper activities reportedly carried out by previous officials. US suggests some arrangement by which GOP would permit small offices officially designated as Freight Forwarding Offices be opened in Peshawar and Quetta manned by Afghan officials with consular status but not designated as consuls. In granting exequaturs, GOP would exercise sovereign right of determining whether any particular official acceptable. It would be understood from outset that if offices functioned mutually satisfactorily for reasonable length of time—e.g., six months—they would be expanded to perform full consular services and redesignated consulates with freight forwarding sections. Trade agencies as previously constituted, would never be reopened, and all functions would be integrated in one office. Again providing everything went smoothly, after reasonable period offices in Chaman and Parachinar might be reopened. US believes foregoing plan would protect GOP security interests and allow RGA retain enough of its public position to accept safeguarding restrictions implicit in exequatur process. At some point in proceedings resumption diplomatic relations would be presumed.2

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-2762. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Gatch, cleared by Bromley Smith and with AID, and approved by Talbot.

1 Rountree left Pakistan on February 7. He was replaced as Ambassador by Walter P. McConaughy, who was appointed on March 1 and presented his credentials on March 20.

2 Rountree saw Ayub on January 30 and discussed the transit dispute along the lines of the instructions in this telegram. He found Ayub adamant against the idea of establishing freight forwarding stations in Peshawar and Quetta, but willing to consider issuing a statement expressing pleasure that the border had been reopened. (Telegram 1300 from Karachi, January 31; Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/1-3161)

102. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 102. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, January 29, 1962, 4 p.m.

2243. Deptel 2541.1 Desai called me in 3 p.m. today and handed me copy Nehru's reply to President dated January 27. Letter three pages long and contains fourteen paragraphs. In order provide Department soonest with substance of reply, quoted below in full are first two paragraphs and also paragraphs 9 through 14. Paragraphs 3 through 8 are largely historical recital and will be sent in separate telegram.2

Begin text

[This letter has not been declassified by the Indian Government.]

Timmons

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-2962. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution.

1 In telegram 2541 to New Delhi, January 28, the Department requested that the Embassy cable the full text or excerpts of the letter from Nehru to Kennedy, which the Embassy had previously indicated had been sent to the Indian Embassy in Washington for delivery to the White House. (Ibid., 690.91/1-2862)

2 Telegram 2247 from New Delhi, January 29. (Ibid, 690D.91/1-2962) The full text of the letter is in the Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Countries Series, India, Security, 1962.

103. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 103. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, January 31, 1962, 12:42 p.m.

2576. President had hour's talk with BK Nehru this afternoon when latter presented Nehru letter stating impossibility GOI accept Black mission. President expressed his keen disappointment, pressed Ambassador as to whether this final word from GOI, which latter claimed was case. At end talk, question of statement to press arose, with problem its negativeness on basis latter. President inquired whether statement could not be withheld here, and GOI itself make statement. He suggested elements for inclusion in such statement as follows: appreciation US concern; admiration for Black; preference for bilateral negotiations; renewal of invitation to Ayub, if possible with Nehru statement he willing meet Ayub anywhere on this problem. Ambassador promised cable Delhi at once urging such GOI statement. USG will withhold statement on meeting with President until reply received.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-3162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Talbot and Horgan, cleared by Bromley Smith, and approved by Manfull (S/S). Also sent to Karachi and USUN.

104. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 104. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, February 23, 1962, 6 p.m.

2621. Ambassador Bowles accompanied by Ambassador Galbraith called on Prime Minister Nehru this noon.1 RK Nehru, MJ Desai also present Bowles used occasion to give Prime Minister account of political situation in Iran and more briefly on Ethiopia including meeting of Economic Committee for Africa. Emphasis in the discussion on prospects for land and other reforms, more liberal policies in two countries and better balance between economic and military aid. Discussion then shifted to Communist china where Indians share view that food situation is extremely serious and related to organic problems in agricultural organization complicated by rapid increase in population. Passing discussion of possibility of Chinese approach to US for food grains and whether this could be made part of bargain [apparent omission] tension should it come about. In response to direct question by Galbraith Prime Minister said there had been no move by Chinese to resume discussion of the Northern Frontier but in recent weeks the tone of other Chinese communications had become markedly more conciliatory. Bowles took occasion to stress our desire to avoid UN ruckus on Kashmir, relating this to the considerable feeling in US that India and Pakistan were using American aid to arm against each other. Prime Minister noted they had no desire for UN debate and added that Dayal had gone back to Karachi with instructions to renew invitation to Ayub to come to New Delhi for talks after the election. Galbraith noted that we would undoubtedly continue to stress with Pakistanis that this was fruitful alternative to New York debate.

Discussion touched on other topics including East Pakistan dissent, problems of population policy and election. Atmosphere amiable and provided useful occasion for getting across number of important American views.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.00/2-2362. Confidential. Repeated to Karachi and USUN.

1 Bowles visited South Asia during a trip that included stops in Africa, the Near East, and East Asia. The trip began on February 8 and concluded on March 19 following Bowles' participation in meetings in Tokyo of the U.N. Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East. Bowles visited India February 23-27, Afghanistan February 27-March 2, and Paki-stan March 2-5.

105. Memorandum of Conversation 105. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, February 28, 1962.

SUBJECT

Courtesy Call on the President by Ambassador Nehru

PARTICIPANTS

HE B.K. Nehru, Ambassador of India

The President

James P Grant, Deputy Assistant Secretary, NEA

The courtesy call on the President by Ambassador Nehru before his departure for two weeks' consultation in India started with a brief discussion of Mrs. Kennedy's trip to India1 and of the Indian elections. The President then raised the subjects of Kashmir, Vietnam and the resumption of nuclear testing.

The President asked about the possibility of a meeting between Prime Minister Nehru and President Ayub on the Kashmir problem. The Ambassador stated that he had seen an unconfirmed press report that President Ayub had accepted the Prime Minister's invitation for direct talks between them and expressed his personal view that such a meeting would be helpful. He then noted that the Kashmir problem impinged on the broader subject of US-Indian relations. The Ambassador said that the major positive factor working for an improvement in relations between the United States and India is American economic aid to India. However, the appreciation for this assistance was more on an intellectual level and actions on an emotional level frequently had a greater impact on relations between countries.

At the emotional level, in his judgment, there were two factors working against improved US-Indian relations. One was of a temporary nature and the other of a longer-run nature. He stated that the temporary reaction in the United States and in Western Europe against the takeover of Goa by India was being widely misinterpreted in India. Indian public opinion is virtually unanimous in the conviction that the Indian action with respect to Goa was right, and the adverse reaction in the United States and Western Europe was being interpreted as support for colonialism. The longer-run problem was the image in the Indian public mind that the United States was giving preferential treatment to Pakistan and the United States through its military support to Pakistan has caused a diversion of Indian resources to defense. This latter problem is further complicated by Kashmir and the Pakistani actions on this subject in the Security Council. The Indian public has the image of United States support to Pakistan on this issue and of Soviet support to India. Furthermore, the Ambassador concluded, as matters now stand, India needs the support of the USSR veto in the Security Council on Kashmir.

The President replied that while we do not support Pakistan per se as a matter of principle in the Security Council on Kashmir, we are aware of the problems that the raising of this issue in the Security Council causes for us and that is a major reason for our reluctance to see the issue debated in the United Nations. On the question of military assistance to Pakistan, the President said it would be better in many ways if all our aid to Pakistan were in the form of economic assistance as it is to India. However, this is not possible for a number of reasons, a major one being that the Executive Branch cannot get enough money out of Congress for economic assistance.

The President noted that the reactions in this country on Goa have been intensified by the preacher role adopted by India on many international issues, and by Krishna Menon in particular. He said, also, that we are in a very difficult position with Portugal because of our statements on Angola and Goa. He noted that the Azores was the site of extremely important facilities for the United States and there were many in the United States who could not understand our jeopardizing such vital facilities for such apparently remote issues as Angola. He thought that the reaction on Goa was now becoming gradually a matter of the past in the United States and hoped that Mrs. Kennedy's trip to India would serve as a major antidote there.

The Ambassador stated that his government had noted and was appreciative of the President's public stance on Goa. His Government also recognized the importance of the Azores facilities to the United States. He expressed the hope that the President and his staff could allay the adverse Congressional reaction to the Goa takeover. The President said it would be most helpful with Congress if Krishna Menon would tone down his statements and actions which create such resentment here.

The President then stated that we would like nothing better than to withdraw from South Vietnam and return to the Geneva Accords but this would be possible only if North Vietnam would withdraw from South Vietnam. As it now stands, we have no alternative to our present military support and cannot disengage until we see the situation improve in Laos and South Vietnam. He stated that we are conscious of the dangers involved in the steps we are now taking in South Vietnam, but we are also conscious of the dangers of non-action.

On the subject of United States resumption of nuclear testing, the President stated a decision was imminent. He noted that unless the Soviets are willing to sign a test treaty of the type presented in April we have no alternative but to resume testing. In response to the Ambassador's question as to whether such tests by the United States were necessary for military purposes, the President replied strongly in the affirmative.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 3/1/62-3/31/62. Secret. Drafted by Grant. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.)

1 Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy represented the President on a trip to India and Pakistan in March. She visited India March 13-20 and Pakistan March 21-26. Extensive documentation on the trip is in Department of State, Central File 711.11-KE. See also the full account of the India segment of the trip in John Kenneth Galbraith, Ambassador's Journal (Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 1969), pp. 275-289.

106. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State 106. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of StateSource

Kabul, March 3, 1962, 2 p.m.

529. On March 1 Ambassador Bowles interviewed Prime Minister Daud and also had talks with Minister Finance Malikyar and Minister of Mines Yusuf.1

In hour and quarter talk with Daud, Bowles gave tour d'horizon stating administration desire reassess problems troubling Asia and Middle East. Re Pakistan Bowles discussed generally theory underlying US military commitments saying that while some had advocated these commitments as essential offset to Soviet pressure, others had feared they might upset regional balance. Any event commitments had been made and must be honored although relative emphasis on economic and military aspects may gradually be changed.

As Daud clearly preferred leave initiative to Bowles to guide conversation latter then moved into specific fields. Discussed historic Afghan devotion to independence and neutrality and hard lessons of Afghan history. Alluding to current problem re transit, Bowles discussed in general terms possible Iranian routes and asserted desire help in Afghan second 5-year plan provided outlook for success of US effort and Afghan independence reasonably favorable. Said while he knew every effort would be made ensure US money would be well spent, there was concern in US over large number Russians in Afghanistan. Stated US does not desire enter bidding game against Soviets. Gave personal conviction that although Afghans have no intention of permitting Soviets take advantage Afghanistan, pressures may increase.

Daud repeated Afghan position that neutrality best policy for this country and that Afghan problems stemmed from area imbalance brought on by US military assistance to Pakistan stating in 1955. Hoped new administration would carefully study implications. Happy with Iranian cooperation and badly needs additional transit route but regards Pak route as vitally important. Said there no change RGA position on principle involved since Merchant mission.

Daud stressed Pushtunistan life and death issue. Pak pressures unbearable for Afghans and effects Pak policies extend far beyond Afghanistan. Reminded Bowles US arms being used by GOP contrary to stated US objectives and that it was these US weapons that had forced Afghanistan to go to Moscow for help after being refused US military help several years ago.

Bowles stressed US influence with GOP marginal and argued for gradual approach in resolving difficulties. US aid to GOP does not buy right to order GOP any more than Soviet aid to Afghanistan buy right to order RGA. Emphasized need for gradual reopening Pak route to meet needs presently beyond capacity Iranian routes. Daud agreed time heals many wounds but said Pak actions deliberately invite reaction and will continue do so regardless what government rules Afghanistan. “These problems cannot be solved by conceit or force.” Bowles repeated hope partial crack in door might be widened order help those who want help Afghanistan.

Warming up, Daud vigorously and pithily restated Afghan position: (1) RGA conceded no fault of it sown in current transit crisis which resulted from Pak action motivated by Ayub's conceit; (2) prime consideration in current temporary partial border opening was appreciation American help and friendship and desire not require US undertake circuitous re-routing goods in Pakistan; (3) Afghanistan has access through Soviet and Iran and even allowing for initial problems in utilization, Iranian route is still cheaper than Pak route; (4) RGA position on principles has not changed; (5) RGA needs aid from US and asked information year ago re overall future magnitude but still no answer. Any case this question separate from issues of principle or national honor which are difficult if not impossible to compromise.

Shifting topic Bowles remarked RGA understands US objectives and US understands Afghan objectives and asked Daud's view Soviet objectives here. Daud smilingly side stepped question admitting it difficult know basis Soviet objectives but so far Soviet behavior above reproach. Any event Afghanistan has not agreed nor would it agree accept Soviet programs based on objectives inconsistent Afghan independence. Daud again deplored fact military imbalance in area forced RGA devote considerable resources to military development which economically unproductive. While agreeing with Afghan motives and historical knowledge of Russians Bowles reminded Daud Soviet Russians today much more skillful, subtle and competent than Czarists a century ago.

In departing Bowles deliberately but casually suggested regional problems might be ultimately solved by containing them within larger framework as France and Germany had submerged their historic differences over Saar and Alsace under umbrella Common Market. Similarly common interests Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran and even India might be linked in some common market and arms control agreement which could help reduce present tensions in this area. Without commenting in detail Daud responded with rather surprising sympathy and expressed hope future might make such development practicable.

Main part of discussion with Malikyar devoted Helmand Valley development with Malikyar stating Afghan desires complete projects underway, increase production in developed areas by introduction machinery, fertilizer industry more electric power and new settlers. Bowles agreed mechanization might be desirable in such a thinly populated area where according Malikyar farmers average 50 acres per family. In discussing Iranian transit routes Malikyar especially interested in Shahbehar route but acknowledged advantages Bandar Abbas route. Agreed with need for reopening traditional Pak route which Afghans do not want to lose. Other hand he referred to Pak pressure which suddenly destroyed normal relations. Bowles emphasized US cannot control Paks but can only offer moderating counsel.

Following brief discussion second five-year plan Bowles said US desirous help Afghanistan in its plan but does not desire simply enter into an escalating competition with Soviets. If US could be sure that Soviet presence in Afghanistan could be stabilized and not allowed to increase endlessly and that there would be genuine effort to establish businesslike relationships with Paks Bowles would personally be inclined recommend that US help Afghanistan to exercise its right of free choice. While there is a risk such statement might be misunderstood as pressure in support Pak position on transit, Bowles felt there was justification for advancing this rather strong medicine. Malikyar demurred and commented Afghanistan would never submit pressure, was devoted to raising standard living, had provided Embassy information re development plans and would appreciate help.

In talk with Yusuf second five-year plan outlined in terms major financing components with reiteration RGA desire for some indication magnitude future US aid. Bowles outlined criteria on which countries divided in categories for determining whether suitable for long term commitments or modified commitments or project-by-project approach. Relationship Iranian and Pak routes discussed along lines indicated previously. Bowles drew attention risks dependence on USSR and described present Soviet low gear but massive approach Afghanistan as unique in world. We are concerned Soviet may gradually gain dominant influence through increasing number of people, ultimately resulting in absorption Afghanistan. Yusuf nodded understandingly and strongly emphasized Afghan determination secure its independence and explained reasons for avoiding alliances.

Comment: Afghans accorded Bowles a notably friendly and warm reception. They listened to his description of US policies with great interest and were generally responsive in conversation. Apart from discussions of specific topics believe Bowles visit was deeply appreciated by RGA as evidence US interest in Afghanistan and its problems. In responding to Bowles remarks on Afghan-Pak questions including transit impasse, Afghan leaders were particularly cautious to avoid saying anything which might compromise their position. Nevertheless, I believe Bowles comments on importance of fully opening Pak route and on importance maintaining 3 practical routes including Pak route did not fall on deaf ears. In his talks he sowed several seeds but given stoniness of Afghan political soil I expect it will be a few weeks before we will be able to observe any sprouting.

Hannah

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 789.5/3-362. Secret. Repeated to Karachi, Tehran, and Manila for Bowles.

1 In telegram 527 from Kabul, March 2, Bowles reported on his meetings on February 28 with King Zahir, Foreign Minister Naim, and Minister of Commerce Sherzad. (Ibid., 123-Bowles, Chester) Bowles summarized his conversations in Kabul and his impressions of the situation in Afghanistan in airgram A-359 from Karachi, March 6. He emphasized what he saw as the danger that Afghanistan had become “the immediate target for a totally new experiment in Soviet expansionism.” (Ibid., 611.89/3-662)

107. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 107. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, March 3, 1962, 5 p.m.

1509. From Bowles. Re New Delhi's 2621,1 2684, 2685 and 2686.2 Subsequent to first conversation with Nehru already reported in reference telegrams, I met in New Delhi with Nehru a second time, with Foreign Secretary Desai, General Kaul, Finance Minister Morarji Desai and (unexpectedly) Krishna Menon (at latter's request). Here is brief resume of pertinent points. (Details by Airgram):3

1. Southeast Asia: All Indian officials with whom I talked endorsed our present efforts in Laos and suggest that political settlement in South Vietnam may become possible if a neutral and independent Laos can be fully established. Even Menon strongly approved Harriman's efforts in Geneva and felt it could have broader implications. MJ Desai believes that if Laos settlement achieved it may be possible persuade Hanoi to agree to ease pressure on South Vietnam. He convinced continuing deepseated North Vietnamese suspicions of Chinese intentions strong restraining factor on all-out North Vietnamese effort. This impresses me as wishful thinking but the view is strongly held.

2. Kashmir: Indians appear reluctant take advantage present Pak difficulties over East Bengal and Afghanistan since they convinced Ayub may be more rather than less difficult deal with if his sense of insecurity grows and his other difficulties increase. Nehru hopeful Ayub will respond constructively to invitation visit India although not optimistic. Nehru convinced further UN discussion will be futile exercise from Pak point of view, and will demonstrate to Ayub his lack of support among Asians and Africans generally.

Comment: My impression is that possibility exceedingly slim achieving any real progress on Kashmir in immediate future unless Ayub becomes convinced by his other difficulties that time has come to cut his losses.

3. Chinese Communists: All Indians with whom I spoke and particularly Nehru showed deep appreciation Chinese threat. General Kaul asked me bluntly in great confidence whether we would come to India's aid in event open ChiCom armed invasion. I assured him that in my opinion we would do so. Kaul then urged that we engage in secret conversations with Indian military on contingency plans for such an eventuality, possibly under cover of three or four day visit New Delhi by some high level US military figure. In response my questions, Kaul insisted such talks should take place even if not fully sanctioned by Menon and/or Nehru. I suggested he pursue subject with Galbraith.

Comment: I was at first skeptical of Kaul's approach, thinking he may have been carrying out some obscure Menon play. However, was assured in New Delhi that Kaul has been showing more and more self-assurance and independence vis-a-vis Menon in recent months and appears to have confidence of the Prime Minister. Approach therefore may have been sincere, and should be given serious consideration.

4. My overriding impression was of tremendously increased Indian self-confidence, both in economic field and vis-a-vis China. Country is moving forward in economic field rapidly; increased decentralization of real political power to elected councils at village level achieved during last two-three years is very impressive sign of progress; problems in many areas which appeared to Indians almost insurmountable only three or four years ago are now being tackled vigorously. In the international field this confidence is greatly bolstering India's resolve vis-a-vis Chinese.

Hall

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.00/3-362. Secret. Repeated to New Delhi.

1 Document 104.

2 Telegrams 2684, 2685, and 2686, all dated February 27, reported on a conversation that Bowles and Galbraith had that morning with M.J. Desai. Telegram 2684 dealt with developments in Southeast Asia; telegram 2685 dealt with the Kashmir problem; and telegram 2686 dealt with Nepal. (Department of State, Central Files, 790.00/2-2762)

3 Airgram A-354 from Karachi, March 6, reported Bowles' second conversation with Nehru on February 26. He also met with Kaul on February 24, Morarji Desai on February 26, and Menon on February 27. (Ibid., 611.91/3-662)

108. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 108. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, March 4, 1962, 8 p.m.

1523. Embassy telegram 1520.1 Ambassador Bowles reviewed India-Pakistan relations with Ayub and MEA officials in separate meetings yesterday. Ayub expressed views similar those recent letter President Kennedy concerning Nehru and India,2 but indicated he might be prepared meet Nehru on Kashmir if fruitful preliminary meeting first held at official or ministerial level to prepare basis discussion.

Ambassador Bowles pressed Ayub and MEA officials to engage immediately direct talks on grounds atmosphere reasonably favorable and 50-50 odds Nehru may be forthcoming in discussions. He also urged MEA officials not to press for SC meeting and suggested reliance direct talks in lieu such effort. Foreign Secretary Dehlavi stated emphatically GOP intends press for SC consideration.

Tone Ayub's remarks about Nehru and deep suspicions of Indian long term intentions revealed by Ayub and MEA officers not encouraging, but suggestion preparatory talks at official or ministerial level may offer some hope if specific and satisfactory response forthcoming from Indians.

Full airgram report follows.3

Hall

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/3-462. Secret. Repeated to New Delhi and USUN.

1 Telegram 1520, March 4, reported that, in addition to problems relating to Pakistan's relations with India and Afghanistan, Ayub and Bowles had also discussed a draft of a constitution for Pakistan and their differing perspectives on policy toward China. (Ibid., 123-Bowles, Chester)

2 An apparent reference to Document 83.

3 Airgram A-358 from Karachi, March 6. (Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/3-662) Airgram A-357 from Karachi, March 6, reported on Bowles' discussions with Ayub and other Pakistani officials concerning Pakistan's relations with Afghanistan. Bowles reviewed his conversations in Kabul, and expressed his concern about increasing Soviet influence in Afghanistan. Ayub shared this concern and agreed that the restoration of normal relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan was important, but he felt that normal relations would be impossible until Afghanistan ceased agitation on the Pushtunistan issue. (Ibid., 611.89/3-662)

109. National Intelligence Estimate 109. National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, March 7, 1962.

NIE 37-62

AFGHANISTAN'S INTERNATIONAL POSITION1

The Problem

To estimate probable developments in Afghanistan's international position during the next few years.

Conclusions

1. The relative weight of Soviet influence in Afghanistan has grown in recent years and Afghanistan has been increasingly isolated from the West. These developments have been greatly facilitated by the Pushtunistan dispute with Pakistan, in which the USSR has emerged as Afghanistan's principal source of diplomatic support. The Bloc has also been the sole supplier of large quantities of arms and a, heavy investor in Afghan economic development. Although there is little reason to believe that the USSR will seek to cash in on its investment at an early date, it is now virtually assured of having the dominant foreign influence on Afghanistan's future. (Paras. 15-17, 21-24)

2. At the same time, Afghanistan will remain deeply concerned with the preservation of its independence and will continue to exercise its considerable skill in hedging Soviet influence. While probably already convinced that the US role will be a secondary one, Kabul will continue eager for US aid and maintenance of the US presence. In general, we are likely to have with us for a considerable future time an Afghanistan very like that we have known for the past few years. (Paras. 21, 24)

[Here follows a 5-page discussion section and a 2-page annex entitled “Pushtunistan.”]

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 79 R 01012A, ODDI Registry of NIE and SNIE Files, Box 212. Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet: “The following organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency, and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff.” All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in this estimate on March 7, except the Atomic Energy Commission representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

1 We believe that the fairly detailed analysis and estimate of the internal political situation in Afghanistan which is contained in Section I of NIE 53-59, “The Outlook for Afghanistan,” dated 22 September 1959, remains valid and that there is little of importance that could be added to it at the present time. [Footnote in the source text NIE 53-59 is printed in Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, vol. XV, pp. 287-292.]

110. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 110. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, March 13, 1962.

McGB:

FYI, our efforts resolve Pak/Afghan transit dispute entering new phase. With eight-week temporary border opening expiring 29 March, State has told Embassy Karachi to approach Paks on formula for extending interim agreement several months.1 (1) US expediters would continue at border posts; (2) Paks would allow Afghan trade commission in Karachi to document transit traffic (we think Paks would buy this); (3) pressure on both sides to explore resumption diplomatic relations and re-opening of consulates (this will be tougher nut, since it related more to Pushtoon issue itself than transit).

Above makes sense. I've kept gentle needle in on not losing transit time left to us. If above succeeds we've bought a little more time. But the big questions remain-how do we damp down overall dispute and how much do we spend in effort keep Afghanistan from being swallowed up. I'm still plugging.

Bob K.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert W. Komer, 3/62. Secret.

1 Telegram 1788 to Karachi, March 2. (Department of State, Central Files, 989.7190D/2-2762)

111. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot) and the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Acting Secretary of State Ball 111. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot) and the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Acting Secretary of State BallSource

Washington, March 16, 1962.

SUBJECT

Suggested Next Steps to be Taken by the U.S. Government in the Kashmir Dispute

Discussion:

At the present moment the Pakistan Government is considering whether to accept Prime Minister Nehru's invitation to President Ayub to come to Delhi, possibly in April, to discuss Kashmir. This invitation was conveyed by Rajeshwar Dayal, Indian High Commissioner in Karachi, on March 1 and allows for lower-level preliminary talks if desired by Pakistan. At the same time, Zafrullah Khan has indicated to us in New York that Pakistan intends to raise the question again in the Security Council “sometime this month,” a move which Pakistan states can be carried on in parallel with bilateral discussions with India. The Pakistan Embassy had requested a meeting with the Secretary for the Pakistan Ambassador and Zafrullah this week. In the Secretary's absence, the meeting would be with you. The first mutually convenient time, however, will not be until March 19 or later.

With the recent Presidential initiative on Kashmir, repeated expressions of American concern over the problem by the President, the Secretary and others, the completion of the Indian elections, and the publication of Ayub's Constitution, we believe a possibility exists for meaningful improvement in Indo-Pakistan relations through bilateral discussions on the Kashmir problem. We also believe a simultaneous consideration of this problem in the Secretary Council would be counterproductive and should be discouraged by us.

We, therefore, recommend the following sequence of actions by the U.S. Government. (A more detailed report of recent actions is attached as Tab B.)1

Recommendations:

1. That we continue to indicate privately to both the Indian and Pakistan Governments our belief that they should and can at the present time carry on meaningful and productive discussions about Kashmir bilaterally. Ayub should be urged to respond favorably to Nehru's invitation for direct Indo-Pakistan talks. Nehru, in turn, should be urged to respond favorably to any reasonable modifications proposed by Ayub.

2. That while making clear to the Pakistanis that the decision of whether they should press for an early Security Council consideration of the Kashmir issue is one for them to make, we should emphasize to Pakistan our conviction that a Security Council meeting prior to or during bilateral talks would jeopardize the prospects for any real progress in this dispute and would further diminish what minimal support there is for an attempted revival of the UNCIP resolution and Graham's recommendations concerning their implementation.

3. That the U.S. remain alert to identify opportunities whereby we can extend our informal good offices to both parties to get the talks started and to increase the prospects of success once begun. These informal good offices can be carried out through our Embassies in the two capitals, the Department in Washington, and senior U.S. officials traveling in the area.

4. That, if bilateral discussions fail to take place or are unproductive, we again offer U.S. good offices or assist the two countries to find a third party who may be able to assist them in achieving an acceleration of the Kashmir question.

5. That if progress is not manifestly forthcoming in the bilateral talks and the lack of progress is not attributable to Pakistan, should Pakistan—despite the risks and disadvantages inherent in renewing debate in the Security Council—decide on such a course of action, we would be prepared to support the UN resolutions, as the President has indicated.

6. That, subject to your approval of the foregoing, we (a) inform our Embassy in Karachi of the prospective next steps, (b) inform the Pakistan Embassy here that we are prepared to talk to Zafrullah and the Ambassador at their earliest convenience the week of March 19,2 (c) convey the substance of our position to Zafrullah at that time, and (d) instruct the Embassy in Karachi now to make points (a), (b) urging Pakistani agreement to bilater talks and, if asked point (c) in the draft telegram (attached, Tab A)3 which is submitted for your approval.4

* Source: Department of State, NEA/INC Files: Lot 66 D 415, Kashmir, January-April 1962 (Miscellaneous Papers). Secret. Drafted in NEA by Horgan, Grant, and James M. Ludlow, and in IO/UNPby Michael Newlin.

1 Not printed.

2 Ball discussed the Kashmir issue with Ahmed on March 28 along the lines of the recommendations outlined in this memorandum. (Telegram 1994 to Karachi, March 28; Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/3-2862) Rusk discussed Kashmir with Zafrullah on April 12; see Document 114.

3 Sent as telegram 1966 to Karachi, March 24. (Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/3-2462)

4 A handwritten note at the end of the source text reads: “All recommendations initialed 'Approved' by Ball 3/24/62.”

112. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 112. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, March 19, 1962.

McGB:

Bowles worth reading on US policy toward Afghanistan1 (after he returns next Thursday I presume he'll want to talk with JFK on several such matters).

He makes a powerful case for major US effort to compete with Soviets, e.g., $150 million in development aid over next five years, developing alternative Iranian transit route, and some passenger and cargo aircraft pronto. He justifies all this by stressing the critically adverse effect: on our positions in Iran and Pakistan if Afghans slip behind the Curtain.

Big problem is not whether to invest this much in gamble to keep Afghan free. It is whether to do so until transit issue resolved and Afghans calm down on Pushtunistan. So long as they press this, they tend to force us to back our Pak allies, thus forcing Kabul in turn to rely even more on Bloc support.

Ayub of course advocates scaring Afghans; while granting that if Afghans fell under Soviet control, Iran would soon follow and Pakistan would be in serious difficulty, he thinks Daud will open his eyes to this threat only if West steps back a bit and causes him to feel pressure of full Soviet embrace. Bowles argues that such a policy would merely thrust Afghans even more rapidly into Soviet hands. It is remotely possible that Ayub (a Pathan himself) may have a better idea of how to play his countrymen than we do.

Regardless of this alternative, however, we ought to face up to Afghan aid question shortly, perhaps even using aid prospect directly as lever toward resolving transit impasse. I've talked with Talbot, but you may also want to raise at Planning Lunch.

Bob K.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert W. Komer, 3/62. Secret.

1 Reference is to the assessment of U.S. policy toward Afghanistan that Bowles sent from Karachi after his visit to Afghanistan. (Airgram A-359 from Karachi, March 6; Department of State, Central Files, 611.89/3-662)

113. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State 113. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of StateSource

Kabul, March 28, 1962, 7 p.m.

565. I was called by Foreign Minister Naim this morning at 11:30. In hour and quarter interview considerable serious ground covered. Will confine this message to subject of restitution normal relations between Pakistan and Afghanistan and more immediate aspects of transit crisis.

Naim said Prime Minister and Cabinet had given full consideration to my presentation and recommendations (Embtels 5541 and 5592 to Department). At outset he said he could not emphasize too strongly how much RGA appreciated US efforts bring about reconciliation. Our good offices activities vital and he trusted we would not abandon them. He reiterated this point at least three times during conversation.

As base for his response to me he said that all must understand that should Pakistan and Afghanistan fail in mending relations both would be ultimate losers. RGA fully recognized this; Pakistan must also understand. This view unassailable whether considered from historic, economic, ethnic or cultural viewpoint.

He then launched into careful and detailed reply which he said was final. Minimum upon which RGA willing re-establish relations with Pakistan and of course raise all restriction with respect to matters of transit was re-establishment of Consular and trade agency offices on basis status quo ante. He said firmly that there was no point in attempting begin on basis of trade commission in Karachi with possibilities of gradual expansion. A return of these offices was symbolic restitution their transit rights. These rights must be immune from political considerations. Further the restitution was only proper in view of fact that Pakistan had taken initiative in dosing these agencies and Consulates without due recourse to unilaterally recognized diplomatic usage. He said it was interesting to note that when Pakistan committed this discourteous and undiplomatic act it did not even inform the United States before doing it. If Pakistan were willing to restore these offices, Afghanistan willing reciprocate by allowing establishment similar Pakistani offices in Afghanistan. If such gesture forthcoming RGA would be willing act immediately to restore transit, allowing details in connection with re-establishment of relations to follow in train. (In subsequent telephone conversation with Hannah, Etemadi elaborated sequence of steps implicit in above sentences as follows: (1) Decision by GOP to restore offices existing before last August; (2) RGA immediate action to resume transit; (3) arrangement of details regarding restoration trade and Consular offices within reasonable time; (4) after actual restoration these offices resumption diplomatic relations.) He pointed out that trade commission in Karachi was no new idea as this had been suggested before even during Merchant visit. It would not accomplish what was required and was therefore unsatisfactory and unpromising.

With respect to entire Pushtunistan issue which was discussed at considerable length he insisted this question must be treated as subject by itself, and item for continuing negotiation with the Pakistanis (and by implication with tribal leaders themselves). But difference of opinion on this subject must bear no relationship to permanent transit rights and minimum facilities to maintain that right. He emphasized Afghanistan had no territorial ambitions and made it clear that in holding views they do with respect to welfare of Pushtuns, they did not claim that answer to this problem lay in direct or indirect affiliation with Afghanistan.

So far as closure of border is concerned it will become effective 6 p.m. Thursday March 29. No regular transit of goods will be allowed beyond that point. Diplomatic goods will be subject special permission on basis notification but he indicated that it would not extend to goods other than those considered as personal effects of diplomats. He further asked that no pipeline of supply be allowed to build up backlog in Pakistan until position clarifies. Other items raised during the conversation will be reported in subsequent messages.

Comment and recommendation: There is little doubt in my mind that this is firm decision of RGA and that Naim was speaking on Cabinet instruction.

Nur Ahmed Etemadi was present to be sure there was no misunderstanding in language and careful notes were kept of everything the Foreign Minister told me. It is my considered opinion that Daud government thinks it knows the risks involved and is quite willing to face consequences in pursuit of policy set forth by Naim today. At same time I believe there would be a great sigh of relief if Pakistan could see its way clear to move in this rather far reaching, rather dramatic and probably unexpected act of restoring permission for the establishment of these Consulates and trade agencies.

When I consider far-reaching possible results to free world interests in this area and especially to Pakistan I cannot do otherwise than recommend that we urge Pakistan muster necessary courage, imagination and far sighted self-interest to thus restore her influence in this area. As all concerned will of course know, I make this recommendation with no history of prejudice or lack of understanding of Pakistan's position in our free world affiance and certainly with no disregard for its immediate self-interest. If this moment in history is allowed to pass and Afghanistan thus forced or encouraged to strengthen her orientation elsewhere the non-Communist neighbors in this area will lose far more than they possibly can [gain] through this relatively harmless concession.

I have been much impressed by my recent conversations with German Ambassador who is very strongly of opinion that some dramatic move is needed now to stop the drift in the inevitable direction it [Afghanistan] is taking and even the British Ambassador told me yesterday that while he thought Pakistan's tough attitude had achieved something in the beginning, a continuation of it was counter-productive.

An imaginative move of this nature is the type of which only the free world and its members are capable. To do it in time would take much of the wind out of the Communist sails and would bring great relief to many elements in Afghanistan who only regard with horror the prospect of being forced more closely into the Soviet embrace. A gesture of this magnitude to begin the healing process would enhance Pakistan's prestige as well as our own, placing us in an advantageous role in helping to guide Afghanistan policy through hazardous shoals during this critical period.3

Steeves

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 869.90D/3-2862. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Karachi, Tehran, and Jidda.

1 In telegram 554, March 24, Steeves reported that he had called on Naim that morning to review the transit impasse. He noted that during the 8-week period that the border had been open, some 26,000 tons of U.S. aid material had been transferred into Afghanistan from Pakistan. The border was scheduled to close again on March 29. Steeves stated that as much as 225,000 tons of additional material would have to be brought in to complete the currently committed development projects in Afghanistan. He argued that, while some of the supplies could be brought in through Iran, it was essential to continue to use the route through Pakistan in order to meet the goals of the projects. Steeves added that the United States was prepared to continue to exercise its good offices to try to facilitate a settlement of the impasse. (Ibid., 611.89/3-2462)

2 In telegram 559, March 26, Steeves reported on a conversation with Daud that morning. Steeves brought up the demarche he had made to Naim on March 24 concerning an extension of the opening of the border with Pakistan. Daud did not respond definitively to the demarche but, like Naim, he indicated that no progress in the dispute with Pakistan was possible until Pakistan took the initiative to reverse the decision that had caused the dispute. (Ibid., 689.90D/3-2662)

3 In telegram 1992 to Karachi, March 28, the Department instructed the Embassy to inform Ayub of the contents of telegram 565 from Kabul, and to ask him to consider an appropriate gesture to prevent the closure of the border on March 29. (Ibid., 689.90D/3-2862) The Embassy responded that, in light of Ayub's repeated insistence that his government would not accept a return to the status quo ante, there was little point in asking him to agree to Naim's request for reopening the Consulates and trade agencies. The Embassy added that to recommend acceptance of what the Pakistanis would regard as a surrender to Afghan intransigence might impact negatively on U.S. relations with Pakistan. (Telegram 1699 from Karachi, March 29; ibid., 989.7190D/3-2962)

114. Memorandum of Conversation 114. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 12, 1962.

SUBJECT

Kashmir

PARTICIPANTS

H.E. Aziz Ahmed, Ambassador, Embassy of Pakistan

Sir Zafrulla Khan, Pakistan Permanent Representative to the United Nations

Mr. Salman Ali, Political Counselor, Embassy of Pakistan

The Secretary

IO—Mr. Harlan Cleveland

NEA—Mr. Phillips Talbot

SOA—Mr. John N. Gatch, Jr.

Sir Zafrulla opened the conversation by saying that he had wanted to talk with the Secretary to explain Pakistan's motives for bringing the Kashmir issue before the Security Council. He said that he had had a long talk the previous day with Ambassador Stevenson on the subject of Kashmir and had gone into it at more detail than usual since Ambassador Plimpton was his usual point of contact on Kashmir. The Secretary said he had seen a brief report of the talk but welcomed Sir Zafrulla's willingness to come to Washington and give a full exposition of Pakistan's position.

Sir Zafrulla said that Pakistan was not wedded to Security Council consideration, but it seemed that this offered the only way at present to get attention focused on the Kashmir issue. Nehru's recent statements that the only thing that India could consider was an adjustment from the present situation, and, in fact, Nehru's whole performance in the face of Ayub's efforts since 1960 to negotiate on Kashmir had convinced Pakistan that India would not enter into meaningful discussions unless maximum pressure were brought to bear. The people of Kashmir itself were being denied the right of self-determination, and the President of Azad Kashmir, Mr. Khurshid, was full of plans to take unilateral action. Khurshid had pressed Minister for External Affairs Qadir to extend Pakistan's recognition to Azad Kashmir, but Qadir had turned the request down. Qadir had said that the new Pakistan Government which would be formed in June would have a new Minister for External Affairs since he was stepping down. The new Minister might reconsider Khurshid's request. Khurshid had also raised the possibility of seeking recognition from Communist China. Sir Zafrulla questioned the wisdom of all of these plans, but said they were evidence that the situation could develop into something that was more than local if the issue were not settled. For example, if Pakistan became militarily engaged in Kashmir, Afghanistan might be tempted to make a grab at the Northwest Frontier.

Sir Zafrulla then recounted and elaborated on a suggestion he had made to Ambassador Stevenson regarding possible practical Security Council action. India continued to claim that it could not comply with the UNCIP resolutions because Pakistan had not taken the first step by withdrawing its forces from Azad Kashmir. Sir Zafrulla wanted to revive a suggestion made by Swedish Ambassador Jarring in 1957 calling for a commission or an individual to be appointed by the Secretary General to draw up a list of defaults by both sides in non-compliance with the UNCIP resolutions and the several Graham reports. For example, the UNCIP resolutions did not call for unilateral Pakistan withdrawal from Azad Kashmir first without corresponding Indian action as Krishna Menon always claimed. Pakistan would welcome an impartial investigation of the whole issue. Sir Zafrulla had told Ambassador Stevenson that India would not agree to an individual from the West but might agree to a neutral. Sir Zafrulla had made no suggestions to Ambassador Stevenson but now would like personally to say that he would prefer to have the Secretary General himself undertake the task, but would welcome a man of integrity from any nation. He suggested that someone from the new unaligned nations of Africa might be appropriate. He specifically named Mr. Amachree of Nigeria who has virtue in Indian eyes of being a non-Muslim from a country which probably is more friendly to India than Pakistan. Ambassador Stevenson had asked what the United Kingdom's reaction would be. Sir Zafrulla said that he was going to see both Sir Patrick Dean and the Secretary General in the next several days to discuss the proposal.

The Secretary asked whether Pakistan was raising the issue at this time purely on its own merits or whether internal pressures in Pakistan made it necessary. Sir Zafrulla said that he did not sense any more specific pressure than usual but knew that there was a strong official and popular feeling in Pakistan that somehow progress had to be made towards a settlement.

The Secretary then asked how Sir Zafrulla saw the U.S. role. He added that since the United States was trying to play an active part in both capitals in an effort to bring about a solution, Security Council action put us in an uncomfortable position. Sir Zafrulla recounted Pakistan's efforts since last summer to get action on Kashmir, and said that the Indian seizure of Goa had made it even more urgent a necessity. Pakistan wondered whether the United States was being active enough. For example, had anything been done since India turned down the U.S. proposal regarding Eugene Black? The Secretary said we were continuing to examine the matter to see what we could do. He wondered whether negotiations could be carried on bilaterally. Sir Zafrulla said that Pakistan considered that a third party was necessary. In response to a question from Mr. Cleveland, Sir Zafrulla said that India did not want a third party in any possible negotiations. The Secretary asked whether a third party from a member of the Commonwealth would be acceptable to India and Pakistan. Sir Zafrulla said this proposal would be agreeable to Pakistan but probably not to India. He added that Pakistan would even accept Nkrumah.

Sir Zafrulla then said that if Pakistan's proposal did not work, Pakistan was faced with two alternatives: (1) to reconcile its people to Nehru's position; or (2) to go along with whatever course Khurshid would take as President of Azad Kashmir. Pakistan did not want the second alternative, and the first alternative in effect provided for a partition without giving the Kashmiris any voice in their own destiny and constituted basically a military settlement of a political problem.

Mr. Talbot asked whether Pakistan's proposed action might not appear vindictive. Sir Zafrulla disclaimed any desire of this nature, and said that Pakistan simply wanted to establish a reasonable procedure to determine the defaults on both sides and get on towards the implementation of the UNCIP resolutions.

The Secretary asked whether it was unfair to say that preliminary negotiation between Pakistan and India was necessary to insure a successful outcome in the Security Council and went on to ask what Pakistan's reaction would be if there were no favorable result from the debate. Sir Zafrulla did not respond to the Secretary's first query, and said that a real failure would increase Pakistan's frustration to a great extent.

Sir Zafrulla then said that it appeared as if April 27 was the first available date. He added that he assumed Krishna Menon would lead India's delegation. The Secretary said that we should all try to reach agreement before April 27 which would make the debate unnecessary. He asked Sir Zafrulla whether his government would postpone the debate if the Indians agreed to negotiations. Sir Zafrulla said he could not commit Pakistan, but thought a postponement could be arranged if the Indians appeared ready to enter constructive negotiations.

The Secretary asked how long it had been since there had been a thorough review of Indo-Pakistan relations by top level people. Sir Zafrulla said there had been none since the September 1960 meeting of Ayub and Nehru.

Ambassador Aziz Ahmed then said that the internal pressures in Pakistan were greater than Sir Zafrulla had indicated. He sketched the history of the Ayub-Kennedy meetings in July 1961 from which Pakistan had gained hope of real progress on Kashmir.1 If there were further delays, the people of Pakistan would begin to wonder whether U.S. assurances meant anything.

The Secretary reiterated the difficulties of the U.S. position. Aziz Ahmed said he appreciated these difficulties but his government could not explain this position satisfactorily to the people of Pakistan in view of the popular understanding of the U.S. commitment. Sir Zafrulla said that US. approval of Pakistan's proposal would not mean that the United States was clearly taking the side of Pakistan against India. The Secretary said that we would have to think urgently about whether that would or would not be the case.

Mr. Cleveland said that the Security Council should look forward to solutions rather than attempt to assess blame. Sir Zafrulla said that Pakistan did not want to assess blame but to find out what needed to be done.

Mr. Talbot wondered whether any useful purpose would be served by basing inquiry on outdated resolutions. Sir Zafrulla said that any other course would simply prove to the Indians that their foot-dragging policy was succeeding. He recalled various attempts in the past, notably by Sir Owen Dixon and Mohammed Ali Bogra, to get Nehru to take a new look. Each time Nehru had gone back on his word.

Mr. Talbot asked whether there was any special reason for bringing the matter up now. Sir Zafrulla said that Ayub had really not had time during the first two years of his regime, and last year had hoped that his efforts with President Kennedy would achieve progress. Mr. Talbot asked whether Zafrulla had canvassed the Security Council. Sir Zafrulla said that his canvassing really was circular because the other countries always asked what the US. position was going to be. His personal guess was that the United Kingdom, France, China and Ireland would vote for Pakistan. He was not sure about Ghana and the UAR. He said that really he believed if a reasonable proposal got the necessary majority and was then vetoed by the USSR, Pakistan could go to the UNGA with a resolution that might pass.

The Secretary asked whether there was anything to be done quietly before April 27. Sir Zafrulla said that the Indian offer as relayed by Dayal to Ayub was not sincere since it did not call for adequate preparation. Mr. Talbot said our understanding of the offer seemed different.

The Secretary asked whether there would be any merit in Pakistan's holding secret, discursive, agenda-less talks with India much as we were with the Soviets on Berlin. Sir Zafrulla said that this would only allow India to procrastinate further. The Secretary then said that he would have to get into the matter promptly and Sir Zafrulla thanked him and said that he hoped the United States would give support to Pakistan's proposal.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/4-1262. Secret. Drafted by Gatch and approved in S on April 18.

1 See Document 30.

115. Letter From President Ayub to President Kennedy 115. Letter From President Ayub to President KennedySource

Rawalpindi, April 20, 1962.

My Dear Mr. President, Three months ago, I had the honour of writing to you in connection with a procedural move by Pakistan in the Security Council on the Kashmir question. The Council decided to consider the substantive aspects of the dispute after March 1, 1962. It has since been agreed by its Members to hold a meeting on April 27.

It is our hope that the Council will address itself squarely to the task of resolving the deadlock which has been obtaining for the last several years over the implementation of the relevant UN resolutions.

In view of the disagreement between the parties as to which side is responsible for the deadlock, an obvious step for the Council to take would be to proceed to determine the state of implementation of the resolution of the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan of 13 August 1948, and to find out what needs to be done by either side so as to make progress towards the achievement of the United Nations objectives in Kashmir.

The Council may well heed the assistance of a suitable person to be enabled to discharge this responsibility. We are inclined to think that at this stage of consideration of the Kashmir question, the designation of a person of integrity and international standing from one of the non-aligned African countries is likely to commend itself most widely to members of the United Nations.

If this proposition fails to obtain the necessary majority, the Security Council could turn to a recommendation of Dr. Frank P. Graham, in his report of 28 March 1958, that the two heads of government should meet, in the presence of a United Nations representative, to resolve the outstanding differences between India and Pakistan on the implementation of the UN resolutions on the Kashmir issue. The presence of the United Nations could be most effectively ensured in such bilateral negotiations, for the reason stated, by the designation of a suitable person from one of the non-aligned African Members of the United Nations.

In expressing these thoughts for your consideration, I am not oblivious of Prime Ministers Nehru's reiterated opposition to the presence of a third party in any talks that may be held between him and myself. I am only too painfully aware of this adamant stand of his on the issue which to me, seems utterly unreasonable. At the same time, I must point out that if the good offices of a third person are not made available to the two of us, no useful purpose is likely to be served by our meeting. Pakistan will be bound to insist that the two UNCIP resolutions should constitute the basis of any settlement of the Kashmir dispute. On the other hand Mr. Nehru has been insisting on the status quo as the only course open for a solution. It is in such circumstances that the good offices of the United Nations through a designated representative, become most essential if not indispensable, to the prospects of a fruitful confrontation. It may be possible for this third person to suggest approaches after taking into account the relevant UN resolutions and the vital interests at stake—without placing any responsibility for his initiatives on either Pandit Nehru or myself—in order to prevent a breakdown in our discussions.

I have ventured to share these thoughts with you in the hope that you will appreciate the reasons why Pakistan feels it incumbent upon itself to ask for Security Council discussion and act:ion on the Kashmir question. I am confident that in our efforts to redeem the promise and pledge of self-determination and justice to the people of Kashmir we may rely on your sympathy and full support.

Pakistan's appeal to the Security Council is in no way incompatible with bilateral talks between Prime Minister Nehru and myself. It follows from what I have said above that the Security Council alone will be able to provide an element to such discussions which is essential to prevent their precipitous breakdown and to keep them going until an equitable and realistic solution of the Kashmir dispute is achieved.

Prime Minister Nehru invited me to visit India to continue our previous discussions on the India-Pakistan questions, including the Kashmir dispute. 'While expressing my readiness to accept his invitation, I suggested to him that it would be advisable first to prepare the ground for a fruitful outcome to a meeting at our level lest a failure result in the exacerbation of relations between our two countries and an aggravation of the existing tension in the sub-continent. To my mind, prudence demands that preliminary talks should take place at the official or ministerial level to explore the outlines and prospects of the negotiations which might be held at the level of the heads of government if they are to lead to a final resolution of this grave and tragic problem.

While agreeing to preliminary talks at official level, India insisted that the move in the Security Council must first be abandoned. What I fear to contemplate is the contingency of interminable meetings at a lower level being protracted for weeks and months to circumvent Pakistan's appeal to the Security Council. A suggestion made by us that we might have such a meeting before the matter comes up in the Security Council in pursuance of the move made by us, was turned down. I see from certain reports that this suggestion is being misrepresented as a demand for the Kashmir settlement within a week or ten days.

Pakistan, throughout the entire period of fourteen years for which the dispute has lasted, has given proof, time and again, of its moderation, patience and faith in the solution of international disputes by peaceful means in the face of provocation, intransigence and threats of violence from our great neighbor.

I realise only too well that without the goodwill and support of the United States in the Security Council, the cause of self-determination for the people of Kashmir will inevitably be lost I am confident Mr. President, that your great country which had done so much for the freedom of men and nations will not let this happen.

Yrs Sincerely,

M.A. Khan

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/4-3062. No classification marking. The salutation and closing of the letter are handwritten. The letter was forwarded to McGeorge Bundy on April 30 under cover of a memorandum from Lucius Battle stating that it was received from the Embassy of Pakistan.

116. Memorandum of Conversation 116. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 27, 1962.

SUBJECT

U.S. Relations toward Pakistan and India

PARTICIPANTSMr. M. Masood, Minister, Embassy of Pakistan

Mr. M.A. Jafri, Second Secretary, Embassy of Pakistan

NEA—Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary

SOA—Charles W. Naas

Minister Masood stated that in the two letters of December 23, 1961,1 and January 2, 1962,2 from President Ayub to President Kennedy and the Aide-Memoire of January 3, 1962,3 several questions had been raised. The President had replied in a brief letter of January 26, 1962,4 and the Government of Pakistan wished to know whether this brief answer was final as the Pakistan Ambassador had understood that a more complete reply would be forthcoming.

The four questions were: 1. Should not the U.S.-Indian Military Sales Agreement be terminated in view of India's violation of the terms by its action in Goa?; or, could U.S. economic aid in some way be limited to prevent India being able to spend so much on armaments?

2. Would the U.S. make public its reassurances to the GOP that U.S. assistance would be forthcoming in the event of aggression from any quarter?

3. If the U.S. is not willing to make a, public statement, would the U.S. at least agree to informing Prime Minister Nehru privately that assurances had been given again to the GOP?

4. In view of the increased threat from India would the U.S. increase its military assistance to Pakistan?

Mr. Talbot stated that it was his understanding the points had been discussed fully by the President and Ambassador Ahmed and that we had promised to consult with the GOP only if there were new developments or changes in policy. At this time we had nothing to add. However, Mr. Talbot agreed to spell out the U.S. position so that there would be no misunderstanding.

We believe that the assurances given President Ayub by President Kennedy meet Pakistan's needs; a public statement or a reiteration to Prime Minister Nehru privately are not necessary and would serve no useful purpose (points 2 and 3).

Mr. Talbot, in referring to points 1 and 4, said the U.S. anticipates no further action. He stated that the U.S. is very conscious of the problem of differentiating between military and economic assistance; obviously large scale economic aid permits a country to divert its own resources to the purchase of arms. The U.S. believes that it is in Pakistan's long-term interest, as well as of the rest of the free world, to have India's economy develop. The U.S. has no reason to believe that, if U.S. economic aid to India were decreased, ipso facto military purchases would decrease. Each nation establishes its own policies and priorities; India would probably decide to maintain its forces and, if necessary suffer the consequences in economic development. The U.S. also believes that economic assistance should not be tied to a particular decision within that country unrelated to the purposes of the assistance. Rather, the best way of meeting the arms race problem is by discussion between the two of their mutual problems. For example, the U.S. is now trying at Geneva to grapple with the arms race; perhaps, the same efforts can be made at the regional level.

Mr. Talbot continued by commenting that in his personal view there are three ways the progress being made in South Asia could be upset: 1. direct Sino-Soviet intervention;

2. major domestic political failures; there remains a certain fragility to the governments, a condition which is natural in view of the manifold problems and the short period of independence;

3. regional disputes become the overwhelming preoccupation of the governments; if this occurred points 1 and 2 easily could follow.

Mr. Masood said that the GOP did not wish to see Indian economic development suffer, but were there not other pressures the U.S. could bring to bear? He noted Pakistan's concern over the Kashmir question and the “30% increase of the Indian military budget” He asked whether, following the ill-fated Black proposal, the President and Department had given consideration to what further steps the U.S. could take in assisting a solution to the Kashmir problem. Mr. Talbot replied that much thought had been given, but that for the time being the Security Council had the issue before it and that further U.S. proposals would depend on the Security Council's actions.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90D/4-2762. Secret. Drafted by Naas on May 2.

1 In this letter to Kennedy, Ayub warned that what he saw as Indian aggression against Goa could be a prelude to Indian aggression elsewhere. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 1/62-2/62)

2 Document 83.

3 See footnote 2, Document 84.

4 See Document 100.

117. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 117. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, May 8, 1962.

McGB:

You asked me last week to give you a “sharp needle” in light of Bowles paper on Afghanistan.1 Have look into matter and found that State/AID have come up with a response to Bowles prodding which has just gone out to field as “To Kabul 346”2 attached.

Essentially, they have decided to be reasonably forthcoming with Afghans on various minor projects (air charter help, loan for other air transports, etc.), and to proceed immediately with surveys of alternative Iranian routes and financing of Herat-Meshed segment if surveys indicate it feasible. By telling Afghans all this we will seek to convince Kabul we want to help keep Afghanistan independent

However, State/AID differ from Bowles in several major respects: 1. Bowles wanted a major “psychological” commitment (perhaps $150 million) to new Afghan five-year plan as evidence of our determination to keep Afghans out of Soviet trap. Bowles saw this commitment as a major confidence builder, while actual outlays would still be contingent upon satisfactory project applications. As you know, AID reacts viscerally against such commitments unless forced. Moreover, State is anxious to keep pressure on Afghans to settle Pak/Afghan differences.

2. State/AID are unwilling to go forward full tilt with development of alternative Iranian route, which they regard as highly expensive and unlikely to be ready in time to help Afghans much anyway.

3. Most important, State/AID propose indirect pressure on Afghans by telling them that shipment of large tonnages via Iran is “impractical and uneconomic. Therefore, on any major projects we tell Afghans we propose to ship the necessary commodities to Karachi on assumption they will reopen frontier. Most big US aid projects, e.g., Kabul-Kandahar road, are in this category. Bowles, of course, strongly opposes any such tie between US aid and transit issue.

Steeves has come in with a long dissent to this last; he says Afghans will size it up immediately as US pressure and greatly resent it (Kabul 624 attached).3 Therefore, he feels that forthcoming nature of rest of our approach will be largely nullified by news that US will ship in supplies for major projects only through Karachi. He urges that we simply omit this angle. Indeed, he argues that if we are going to use such pressures on the Afghans, we should “light as many fires as possible in all Afghan quarters to bring internal pressure to bear on Daud.”

As between the Bowles/Steeves approach and that of Gaud/Talbot, I favor the latter. For us to tell the Afghans that we will do everything possible to help them, including an all-out effort to open up an uneconomic Iranian route, is tantamount to telling them that we will support them irrespective of their quarrel with the Pakistanis, thus removing all incentive to compromise. In effect, we'd prolong the dispute rather than damping it down. Moreover, so far as effective help to Afghanistan is concerned we can only provide it over the Iranian route at great excess cost and delay, at any rate for several years until a good road can be built.

Therefore, if we are to compete effectively with Soviets in Afghanistan, re-opening of the Pak route seems essential. We cannot really get the Afghans to do so until we get them to recognize that staying out of the Soviet embrace is more important than pursuing Pushtoonistan dispute. Moreover, with so many problems looming between us and Ayub, should we add to them an insulting indication that we will help the Afghans regardless of what they do on Pushtu issue? In sum, while all concerned agree with Bowles that US should make a major effort to help Afghans stay out of Soviet clutches, the rest of us disagree with him on tactics.

Finally, I gather that Bowles himself is pleased with his half a loaf; he did get a pretty forthcoming set of projects which will clue Afghans that we're still interested, and enough movement on Iran route so Afghans see a partial alternative to total dependence on Pak door to West. True, we thus fall between two stools but the modest bait we're dangling before Afghans may whet their appetite for more.

Ergo, no need for a “needle” on Bowles' behalf. About the only useful handle would be an NSAM requesting State to due the President on US policy, and then a confrontation before JFK (I suspect he'd come down on Talbot/Gaud side too). So I see no WH action indicated at this time, but will keep in close touch.

RWK

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, 5/1/62-5/15/62. Secret.

1 In an April 26 memorandum to Rusk, Bowles argued that it was important to recognize the danger of further Soviet encroachments in Afghanistan and necessary to move vigorously to bolster Afghanistan's traditional neutral status. To that end, he advocated continued support for Afghan development projects and the establishment of an alternative transit route through Iran for U.S. aid materials. He anticipated that the impasse in relations between Pakistan and Afghanistan would be lengthy. On April 30, Bowles sent a copy of the memorandum to the White House under cover of a letter to McGeorge Bundy. (Ibid., 3/25/62-4/30/62)

2 Dated May 4. (Department of State, Central Files, 811.0089/5-462)

3 Dated May 6. (Ibid., 811.0089/5-662)

118. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 118. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, May 8, 1962, 7 p.m.

3537. Department pass Defense. Reference Embassy telegram 3505.1 The moment of truth on the MIG's came at noon when Desai called me in to say that he had not been fully informed on developments when he talked to me on Friday last. In fact he had learned upon return of Menon that exploratory discussions with Soviets had been taking place and were well advanced. Of the three possible planes, F-104's, Mysteres and MIG's, only the MIG's seemed be available promptly on payment terms which Indians could afford and with prospect of manufacturer and appropriate provision for spares in India. The papers continue to speak a completed deal and I sensed he might be softening me up for such an announcement. I asked him directly if the transaction completed and he said no. I then asked him if a decision had been taken to buy the MIG's and he said not in the sense of a government action, whatever that may mean. I then made the following points with adequate force: (1) I did not like being told on Friday that nothing was happening and discovering on Monday that developments were well advanced. On Desai's presumed information I had reported that no negotiations were in progress.

(2) Our policy was to be tolerant and good humored but he, Menon and above all the Prime Minister should be aware of the limits. We were providing $500 million in economic aid, another $280 million in food. The Indians were saying in effect that this was insufficient so they must turn to Soviets to equip their forces. This was callous of American public opinion and highly illogical to boot.

(3) To reinforce the point, I told him of conversation last night on the plane with L.K. Jha, Permanent Secretary Finance. Jha sought me out to speak of their developing alarm over balance of payments. As matters now stood, this kind of worry came to us while Menon went to Soviets for arms. Such a division of labor would never be acceptable to Congressional or American public opinion for reasons he could well understand.

(4) It was true, as Desai had said earlier, that the Soviets had made an offer and we had not. It was not our policy to merchandise our arms around the world and this was a policy that India should appreciate. I then told him that we had specifically asked Lockheed to exercise restraint. I noted that in the case of the C-130, a dual-purpose vehicle, we had offered a demonstration and had been refused.

(5) I then took notice of his earlier statement that the Russians had offered better terms including rupee payment and that India could not accept arms aid. Rupee payment was as much a form of aid, and as prejudicial to Indian principles, as acceptance of MAP assistance. Because Russian bookkeeping was more clandestine than ours acceptance of rupees was no less in the nature of a gift. It was the same deal, slightly less generous, as the one on which they got food.

(6) Finally, while noting that I could not promise to match Soviet offer, we did expect to be asked. If it developed that for reasons of policy or security classification we couldn't do business, then at least they would have dealt with us courteously and could go ahead with the Soviets. I took occasion also to observe that there could be no emergency over the licensing of manufacture since planes from this source would not be available for some years anyway.

Desai, who seemed rather ill at ease during this eloquence, was I think impressed. I asked that matter be put firmly and fully before Prime Minister and he said it would be. I then said I hope we might be kept informed.

To pin these matters down I am summarizing them in form of a note to Desai which I am sending over this afternoon.2 One can never be quite confident where Menon is concerned, but I have feeling this may produce at least temporary block. Although I have avoided any commitment, implications for possible Washington action and decision will be evident.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/5-862. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Canberra for the Secretary and to London. Relayed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Army, Navy, Air Force, and the CIA.

1 In telegram 3505, May 4, Galbraith reported that he had taken up with Foreign Secretary Desai reports in that morning's local press to the effect that the Indian Government was close to an agreement with the Soviet Union to equip two squadrons of the Indian Air Force with Soviet MIG fighters. Desai said there was no such plan. (Ibid., 791.5622/5-462)

2 The Embassy transmitted the text of this note to the Department in telegram 3545, May 9. (Ibid., 791.5622/5-962)

119. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 119. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, May 9, 1962.

McGB:

I hope we won't panic at MIG-21s for India. One can see Galbraith leading up to plea for F-104s on highly favorable terms.

In time I can see strong case for subsidized arms “sales” to Delhi, but question wisdom at this time: (1) It would raise hob with Paks who will see in it final confirmation of their suspicions we are shifting to a pro-Indian stance—true, we are but now is not the time to push Paks to wall;

(2) At present Paks have air superiority so Indians are just catching up—we can resist Pak pleas for more 104s on these grounds; we can also tell Paks that if we give them more, Indians will just get more from Sovs;

(3) MIGs for India will encourage Delhi to take strong line against Chinese, even more than 104s would;

(4) I don't think we're in danger of setting a precedent whereby Indians will turn to Sovs for all arms supplies—Indians are too smart for this;

(5) Indeed, I doubt that this transaction will lead to any shift in India's increasingly pro-Western orientation; on the contrary it will make Indians more anxious to show us that it has not;

(6) While it is true that Pak-Indian arms race siphons off benefits from US economic aid, this will be fact of life until Pak-Indian differences resolved.

In sum, while protesting vigorously for effect, I don't think we should break our backs to forestall MIG purchase.

Bob K.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert Komer, 5/62. Secret.

120. Memorandum of Discussion 120. Memorandum of DiscussionSource

Washington, May 13, 1962.

SUBJECT

Discussion on Pakistan-U.S. Relations

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Talbot

Mr. Grant

Mr. Cameron

Mr. Wriggins1

Mr. Horgan

Mr. Gatch

Mr. Naas

The meeting was called to discuss the current unsatisfactory state of U.S.-Pakistan-Indian relations. The attached outline2 prepared earlier in SOA was followed as a guide to the discussion.

Briefly, the causes of concern to the US. at present are: 1. The drift apart of the U.S. and Pakistan; there is an absence of communication with Pakistan; Pakistan has not consulted with the U.S. on important actions—closure of Afghan offices, boundary talks with Chicoms.

2. There are indications of a possible reappraisal by Pakistan of its foreign policies; Pakistan leaders have made it clear that they are dissatisfied with the extent of U.S. support on those issues—Kashmir and relations with Afghanistan—directly affecting Pakistan security

3. At the same time, U.S.-Indian relations, possibly in the military field, may be entering a new phase as the Chinese Communist threat to India becomes more acute; and the U.S. will need added flexibility. The problem, therefore, is how to gain this freedom.

A. In these circumstances it becomes necessary to examine the following possible lines of action: 1. Fully support, at whatever costs, the political objectives of one or the other;

2. Adopt an attitude of “plague on both your houses” and effect a slow withdrawal from the area;

3. Attempt to treat both countries equally;

4. Attempt to continue, as we are presently doing, “to straddle.”

These four lines of action were discussed at length; conclusions are briefly given: 1. The value of our special relationship with Pakistan, particularly in the military field, is such that we cannot contemplate withdrawal. Also, the U.S. cannot yet accept the dissolution of CENTO and SEATO, which might follow if Pakistan withdrew.

On the other hand, India is of such importance that little or no consideration can be given to a major retrogressive change in U.S. policy toward it.

a

2. Although isolationist sentiment domestically would be satisfied, there is nothing to be gained by such an extreme policy.

3. It was concluded after lengthy discussion that equal treatment for India would be interpreted in Pakistan as a U.S. decision to change fundamentally the relative role of Pakistan and could adversely affect our interests in Pakistan.

4. It was generally agreed that the U.S. approach the current problem by investigating the possibilities of strengthening our relations with Pakistan in order to obtain the additional freedom of action to take the steps necessary to deal with India in the light of our national interests. An improvement in Pak-Indian relations is an essential element in gaining this additional flexibility.

Basically, it was concluded that the U.S. would gain little or nothing by a major shift of our Pakistan policy and a great deal could be lost: a. Such a move would remove irritations in our relations with India but it is unlikely a meaningful basic change in Indian-U.S. relations would follow: (1) India's policy of non-alignment probably precludes significantly closer ties with the U.S. Also, for the present, India's policy has advantages to the U.S., such as in the Congo.

(2) India probably is not overly concerned with the threat of Pakistan to its security.

b. The Government of Afghanistan would be pleased by a basic change, but in our estimation would not alter its present policies towards the U.S. and U.S.S.R. In addition, we would gain no significant flexibility in our immediate problems of communications through Pakistan.

c. The area disputes would in our estimation be no closer to resolution. The “Pushtunistan” and Kashmir disputes are deeply rooted and would not disappear if we changed our Pakistan policy. They would continue to threaten area stability.

d. The U.S. would, however, have somewhat increased flexibility in dealing with India, and to a lesser extent, Afghanistan, but in view of the limitations on our actions placed by both countries the increased flexibility would not be of appreciable significance in the near future.

B. Having agreed that the advantages do not equal the disadvantages to the U.S. of a major shift, the main issue before us is how to maintain our relations with Pakistan and yet gain the freedom to be more forthcoming in relations with India, e.g., possible provision of military equipment. In the long run a basic improvement in Indo-Pakistan relations is a sina qua non for full freedom in dealing with India. In the short run, however, greater flexibility might be gained if U.S.-Pakistan relations could be strengthened; steps in this direction might include: 1. A full and frank exchange of views with President Ayub on our relations in order to pinpoint irritations, to identify Pakistan vital interests which we are prepared to support, and to expound to him our views on area and world problems. We believe the breakdown in communications has been a factor in the present drift.

2. The examination of ways to increase Pakistan's sense of security.

3. A greater exchange of views and information on affairs outside the subcontinent.

4. Take a more positive role in the Kashmir dispute in order to show that an allied relationship does have benefits beyond the military and economic aid spheres.

* Source: Department of State, NEA/SOA Files: Lot 64 D 571, United States, Jan.-July. Secret. Drafted by Naas on May 19.

1 W. Howard Wriggins, member of the Policy Planning Council.

2 Not printed.

121. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 121. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, May 13, 1962, 6 p.m.

3598. Yesterday in course of another conversation FonSec Desai told me that following my reps PriMin had told Krishna Menon that MIG deal must come before the cabinet and case would be reviewed with full consideration our points.

I have been worried in this matter lest Menon think I have been fighting him indirectly and by proxy so today I made appointment and had long talk. M.J. Desai was present At times discussion was rough. He once accused me of addressing him as subordinate official of his Min; I said I was refraining from apology only because I had not done so. In the end we parted fairly amicably and I had feeling that I made all the necessary points and, as usual very little impression. Following were the principal interchanges: 1. As earlier to Desai I said we could no explain provision of $850 million in civilian aid while leaving to the Russians the task of giving mil assistance. He bristled and said not one stick of equipment was supplied under mil aid programs. All was paid for. I had hoped for this and pointed out that according to newspaper accounts the Sov equipment was being supplied for rupees. Food Min S.K. Patil could as well argue that PL 480 food was purchased commercially. However we and he considered it aid. Menon then said rupees went into convertible accounts and could be spent by Sovs. I pointed out this only proved that the Sovs were less generous than we. We put our rupees into inconvertible accounts and returned them to the Indians. I then added that if the Sovs gave as much econ aid as we did the Indians would be quite well supplied with dollars from trade and could go in for mil procurement in the US. Thus, even if the transactions with the Sovs were commercial which they are not, they are made possible by American aid. At this juncture Menon said these were considerations for the FinMin, not for him. His concern was only with getting the best possible equipment. One happy dividend of this interchange on the MIGs is that I have at last managed to get Sov sales for rupees on all fours with any other kind of mil aid.

2. Menon then said that as DefMin his task was to be sure Indian pilots flew planes equal those of Chinese. He also made refs but very passing ones to the Pak F104's. The morale effects of inferior equipment was damaging. India he said was not looking for war or conflict but her borders were everywhere subject to almost daily violation or air penetration. She had to show that this could not occur. In a passage strongly reminiscent of some unidentified warmonger he said only strength would ensure peace. He was putting all the data on available arms on the table and they would then reach a decision. I said that we had sympathy for many of India's problems but could not understand how all the data could be on the table since they had not asked about American terms or looked very seriously at American equipment. He said they had gone into detail with Lockheed. I pointed out that they had refused a demonstration of the C-130 for which he had once asked and noted that Lockheed as a private firm could not talk about any terms or arrangements. These were matters for the USG on which we had never been approached. He said C-130 not available; Lockheed had had to borrow a test model from the US Army. I pointed out that Lockheed did not keep a private inventory in Europe and pressed him on when he had last asked about delivery dates. He said, a bit reluctantly, that it was three years ago.

3. He then said our security arrangements were too difficult and sent out for and read me the note about the security team when we offered the Mark 44 torpedo. I asked if the Sovs were giving them secret equipment without any security precaution. He said this was an improper question. I then ventured that he was comparing a country that asked for assurances on its classified equipment and a country which did not give out any secret stuff at all. He disagreed.

I then made my principal pitch. As a senior member of the cabinet with a special knowledge of the US he was surely aware of the effect of this purchase on American public opinion and on pending legislation. This was a serious problem for US in which the Indian govt had the greatest possible collateral interest. The prime question was not the by-passing of American for Sov equipment. I was not merchandising American equipment. It was the effect of any action at this juncture on the US public and pol opinion. He said he was conscious of this. I thought it well not to express obvious doubts.

The debate (or bickering) covered Adlai Stevenson, the American press treatment of Nehru and Menon, our alleged refusal of Sidewinders and the improbable contention, which I also did not challenge, that the IAF had the ground radar for aerial control of F104s and MIGs. So passed the Indian sabbath.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/5-1362. Secret; Niact.

122. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 122. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, May 18, 1962, 6 p.m.

3691. Pass Defense. Embassy believes Indian political situation is entering period of transition with major implications for U.S. interests and requiring clear decisions. We are aware that in light of recent Senate action and in face current attitudes toward India the timing of decision could not be more inconvenient than this, and ways of juggling time factor have had our detailed consideration. Unfortunately the tune is being called by others.

The first factor in situation is Prime Minister's age and illness and following possibilities: (a) In immediate future he may not be exercising dominant influence and this gives increased freedom for maneuver to Menon. Menon is dearly determined to exploit situation to weaken American influence and very probably has design to protect his own longer-run position by getting greater dependence on Soviets, (b) Prime Minister may become incapacitated or disappear from immediate scene, which will bring prompt reduction in Menon's influence. During this period the US. must play hand in accordance with underlying realities of situation and not surface influences and specifically must avoid action and forestall steps which would play into Menon's hands and weaken the fundamentally far stronger pro-western members of cabinet and armed forces. Checking any increased dependence on Soviets, with its political consequences, and protecting present western orientation of military forces are thus vital factors. Against this background question of supply of military equipment to Government of India becomes matter of major significance.

2. Second basic fact is intense dissatisfaction of Indian Armed Forces with present obsolete military equipment. Accordingly Indian defense establishment will continue to exert strong pressure on Government of India to obtain modern military equipment through foreign purchase or some sort of direct military assistance. In absence of detente on Chinese Communist border, and in lesser degree on Pakistan border, Government of India will get more modern military equipment one way or another. It must be stressed that in Government of India decision on material prestige and morale factors may well take precedence over question of strict operational role. This is especially case in their decision to immediately obtain high performance supersonic aircraft. This does not lessen force of determination or problem created thereby or open way to dissuasion.

3. Third basic fact is that GOI is unable to pay for substantial quantities of modern military equipment with foreign exchange. Accordingly, Government of India will have to turn to either Soviet or western aid, disguised or undisguised. Some senior members Government of India now recognize purchase Soviet equipment for rupees must be considered form of military aid, and Washington will be aware this has been a major thrust of our recent arguments.

4. Fourth fact is that our intervention and that of United Kingdom have for the moment blocked MIG-21 deal. Inherent in decision to delay is recognition that insufficient consideration given to United States and United Kingdom alternatives. Therefore, Indian decision to delay requires United States to make decision on its course. We must decide whether Soviets will make important inroads into Indian military with likely far-reaching consequences or whether west will provide alternative and competitive sources of supply. Mission is united in recommending latter course. We recognize public announcement of decision, especially re supply F-104's, must be related to this year's foreign aid legislation, a point on which Indians, Krishna Menon apart, can be persuaded.

5. We stress now the consequences. In absence of a favorable United States policy India will go to Soviets for military equipment. If Government of India obtains MIG-21 and/or other types of major military equipment from Soviets, following will result: (a) Large number of Soviet technicians will be introduced into Indian defense establishment. (b)There will be much closer association with Soviet Armed Forces than presently exists. The AN-12's, MI-4's, IL-14's and HF-24 engines have already introduced some 200 Soviet technicians into Indian defense installations. (c) Position of senior Indian officers who presently pro-west in orientation and who do not want Soviet military equipment will be undermined. (d) Five to ten years from now present strongly pro-west senior officers will be out of picture. Soviet training and technical advisors who would accompany purchase of Soviet equipment will have inevitable influence on younger post-independence Indian military officers now rising to position of prominence. (e) Soviets will emerge as the defender of India against dramatic border enemies. This will be a source of gratitude and esteem outweighing power plants, steel mills or other economic aid. Movement of India toward west during past five years will be arrested and possibly reversed. (f) Action will serve directly interests of small group in Government of India, led by Krishna Menon, who seek break with United States and closer alignment with Soviets. This alignment vital for Menon fortunes as is failure of United States to supply equipment As other telegrams will have told, Menon has invented United States supply reluctance and failure in advance of manifestation. Note that Menon has no future as a pro-westerner and no future in a pro-western India and no inability to understand matters affecting his personal ambitions.

6. Decision to meet Soviet offers will require: (a) Willingness to supply F-104's from inventory promptly or possibly to convince United Kingdom to offer Lightnings under same terms. Ambassador will discuss this latter possibility on his return to United States. It raises considerations that cannot be judged fully from here. (b) Rupee payment with appropriate price concessions. (c) Licensing agreement for manufacture of F-104's (or Lightnings) in India. (d) Possible modification of United States security requirements.

7. At first time domestic situation reasonably allows, Ambassador should be authorized make offer on C-130's to Prime Minister. In event there no alternative to F-104's Ambassador should be authorized make same offer on these. Way should similarly be opened on other needs. We do not minimize the difficulties of finding a right time and, as noted, if decision is fairly clear we can ask responsible Indians for tolerance on timing. Note also that availability of an alternative that must be technically examined and then considered will have effect of delaying any decision on high performance fighters at least by weeks, perhaps even by months. The chance to shove through MIG's rapidly depends heavily on absence of alternative.

8. Provision of F-104 and other major items of military equipment should be accompanied by well-proclaimed United States-Indian understanding that they are provided for defense of India's Northern borders. Pakistanis will not like decision urged above, but such line of action would also be for overall protection of Pakistan, which is as vulnerable to Communists as India and perhaps in light of situation in East Bengal more so.

9. Embassy fully aware of varying forms of opposition in United States and need for explanation in light of current attitudes which Menon, we should remind ourselves, has himself cultivated with skill. However we believe all legitimate arguments can be met and that pivotal position of India in Asia justifies decision.

10. Points here reflect fully agreed position of Mission.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.00/5-1862. Secret; Limit Distribution.

123. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 123. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, May 19, 1962, 5:15 p.m.

2440. Deliver following letter to President Ayub as soon as possible, informing Department of date and time delivery.

“I am very glad to have your latest views on the Kashmir question in your thoughtful letter of April twentieth.1 It is obviously of great importance that on this extremely difficult issue we should keep in close contact.

“As I said when we met last summer, we too attach the highest priority to an equitable solution of the Kashmir dispute. It is clearly essential for the peace and security of South Asia that such a solution be found. It was for this reason that I proposed in January that the matter be considered again with the good offices of a third party of the standing of Mr. Black. I must say that I found it hard to understand why Prime Minister Nehru chose to reject this opportunity, and I continue to believe that the time will come when a third party will indeed be necessary. Because of the current position of India, I do not see how we can move to this form of negotiation at present, but we should all keep looking for an appropriate opening in this direction.

“I understand why, in the circumstances, you feel it necessary to turn to the Security Council. Yet I ought to tell you in all honesty that after my experiences of the last twelve months, I do not personally have great hopes from UN action on this subject nor on a good many others. The UN has great values, and we are among its strongest supporters, but I am sure you will agree that we cannot count on discussions and voting in New York to give us much direct help in finding a fair settlement in Kashmir.

“Nevertheless, I understand your own position in the matter, and I have in mind our discussion of the subject last summer. It is good that our representatives are working closely with each other, and we have found your Government's ideas on a possible resolution to be most constructive. On this basis, we are in a good position to cooperate with you during the debate by supporting a suitable text based on these ideas.

“Let me repeat that we deeply share your desire for an early just and peaceful Kashmir settlement. We will keep up our efforts to this end. Obviously, an issue as complex and stubborn as this one will require of both sides the greatest imagination and flexibility if a common basis for agreement is to be found. I cannot quite share the suggestion in the last paragraph of your letter that the role of the United States can be decisive in this matter, but I can and do assure you of our deep interest in a fair settlement.

“In closing, let me speak again of the broad and general feeling of good will and sympathy which exists for Pakistan here in the United States. These are days of tension in your country and also in ours, and I find it helpful that there is between our people and those of Pakistan so dear a sense of friendship.

“Mrs. Kennedy joins me in warm expression of our high and cordial esteem. Sincerely, John F. Kennedy.”

Original will be pouched.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.11-KE/5-1962. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Cameron and approved by Grant. Repeated to New Delhi.

1 Document 115.

124. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 124. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, May 22, 1962, 7 p.m.

2057. Re Embtel 2044.1 In same May 19 conversation with me at Rawalpindi, President reviewed general state of GOP relations with India, and problems for Pak posed by GOl search for more modern fighter aircraft.

While deploring what he termed growing testiness, duplicity, intolerance and unyielding hostility of Indian policy toward Pak, he emphasized inescapable necessity for maintaining effective diplomatic communication with India—not just pro forma diplomatic contact but meaningful diplomatic intercourse which with time and patience might grow into constructive exchange. He revealed great and growing disenchantment with Mr. Nehru, whom he characterized as arrogant, irritable, truculent, obstinate. He characterized Nehru as a fraud masquerading as an idealistic philosopher who actually plays rawest and most ruthless form of power politics. He dislikes Nehru the more because he feels that he lives a pretense and sham.

When I put in a good word for Mr. Nehru, observing that Indo-Pak relations were certainly better off with Nehru at helm in India than would be case with some other figures he could name, Ayub was rather inclined to take issue with me. After discounting Krishna Menon's chances of ever succeeding to PriMinship, he said that in his view almost any other Indian politician would have less potential than Nehru for doing harm to Indo—Pak relations. He felt that with inevitable not-too-distant step-down of Nehru from PriMinship, a better and more tolerant Indian understanding of Pak legitimate aspirations and desires for satisfactory relations with India could reasonably be hoped for.

President Ayub dwelt at some length on regretability of heavy Indian armament expenditures from resources which were needed for econ development. He thought it unfortunate that American econ development assistance helped India to build up military capability. This increased Indian military pressure on Pakistan.

I reminded him that there was no actual or prospective US military assistance program for India and that our econ development assistance was earmarked for specific and well justified econ projects not related to arms procurement.

President admitted this but argued that indirectly our aid facilitated Indian purchase of arms by swelling pool of econ resources out of which arms purchases had to be financed. He did not know precisely how a change might be effected, but he wished some aid formula could be devised which would make it impossible for India to purchase advanced types of offensive weapons without thereby losing part of the foreign econ assistance on which she depends.

When I pointed out that such punitive provisions would be offensive to national pride anywhere, he replied that Indian dependence on US aid and friendship was so great that India would respond, albeit reluctantly, to influence of this sort. When I pressed him, he admitted that we could not and should not radically alter the pattern of our econ assistance to India. He recognized that stability in India was necessary for the well being of entire subcontinent and did not quarrel with my statement that good US relations with India, including US ability to wield some influence there, was essential to free world interests, both regional and global. I told him that we intended to exemplify in all phases of our relationship with Pakistan the posture of a loyal ally and a good friend, but that we did not intend that this relationship should impair our friendship with India.

President Ayub did not quarrel with this but said his most earnest piece of advice to us on our Indian policy was, “Don't let India take you for granted.” He said Indians were all too prone to do this, taking advantage of US generosity good nature and the known high value we place on keeping India non-aligned with the USSR. He said our bargaining position with India is stronger than we realize and that more realistic negotiating with India on our part is needed. He predicted that a firmer line would be successful if we played our cards since India in actuality is dependent on US politically and strategically, as well as economically. He argued that India would “have no place to go” if she turned her back on United States. He emphasized relative degree of isolation of India, assessing that not even non-aligned governments of Southeast Asia such as Indonesia and Burma have any real respect or liking for present Indian government. He quoted Soekarno as having used terms of profane contempt in his appraisal of Nehru.

President Ayub feels that case for attempting to deny advanced offensive weapons from foreign sources to India has become much stronger in recent months. He believes recent Indian record shows clearly that India has openly abandoned (if indeed she ever adhered to) principles of peaceful settlement of international disputes. Since India invokes force and threat of force for settlement of disputes, President Ayub feels strongly that any country which directly or indirectly contributes importantly to better armament of India becomes an accessory to Indian power tactics and therefore unhelpful to the security of Pakistan. He predicted that any augmented Indian military capability would be used not against China but to intimidate weaker neighbors.

I am deferring comment on above until my Washington consultations.

McConaughy

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/5-2262. Secret; Priority. Repeated to New Delhi and USUN.

1 In telegram 2044, May 20, McConaughy reported on a conversation with Ayub the previous day concerning the status of the Kashmir issue in the U.N. Security Council. (Ibid., 690D.91/5-2062)

125. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 125. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, May 25, 1962.

McGB:

MIG-21s for India

State is working hard for delay en route on MIG deal. Ball will urge Ormsby-Gore today to offer Lightnings pronto, even as a stall. Our people in Delhi will collar a number of key Indian figures to urge the risks in MIG deal, not least to US aid.

I've been urging State to explore: (1) Slim possibility of some kind of indirect tie-in which would permit UK to shave Lightning price if we helped UK on some NATO project.

(2) Stronger effort to persuade Delhi to stall at least till after aid bill passes Congress (and border war heats up).1

(3) Reminding Delhi that big MIG deal will generate irresistible PAK pressure for more 104s and thus start new arms spiral. I'd even consider telling Nehru that if he'd forego MIGs we'd not give Paks any more 104s, and that so far as Chicom threat is concerned, if this became a real problem we'd consider 104s to India

Bob K.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert Komer, 5/62. Secret.

1 A border dispute between India and China in the Ladakh district of Kashmir flared in the spring of 1962 with repeated hostile exchanges between Indian and Chinese military patrols.

126. Memorandum of Conversation 126. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, May 28, 1962.

SUBJECT

U.S. Military Assistance to India; Pakistan Concern at Indian Intentions

PARTICIPANTS

H.E. Aziz Ahmed, Ambassador, Embassy of Pakistan

Mr. M. Masood, Minister, Embassy of Pakistan

Mr. Salman Ali, Political Counselor, Embassy of Pakistan

The Secretary

NEA-Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary

SOA-John N. Gatch, Jr.

The Ambassador presented an aid-memoire1 outlining his government's concern at the reported possibility that the United States was thinking of supplying F-104s to India, and its general concern over Indian intentions towards Pakistan.

He said that Pakistan was particularly worried by Krishna Menon's statement in the recent Security Council debate on Kashmir that implied India was no longer bound by the cease-fire line imposed by UN action and UN resolutions. He said Menon's statement, coupled with the reports that India was seeking to improve its already strong military forces, make it appear that India was considering aggressive moves against Pakistan or was at least preparing to maintain and even increase its intransigence on Kashmir.

In the view of Pakistan, the threat to India from Communist China was really a part of the whole threat to the subcontinent from the Communist Bloc. The continuance or increase of tension within the subcontinent thus made the Communist task easier. The Ambassador said there were two ways to deal with the problem: (1) to back India completely; (2) or strengthen the region as a whole. Pakistan naturally favored the latter course, but the Ambassador said he could detect real concern over U.S. intentions on Ayub's part when he made public statements questioning the worth of CENTO, SEATO and the alliance with the United States.

The Secretary replied first on the subject of F-104s. He reminded the Ambassador of the President's commitment to Ayub in 1961 that the United States would consult with Pakistan before any change was contemplated in our policy on military assistance to India. He said he regretted that Pakistan felt compelled, on the basis of newspaper reports, to make a query of this nature. In direct reply he said that India had not asked the United States for F-104s nor had the United States offered them. As far as we were aware, the situation was that India was deter-mined to develop a supersonic capability and was exploring sources of supply, including the Soviet Union. Our Ambassador had expressed his concern to Indian leaders that they might not fully realize the implications of a MIG deal with the Soviet Union. We did not yet know how the situation would evolve but once again could assure Pakistan there would be no change in United States policy without prior consultation.

Turning to a broader aspect of the picture, the Secretary mentioned the possibility that had been discussed in 1959 of joint defense between India and Pakistan and regretted that it had not materialized, in view of the regional nature of the Chinese Communist threat. The Ambassador recounted the history of the joint defense proposal which had come up first after the Chinese occupation of Tibet. Nehru at first had rejected it because it would “align” India militarily, but after the Indus Waters settlement had become more favorably disposed towards the idea. The Kashmir's dispute, however, remained the chief obstacle.

The Ambassador then turned to the subject of the Sino-Pakistan border demarcation negotiations. He recalled that Ayub had discussed the subject with the President last summer and had outlined Pakistan's belief that the negotiation of an agreed border would remove a possible threat to Pakistan from Communist China. The timing of the present announcement was entirely at the initiative of the Communist Chinese. He had no doubt that the Communist Chinese had taken this step to put pressure on India, but said Pakistan had no such intention. The Ambassador said that Pakistan believed India's rights in the matter had been well protected by the terms of the agreement which called for the demarcation of a provisional boundary subject to final approval after the Kashmir issue had been settled.

The Ambassador then said it had not been his or his government's intention to question the President's commitment about informing Pakistan of any impending changes in U.S. policy on military assistance to India. He was simply seeking information and clarification because of the many news reports. The Secretary indicated that the Ambassador should not consider his remarks on the subject to be meant in an unfriendly sense.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/5-2862. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Gatch on May 31 and approved in S on June 12.

1 Not printed.

127. National Intelligence Estimate 127. National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, May 31, 1962.

NIE 31-62

THE PROSPECTS FOR INDIA

Conclusions

A. The dominance of the Congress Party in Indian affairs was confirmed in the 1962 elections and during the next few years is unlikely to be threatened by the Communist Party of India (CPI) or by the parties which draw support from their regional or religious appeal. (Paras. 5-8.)

B. We believe that the ambitious Third Five-Year Plan will be generally successful, enabling India to maintain a satisfactory rate of investment and at the same time provide a modest increase in living standards. The Plan's success will be heavily dependent on a high level of foreign aid and could be undercut by other factors, such as crop failures, an unexpected decline in exports, or sharply increased defense outlays. (Paras. 9-12)

C. India's federal democratic system will be severely tested after the steadying influence of Nehru is no longer available. If the central political leadership provided by his successors should prove ineffective, or in the event of a persistent economic crisis, India would experience severe political and social strains. The forces of regionalism and communism would be strengthened. Should the presently nonpolitical Indian military come to believe that competent government and the integrity of the national state were threatened, they probably would feel compelled to intervene. (Paras. 17-20)

D. India is almost certain to continue its nonalignment policy. US-Indian relations have improved in recent years, and probably will continue to be generally satisfactory, but differences in interest and points of view will from time to time create serious frictions. At the same time, India will continue to attach high priority to maintaining good relations with the USSR, to which it will look for aid and trade, for support on the Kashmir issue, and especially for help in India's problems with Peiping. (Paras. 21-25)

E. India now recognizes that its major foreign policy problem for the indefinite future will be centered on the threat of Communist China. Neither side is likely to make sufficient concessions to enable a border settlement to be reached in the near future. India's attempt to force Chinese withdrawal from forward positions in the Ladakh section of Kashmir probably will result in border clashes, though the odds are against any major military escalation. (Paras. 27-28)

F. Relations with Pakistan, which improved during President Ayub's first two years in power, have again deteriorated. There has been an upsurge of Hindu-Moslem tensions in both countries, and the Kashmir dispute is once more active. We believe a Kashmir settlement is unlikely and that a further worsening of lndo-Pakistani relations is probable. (Para. 29)

G. India is concerned at the establishment of closer relations between Nepal and Communist China. New Delhi will continue its efforts to persuade the Nepalese King of the dangers of this policy and to bring about a rapprochement between him and the disaffected Nepali Congress Party. With respect to southeast Asia, India is unlikely, during the next few years at least, to develop either the will or the capability significantly to affect events in the area, and its policy is likely to amount to little more than urging peace and conciliation. (Paras. 30-31)

[Here follows an 8-page Discussion section.]

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 79 R 0102A, ODDI Registry of NIE and SNIE Files, Box 212. Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, The Joint Staff, AEC, and NSA.” All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in this estimate on May 31, except the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

128. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 128. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, June 1, 1962.

SUBJECT

Proposed Message to Prime Minister Macmillan Concerning Possibility of British Offering to India an Alternative to MIG-21's

The purpose of this memorandum is to request you to authorize the dispatch of the enclosed message1 from you to Prime Minister Macmillan concerning Indian efforts to a acquire Soviet MIG-21's and the possibility of the British offering an alternative.

The Government of India has decided at the highest level to begin now to acquire a supersonic fighter capability. For this purpose the Indians have looked into the F-104, Super Mystere (French), Lightnings (British), and the MIG-21. The Indians are apparently prepared to go ahead with the MIG-21's on the basis of the findings of an Indian Mission which has just returned from Moscow. Factors which have led the Indians to this point include political considerations, early availability of the MIG's, payment in Indian rupees and Soviet promises of assistance in future manufacture in India.

Should the Indians acquire the MIG-21's, the Indian Air Force would be compelled to build its whole fighter aircraft weapons system, of which the airplane itself is only a part, on the Soviet pattern. This would lead probably to the adoption of Soviet bomber and missile systems as being more compatible with the fighter system than would be equipment from the West. In any event, the assignment of large numbers of Soviet technicians to the Indian Air Force would force a withdrawal of the West from those areas where security is a factor (the British are already faced with this problem), inviting further penetration by the Soviets. To have this possibility occur at this time would be particularly unfortunate since senior, basically Western-oriented officers will be retiring in favor of a generation which lacks the strong tradition of close ties with the West.

Ambassador Galbraith has been assured by Foreign Secretary Desai that a final decision will not be taken for another ten days. We are certain, however, that Krishna Menon will be working on Prime Minister Nehru in the interval to get him to agree to the MIG transaction. He can be expected to bring the Prime Minister to this decision unless a satisfactory Western alternative can be offered.

The provision of F-104's is not a feasible alternative at the present because (a) we believe such a move would seriously jeopardize our essential interests in Pakistan, (b)in view of Indian attitudes towards our security procedures we cannot readily provide the necessary associated classified equipment, and (c) India's lack of foreign exchange would make it necessary to provide the equipment under some form of military aid from the United States, a step which would raise major political problems at home and over sea.2

We have examined other possible Western alternatives and have concluded that we should first explore with the British the possibility of their providing Lightnings. The British traditionally have been India's primary source of modern military equipment. Mr. Ball broached this subject with Lord Hood on Monday.3 It was suggested that we were prepared to explore ways of helping the British meet whatever problems this might create for them.

We have not received a reaction from London. In view of the urgency and seriousness of this matter, I recommend that you under-score the importance which we attach to it by authorizing me to send the enclosed message from you to Prime Minister Macmillan.

Dean Rusk4

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-162. Secret. Drafted by Cameron and Horgan and cleared in BNA by Milton G. Rewinkel. A typed notation on the source text indicates that the enclosed telegram was approved as amended and sent on June 1.

1 For text of the telegram as sent, see Document 129.

2 A handwritten note in the margin at this point, in an unknown hand, reads: “a flat decision on this should await results in London.”

3 A memorandum of Ball's conversation on May 28 with the Minister of the British Embassy is in Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/2862.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original.

129. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 129. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, June 1, 1962, 8:52 p.m.

6411. Please transmit urgently following message from President to Prime Minister:

I want you to know personally how much importance I attach to finding an alternative to the MIG-21s and associated manufacturing facilities which the Indians are now seriously considering. We believe that such a Soviet entry into India's military picture could have very grave long-range consequences for Indian internal politics. Mr. Ball discussed this matter with Lord Hood on Monday and asked whether your Government might be in a position to provide Lightnings as such an alternative. I have thought a great deal about this matter, and this is the only way I can now see to meet a problem which greatly concerns us both. I can well understand that the provision of Lightnings on terms satisfactory to the Indians might give you some difficulties. I should be glad to see how we might assist you in meeting these difficulties.

This is, in my view, a very urgent matter. We have indications that a final decision to acquire the MIG-21s may be reached in the middle of June so that if at all possible we need to find means of making a counter offer next week.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-162. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Grant and Cameron, cleared by Rewinkel and Bromley Smith, and approved by Rusk.

130. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 130. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, June 4, 1962, 5:17p.m.

6441. Deptel 6411.1 There follows for your information Prime Minister's reply of June 4 to President's message contained reftel: “Thank you for your message delivered on June 2 about fighter aircraft for India. We are now looking into this question as a matter of urgency and hope soon to be ready to concert a plan with you. One of our difficulties is that it may take a little time to step up the rate of production of Lightnings. We shall of course be ready to consider diverting existing orders to India, but this in its turn raises very troublesome questions.

In the meanwhile we are asking our High Commissioner in Delhi to talk in general terms to Mr. Nehru when he sees him on June 7, and to say that the Commonwealth Secretary will be raising this substantively when he visits Delhi on June 15.”

Prime Minister's reply was sent directly to White House.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-462. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Cameron, cleared by Bromley Smith, and approved by Talbot.

1 Document 129.

131. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 131. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, June 4, 1962, 8:29 p.m.

6452. Deptel 6441.1 There follows for you information text of President's reply to Prime Minister's letter of June 4: “I am very grateful for your 4 June message about fighters for India. If we concert some plan for a counter offer in time to forestall the MIG-21 deal it will be effort well spent.

I am concerned, however, lest Nehru approve the MIG purchase before we have time to counter it. Galbraith has been promised no final action would be taken until he returns around 15 June. However, we also have reports that it is practically buttoned up. Therefore I would hope that when Gore-Booth sees Nehru on 7 June, he could at least mention that a favorable U.K. offer was in the wind, and seek assurances that no decision would be taken until it could be fully considered. This could help to get us the necessary time.”

President's reply was sent directly to Prime Minister.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-462. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Cameron, cleared by U. Alexis Johnson in draft and with the White House, and approved by Talbot.

1 Document 130.

132. Special National Intelligence Estimate 132. Special National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, June 6, 1962.

SNIE 31/32-62

PROBABLE REACTION OF PAKISTAN TO THE PROVISIONOF SUPERSONIC FIGHTER AIRCRAFT TO INDIABY THE US OR OTHER WESTERN COUNTRIES

The Problem

To estimate Pakistan's reaction to the provision of supersonic fighter aircraft to India by the US as a means of forestalling Indian acceptance of MIG-21s from the USSR. In addition, to assess (a) Pakistan's reactions to provision of comparable fighters by other Western suppliers; (b) Pakistan's reaction to US provision to India of significant military equipment other than fighter aircraft; and (c) India's probable response to Western offers of fighters or other military equipment.

(Note: This estimate does not consider the future military or political implications for India of the acquisition of supersonic fighter aircraft, either from the West or from the USSR.)

Conclusions

A. US provision of F-104 fighter aircraft to India would draw a sharply adverse reaction from Pakistan. Though we think that Pakistan would be unlikely to repudiate its Western ties, it would almost certainly manifest a greater degree of “independence” in foreign policy, characterized by a markedly increased intransigence toward the US. In particular, Pakistan would certainly not permit expansion of the special US facilities and would probably impose new restrictions on them. (Paras. 2-9)

B. The Pakistanis would probably react less severely if supersonic fighters were provided India by the UK, France, or some other Western source. (Para. 10)

C. We believe that the Pakistanis would react as strongly to sizable and long-term US support for Indian ground and naval forces as they would to the provision of F-104s. (Para. 11)

D. Under present circumstances, we believe it doubtful that India would accept F-104s or other Western supersonic fighters in lieu of the MIG-21s. (Paras. 12-13)

[Here follows a 3-page Discussion section.]

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 79 R 01012A, ODDI Registry of NIE and SNIE Files, Box 212. Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force.” All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in this estimate on June 6, except the Atomic Energy Commission representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

133. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 133. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, June 9, 1962, 4:08 p.m.

6560. There follows for your information text of Prime Minister Macmillan's message to President of June 7:

Verbatim Text

We have now had a very thorough examination of the practical possibilities for making a counter offer of fighters for India.

In our view there are two aspects of this matter. One is the question of what fighters the Indians will operate for the next two or three years, and the other is what engines they will use for their own future fighters—H.F. 24. We believe that the most important point for the Free World as a whole is to ensure that the Russians do not secure a position in the industrial and technological field in India by persuading the Indians to accept Russian engines for the H.F. 24. As you probably know, the alternative to this is to develop the Orpheus 12 engine. The cost of this development is expected to be about three million pounds and development of the engine could be kept in phase with development of the H.F. 24 itself. We believe that an agreement for the supply of the Orpheus 12 for the H.F. 24 could be quickly reached with the Indians and we would be prepared to press this on them if your government could renew the agreement to contribute three-quarters of the cost of this development of the engine. In this way I would hope that a joint Anglo-American offer could prevent the main danger from materializing.

The immediate problem of providing modern fighters to offset the acquisition by Pakistan of F-104's is, I fear, more difficult. At the moment the English Electric Company's production of Lightnings is planned on the basis of Royal Air Force needs for which indeed production is at present barely adequate. We have made every effort with the company but it is dear that they could not appreciably expand their production in time to help India, as well as to meet our own requirements. Now that countries in the Middle East and Far East have modern Soviet aircraft in service with their own forces, the Royal Air Force cannot afford to be behind and so we must have the Mark II Lightnings as soon as they come off the production line. As I understand it the only practical alternative to the Lightnings are F-104's. I know that the Indians have said that they will not take these aircraft, but I would suggest that you could now put very strong pressure on the Indians to accept F-104's pending the arrival of their own aircraft. After all, they are getting very large sums of money from you which they could not get from anyone else. Could you not represent to them that if they accept Russian offers Congress might resist your proposals for economic aid to India? I would have thought that this would be a very powerful argument.

I am sorry that we cannot do better about the Lightnings but I do seriously believe that the question of the engines is more important and that it should be possible to persuade the Indians to accept your F-104's. I would hope that Duncan Sandys, who arrives in India about June 16, might be able to deploy the arguments with good effect. End Verbatim Text.

Copies other messages this series have been pouched.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-962. Top Secret. Drafted by Cameron, cleared by Rewinkel and Bromley Smith, and approved by Grant.

134. Telegram From the White House to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 134. Telegram From the White House to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, June 9, 1962, 5:44 p.m.

CAP 5279-62. Amembassy London pass action to Prime Minister Macmillan as soon as possible and keep as info for Ambassador. From the President.

Dear Prime Minister,

I fully understand your difficulties over Lightning Mark II's for India. I also share your feeling that we must at the very least try to forestall Indian manufacture of MIG's. However, from the standpoint of US public and congressional reaction and its impact on our aid legislation, an initial MIG purchase will be fully as bad. It may compromise the long-range policy of massive aid to India on which we are embarked.

Equally worrisome, we see Krishna Menon embarked on a vital test of strength over this issue, and reportedly on the verge of success.

Therefore, we still regard it as of the highest importance to get in with at least a spoiling offer of aircraft as well as engines by mid-June. We have again reviewed the F-104 possibility, but regretfully conclude that it involves far too much risk of a disastrous Pakistani reaction involving the Peshawar facilities. An offer of F-104 would also play hob on our domestic scene. We are trying out the French on Mirage III's but are dubious that they could come through in time.

All this leads me to try once more on Lightnings. Even an offer which was unlikely to be accepted might at least buy us time to dredge up other alternatives. Perhaps you would consider an interim offer of some of the Mark I's and I-A's I understand you have in service, to be replaced later by new models.

We are prepared to do whatever is necessary within reason to fill any temporary gap in your defenses and to make this tough choice otherwise attractive. Secretary McNamara tells me that there are a number of possibilities to this end, including a loan of F-104's for your defense, and I am prepared to have him or some of his top people come over immediately to discuss them with Watkinson. Let me assure you that I would not tackle you again on this issue, if I did not feel strongly that the Indian MIG deal will have most adverse effects on the interests of us both.

With warm regards,

John F Kennedy

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-962. Secret; Niact. Repeated to the Department of State and to the Department of Defense for William Bundy. The source text is the Department of State copy.

135. Telegram From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Kennedy 135. Telegram From Prime Minister Macmillan to President KennedySource

London, June 13, 1962.

T.293/62. Message Begins.

Dear Friend

1. The more we consider the question of the fighter programme for the Indian Air Force from the point of view of making an attractive offer to India, the clearer it becomes that the Indians must be even more concerned with possible methods of payment than with the quality or even the cost of goods and services supplied.

2. On the particular question you put to me in your last message1 I am of course most grateful for your offer of the loan of F-104s. Accept-ance of this offer would however present us with serious training and logistic difficulties. We are equally grateful to you for offering to deploy fighter squadrons to cover any gap created here. Perhaps I could leave this over for the time being.

3. Lightning Mark I's of which we have three squadrons now in front line service in the Royal Air Force would be most unlikely to satisfy Indian requirements. I cannot see the Indians accepting secondhand aircraft however good; also they would need to be refurbished which would take time.

4. Despite its relatively short range, the Lightning Mark 2 is a better aircraft than the MIG because of its superior night fighter capacity. It will cost about #600,000. At a sacrifice which we would only accept because of the major political factors which you mention, we could let the Indians have every other one off the production line; this would give them eight aircraft by the end of 1962 and thereafter two or three a month up to a total of twenty four aircraft.

5. In order to avoid our own difficulties with Pakistan we should in any case have to look to the United States Government to meet the difference in cost between these aircraft and the MIG 21s at the price for which the Russians have offered these to India. It remains most important in my view that the Indians should go on with their plans to manufacture H.F. 24s and we therefore consider the developing of the Orpheus 12 engine to be the more important part of our counter-offer to India. I should be grateful for confirmation that the United States will contribute 75 per cent of the cost of development.

6. I should add that if the Indians commit themselves to a purchase of Lightning Mark 2s they will also need to buy two dual type aircraft for training; an outfit of Fire Streak air-to-air missile and a flight simulator: the total bill for these additional requirements would amount to some five million pounds.

7. The major problem still remains. It is clearly quite impossible for India to pay us for the aircraft (even at three hundred thousand pounds each) and the training facilities and ammunition to a total amount of twelve million pounds except in blocked rupees, which are of no use to us and with which British firms are already embarrassingly well supplied. In our present economic situation I am unable to agree to what amounts to a free gift to India on this scale.

8. The solution would be for you to meet the full cost of supplying the aircraft. The only alternative that we can see is that these goods and services should be supplied to India in replacements for an equivalent amount of civil aid under existing aid programmes. I suspect that there would be considerable fractional difficulties about this, but in any case it is obviously not a suggestion which the Indian Government would accept unless they realized that by buying MIGs they run the risk of curtailment or cessation of American aid which I mentioned in my message to you of June 7.2

9. My conclusion therefore is that the only factor which might bring the Indians to heel would be the fear of losing a substantial part of the large scale aid which they receive from the United States. It seems to us therefore that the best course might be for you to send a personal message to Nehru warning him that a decision by India to buy armaments from Russia might prejudice the attitude of Congress so gravely as to endanger seriously India's future prospects of obtaining continuing aid on the present scale from the United States.

10. I should be glad to have your reactions to the ideas I have set out above, and also to learn what reply you have had from the French about the possibility of their supplying Mirages.300

Yours sincerely,

Harold Macmillan

* Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 204, Macmillan Correspondence with Kennedy, 1962, Vol. III. Top Secret; Eyes Only. The telegram apparently was sent to the British Embassy to be conveyed to the White House.

1 Document 134.

2 See Document 133.

300 The French Embassy informed the Department on June 9 that France would have difficulty in offering to supply two squadrons of Mirage II fighters to India. The difficulty lay in a currency problem. The French were concerned that to sell for Indian rupees or on soft terms could not be kept secret and would have undesirable effects on French sales in other parts of the world. (Telegram 6624 to Paris, June 9; Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-962)

136. Memorandum of Conversation 136. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, June 14, 1962.

PRESENT

The President

Mr. George Ball

Mr. U. Alexis Johnson

Ambassador Galbraith

Ambassador McConaughy

Mr. James P. Grant

Mr. Robert McNamara

Mr. McG. Bundy

Mr. William P. Bundy

Mr. R.W. Komer

DECISIONS TAKEN AT PRESIDENT'S MEETING ONCOUNTERING MIG SALE TO INDIA, 14 JUNE 1962

The President was opposed to subsidizing the sale of two Lightning Mark II squadrons to India for rupees, at a likely cost of around $60 million.

Instead he approved telling Prime Minister Macmillan that we would be willing to share 50/50 the hard currency cost of one Lightning squadron. We would also finance 75 per cent of the further development cost of the Orpheus engine, if the Indians accepted the UK offer. To complete the package, he approved a simultaneous US offer to sell India nine C-130 transports for rupees. All of the above are contingent upon the Indians not buying the MIG-21.

The President directed that Ambassador Galbraith make a strong presentation to Nehru on the likely blow to US aid prospects if the Indians bought MIGs. He agreed to send a personal letter to Nehru for Galbraith to present after his first talk with Nehru.

The President desired that we tell Ayub frankly why we were trying to forestall an Indian purchase of MIGs. He expressed willingness to write Ayub a personal letter to try to disarm him. He reserved judgment on the suggestion that we attempt to placate Ayub by offering him the public security reassurances he has been seeking.

RWK

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 6/11/62-6/16/62. Secret. Drafted on June 15 by Komer. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.)

137. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 137. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, June 14, 1962, 8:58 p.m.

6679. Please transmit urgently following message from President to Prime Minister:

We are most appreciative of your willingness to come up with a Lightning Mark II offer, despite the real sacrifice involved. I am concerned, however, lest Nehru's press conference remarks mean that he has all but made up his mind to buy MIGs. The unfortunate leak to The New York Times from Delhi also suggests that it will be difficult to keep the US role in any counter-offer from being too transparent and exposing us to a strong Pakistani as well as domestic US reaction which may jeopardize other programs.

Nonetheless, I still believe that it is in our mutual interest to forestall if possible a crucial step toward Indian acceptance of the USSR as a main source of arms supply. Even if we fail in this endeavor, we want to deprive hostile elements in India of the argument that India had no reasonable alternative.

Therefore, we emphatically support the Orpheus engine offer, and will finance 75 per cent of the three million pounds additional you estimate is required to develop it.

As you know, we believe that it is equally important to offer some aircraft in order to provide an alternative comparable to the MIG offer. We share your view that reasonably comparable soft currency terms will also carry great weight with the Indians, and that we should allow payment in rupees to the extent necessary.

In reflecting we have looked again at the possibility of offering to provide Nehru transport aircraft, on which his need vis-a-vis the Communist Chinese is much more valid than for the fighters, and where the Pakistani reaction would be minimized. Accordingly, I conclude that the farthest we should now go is to offer to sell India a single squadron (12 aircraft) of the Lightning Mark II, for rupees at a stated price of perhaps 300,000 pounds, plus accessories which we suppose would be about 3 million pounds or a little more than half of the 5 million estimate for the two squadrons. In addition, we on the US side would offer to provide nine C-130 transports as a sale for rupees. This latter would of course be left to Galbraith, but Sandys could refer to indications from us in this direction.

If you were prepared to do this, we would hope that you could bear one-half of the real cost of the fighters, which would total about 10.2 million pounds. We would make up the rest through some means involving greater participation in military research projects, or through some economic aid sharing, or a combination of the two. Our joint interests are such, as I am sure you will agree, that we should not hesitate to reallocate financial responsibilities in order to advance our common interests or minimize our common difficulties. I trust that these assurances are sufficient so that you can go ahead with an offer of twelve Lightnings as well as the Orpheus.

We are of course anxious to forestall a violent Pakistani reaction, for reasons I have mentioned. In our approach to the Pakistanis, we should both tell them frankly that it is to save them and us from something worse, i.e., a major Soviet re-equipment of the Indians of a nature we cannot control.

Let me also assure you that we are bending every effort to bring home to Nehru how a MIG purchase might gravely prejudice Congressional approval of continued massive US aid. I had already sent a brief message to Nehru, and am instructing Galbraith to make a full-scale assault as soon as he returns. Sandys too could certainly mention the great concern in Washington lest a MIG deal undermine our whole aid program.

The French reaction is negative so far. But I think you will agree that we should give India the impression, if possible, that there is more than one Western alternative to MIGs. Hence we will continue explorations with the French.

With warm regards.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 204, Kennedy Correspondence with Macmillan, 1962-1963, Vol. II. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Grant, William Bundy, and Komer; cleared by McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Grant. Repeated to Karachi and New Delhi.

138. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 138. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, June 15, 1962.

SUBJECT

U.S.-Pakistan Relations

There is enclosed a memorandum prepared at the request of Mr. McGhee for the President, outlining the current status of U.S.-Pakistan relations. This memorandum has been approved by Ambassador McConaughy, who is presently in Washington.

Further consideration is being given to moves on our part which can improve U.S.-Pakistan relations, in particular to overcome problems arising from U.S. involvement in the India MIG-21 issue. The President may wish to have a review of the results of this investigation prior to Ambassador McConaughy's departure.

A.E. Breisky1

Enclosure2

U.S.-PAKISTAN RELATIONS

We have maintained a close and for the most part friendly alliance with Pakistan since 1954. We and Pakistan have mutually benefited by this alliance, although they and we view it from a different perspective. Recent strains on both partners have caused both to re-examine the value of the alliance. Despite indications that the various causes of strains will not be easy to eliminate, it seems clear that it is in the best national interest of both the U.S. and Pakistan to continue the alliance.

I. The Nature of the Alliance

There exists between the U.S. and Pakistan an extensive range of scientific, cultural, educational, military and political common interests.

The basic objective of U.S. policy toward Pakistan is to insure to the best of our ability its continued existence as an independent nation with a healthy economic development firmly integrated in the non-communist world. We have assisted Pakistan on a massive basis economically and militarily, and to a lesser extent politically. We have guaranteed Pakistan's security against aggression from any quarter. In return we have asked Pakistan to allow us to maintain in the country military communications and intelligence facilities which we consider vital to our national interests. We expect Pakistan to stand with us politically on the major issues dividing the free world from the communist bloc; and stand with us militarily to the extent that it can contribute to regional collective security within the framework of CENTO and SEATO.

The basic objectives of Pakistan policy toward the U.S. are to insure that it can maintain a military capability sufficient to prevent its neighbors, most particularly India, from attempting solutions of outstanding disputes by force; and that it can undertake its much needed economic development under the general protection of the U.S. against the long-range communist threat to its existence.

Pakistan has granted us facilities, the existence of which have brought regional pressure and specific threats of war-like action to bear against it. Pakistan has stood up firmly, after the U-2 incident for example, to this pressure. Pakistan has stood with us on every major political issue except the question of admission of Communist China to the UN.

In return Pakistan has asked us for economic and military assistance, and strong political and moral support on those issues which it considers vital to its existence as an independent nation, principally Kashmir and to a lesser degree the Pakistan-Afghanistan border problem.

II. Background

The course of U.S.-Pakistan relations has been irregular over the last several years. At times when interests seemed to coincide, or when one of the partners in the alliance had a particular need, relations have been excellent. At other times when doubt and frustration on the part of Pakistan as to the validity and utility of its commitment has caused it to question the alliance, or when our irritation at some particular action of Pakistan's made us do likewise, relations have worsened appreciably. We are currently in a low period similar to the one existing before President Ayub's visit to the U.S. in 1961. At that time Pakistan considered the new Administration to be so biased in favor of India as to be detrimental to Pakistan's interests.

However, U.S.-Pakistan relations improved markedly as a result of President Ayub's visit during which both countries were reassured as to the good intentions of the other. President Ayub left the U.S. with these understandings on the subjects of his main interests:

Kashmir

a. The President would make a major effort in November 1961 to get Nehru to negotiate reasonably on Kashmir.

b. If this effort were unsuccessful, the U.S. would then support Pakistan when it again took the issue to the Security Council.

U.S. Military Assistance to India

The U.S. had no current intention of changing its policy on providing military assistance to India and would not unless circumstances in the area altered—for example, if an increased military threat to India from Communist China became apparent. In any case, the U.S. would not change its policy without prior consultation with Pakistan.

Afghanistan

There was a fundamental disagreement between the U.S. and Pakistan on how Pakistan should deal with Afghanistan, but the U.S. would not stand in the way of a Pakistan attempt to deal firmly with the Afghans.

Communist China

The U.S. knew that Pakistan was planning to demarcate its northern border with Communist China in order to prevent a situation similar to the one in Ladakh from arising in Pakistan.

Economic and Military Assistance

The U.S. intended to undertake a thorough look at Pakistan's waterlogging and salinity problem with a view to seeing whether we could not start a practical program to solve it. The U.S. planned to be similarly forthcoming with regard to its other assistance programs, including our part in the Indus Waters scheme and the Second Five Year Plan. Concerning military assistance, the U.S. planned to maintain its current policy and, in addition, supply a squadron of C-130 transport aircraft.

On our side we had substantially the same understandings except for the one in Afghanistan. President Ayub left the impression that, when he spoke of dealing firmly with the Afghans, he was referring to military reprisals by Pakistan against Afghan incursions into Pakistan territory rather than any political actions.

III. Pakistan's Policies Since Ayub Visit

Afghanistan

Our relations with Pakistan took a turn for the worse about a month after Ayub's visit when Pakistan unilaterally and brusquely ordered Afghanistan to close its consulates and trade agencies in Pakistan. Afghanistan thereupon broke off relations with Pakistan and sealed the common border, which has remained closed, except for eight weeks, ever since September 6, 1961. Despite our good offices, including Ambassador Merchant's mission, the situation remains unresolved. We continue to consider that, despite Afghanistan's illogical and stubborn policy, Pakistan has played into the hands of the Soviet Union by its pre-emptory action.

Kashmir

The President attempted without success in November to get Nehru to negotiate on Kashmir. Because of this, and spurred on by what appeared to be a genuine fear of Indian aggressive intent after the Indian seizure of Goa, Pakistan carried through on its plan to take the Kashmir issue to the Security Council, although delaying this move several times at our request while we tried various ways of getting Pakistan and India together—including the President's proposal to send Eugene Black on a good offices mission. There is a definite feeling among Pakistanis—officials and private citizens alike—that we have not lived up fully to the President's commitment to support Pakistan in the UN. Recent efforts by USUN may have changed this opinion to some extent among Pakistan officials, but the general belief remains among the people that the U.S. has let Pakistan down.

U.S. Military Assistance to India

Pakistan's distrust of U.S. intentions was heightened in May by reports that Ambassador Galbraith had attempted to counter an Indian plan to acquire MIG-21's from the Soviet Union by offering to provide F-104's. The fact that India was attempting to build a supersonic capability revived the fear that had been aroused by the Goa take-over. The U.S. has attempted to allay this fear in several ways after Goa, including a confidential renewal of U.S. security guarantees for Pakistan which were contained in a letter from the President to Ayub last January.3 Despite these assurances, Pakistanis at all levels continue to distrust India—particularly Krishna Menon—and appear to be genuinely apprehensive at the possibility of an attack from India.

Communist China

When Pakistan and Communist China announced jointly in May that they intended to negotiate the border between Pakistan-held Kashmir and Singhiang Province, India reacted sharply in the belief that both Pakistan and Communist China were attempting to put pressure on India. Although the U.S. has maintained official silence on the subject, early press reports gave Pakistan officials the idea that the U.S. was displeased at Pakistan action. The Pakistan Ambassador here and the Pakistan Foreign Secretary in Karachi have gone to great lengths to justify Pakistan's policy on this matter.

U.S. Economic and Military Assistance

Pakistan was greatly reassured by U.S. support which resulted in the IBRD Consortium's pledging the full amount requested for the first two years of the Second Five Year Plan. However, the delay in issuance of the report from Dr. Wiesner's office on salinity, and the revisions that have had to be made on the Indus Waters scheme have aroused doubts in Pakistan as to the validity of our commitments. On the military side Pakistan defense officials desire to maintain close association with the U.S. but are worried that we do not reciprocate. Washington rumors and delays in MAAG programming and deliveries have accentuated these fears. Pakistan defense officials have also been putting pressure on us in CENTO, SEATO and within the framework of our bilateral understanding to engage in contingency planning against possible attack from India or Afghanistan.

The accumulation of doubt and frustration in Pakistan as a result of the foregoing has led politically aware Pakistanis to question the value of Pakistan's alliance just at a time when a measure of political freedom returned to the country after over three and a half years of martial law. The newly convened National Assembly will have some restraint on the power of the Executive and Ayub will thus have to be responsive or at least alert to its wishes. He will not be able to make decisions affecting Pakistan's foreign policy posture without being more responsive to the pressure of public opinion than he has in the past. There have been some recent indications of a possible reappraisal by Pakistan of its alignment with the West. Logically, however, it would seem that Pakistan has really no practical alternative to its alliance with the U.S. Despite increasingly bold opposition, Ayub can be expected to follow substantially the same course as he has in the past.

IV. Recent U.S. Attitudes

Beginning with Pakistan's abrupt action against Afghanistan in August 1961, our view of Pakistan's course of action has become more and more critical. It has seemed that Pakistan is asking for more from us than we are prepared to give in order to maintain our special relationship. Furthermore, Pakistan's actions have at times seemed to have been taken without sufficient consultation with us and there has been an increasing breakdown of communication.

Some of the major irritants have been listed above—i.e., Pakistan-Afghanistan impasse, Kashmir, Pakistan-Chinese Communist relations, differing views on CENTO and SEATO. In connection with the latter organization, Ayub recently failed to respond to the U.S. suggestion to send token forces to Thailand.

We too have been taking stock of the alliance in the light of the unsatisfactory relations of the past year. Pakistan seems determined to try to limit U.S. freedom of action with respect to India and to a lesser extent, with respect to Afghanistan. The present judgment is that the value of our special relationship with Pakistan, particularly in the military field, is such that we cannot contemplate withdrawal from the alliance. We cannot, furthermore, yet accept the dissolution of CENTO and SEATO, which might follow if Pakistan on its side withdrew.

Conclusion

We recognize the difficulties which we face ahead in trying simultaneously to maintain our relationship with Pakistan and to develop an increasingly effective relationship with India. Nevertheless, continuation of the alliance is in our interest. Not only is a free and cooperative Pakistan essential to the stability and security of South Asia and to our presence there, but there is no satisfactory alternative site for our facilities which are vital to our national interest.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90D/6-1562. Secret. Drafted by Gatch and McGhee and cleared by Grant, Cameron, McGhee, and McConaughy.

1 Breisky signed for Brubeck above Brubeck's typed signature.

2 Secret.

3 See Document 100.

139. Memorandum for the Record 139. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, June 19, 1962, 4 p.m.

Meeting with the President on India-Pakistan Problems

PRESENT

The President

Mr. G. McGhee

Mr. J. Grant

Ambassador McConaughy

Mr. McG. Bundy

Mr. R. Komer

1. The President approved a reply to Prime Minister Macmillan's messages of 181 and 19 June2 on a counter-offer to forestall Indian purchase of MIG-21s. He accepted Mr. McGhee's arguments as to why we couldn't sell F-104s to India for rupees, even though it was technically feasible to do so. These were chiefly the likely strong Pakistani reaction, which might even lead to restrictions on our key intelligence facilities, and secondarily the likely Congressional reaction. The President agreed to tell Macmillan that we would pay more than half the hard currency costs of a Lightning squadron if necessary, especially if we could find some way to minimize the dollar drain involved.

2. Ambassador McConaughy explained how he would propose to explain our maneuvers to Ayub, depending upon the possible outcome in Delhi. The President instructed Ambassador McConaughy to tell Ayub in the event our counter-offer seemed likely to be accepted that we were serving Pakistani interests as well as ours, and that a Western-controlled supply of jets to India was infinitely preferable to uncontrolled reliance on Soviet sources. On the other hand, if the MIG deal went through we should tell them that it didn't change the military balance much (as a hedge against new Pakistani requests for jets), and explain that counter offers to India had been in an attempt to spoil this deal. The President was dubious about giving more jets to the Pakistani regardless of what happened.

3. The desirability of meeting the Pakistani request for bilateral joint planning vis-a-vis India and Afghanistan was discussed. Although Ambassador McConaughy pointed out how the Pakistani argued that this was purely contingency planning of the sort any two allied general staffs would normally carry out, the President was opposed to our engaging in any joint planning which might leak to the Indians and suggest that we were planning with the Paks against them.

4. Mr. McGhee noted the Pakistani desire for a public US guarantee of Pakistan's security against Indian aggression. He felt that reiteration of the Pak guarantee in some form might be essential to mollify Ayub if we and the UK supplied planes to India. The President said he was extremely reluctant to give any new commitments to the Pakistani; he queried why we got into such commitments in the first place. Mr. McGhee briefly explained the history of our past “guarantees” to Pakistan and India.

Mr. McGhee suggested that if we could get the two countries, perhaps in the UN discussion on Kashmir, to make public statements disavowing any intention of attacking each other, the US could then come out with a public statement noting these declarations and “guaranteeing” the security of each in event of aggression by the other. Mr. Grant noted that our main objective in supplying such security reassurances to Pakistan was to forestall their “doing something” to our Peshawar facilities in retaliation for what they regarded as pro-Indian US actions. The President reserved judgment on any such idea, and asked that it be studied further when the occasion arose.

The President said that perhaps he ought to have one more meeting with McConaughy before the latter returned to Pakistan; he also thought that he might write a letter to Ayub.

R.W. Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 6/20/62-6/24/62. Secret. Drafted by Komer on June 20. The time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is taken from the President's Appointment Book. (Ibid.)

1 Macmillan's message of June 18 to Kennedy reported on two “difficult” conversations that British Commonwealth Secretary Duncan Sandys had with Nehru concerning the Indian desire to purchase supersonic aircraft. Nehru stated that the F-104 fighters supplied to Pakistan by the United States had created a strong public demand in India for comparable aircraft. Of the Western aircraft being considered, the Indian military viewed the British Lightning fighter as least suited to their needs. Only the Soviet MIG, in Nehru's view, could be produced and offered at a price India could afford. An offer of Western aircraft at a comparable price would amount to military assistance and compromise India's neutrality. (Telegram 6781 to London, June 18; Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-1862)

2 On June 19, Macmillan informed Kennedy that he had received a further report from Sandys which was more optimistic. Sandys had learned from Indian President Radhakrishnan that Nehru was concerned about the strong U.S. and British reactions to the projected purchase of MIGs, and would be glad to find a way to resolve the issue that did not involve too much loss of face. Radhakrishnan and Desai had urged Nehru to put the question into “cold storage” for several months. (Telegram 6792 to London, June 19; ibid., 791.5622/6-1962)

140. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 140. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, June 19, 1962, 8:52 p.m.

6801. Eyes Only for Ambassador. Please transmit urgently following message from President to Prime Minister:

“I am much encouraged by your message of June 19th.1 We too are hopeful that we can shake the Indians sufficiently to get the whole question put into cold storage for a while. However, we are not sanguine at this point that even Desai and Radhakrishnan will be able to match Menon's inevitable counter-arguments. We need to strengthen the hand of our friends as much as possible at this critical juncture.

Therefore, while I agree with you that we need not reach any irrevocable decisions now about what we are prepared to offer the Indians, I believe that we should dangle a bit more bait before them than Sandys felt able to do. A spoiling offer of this sort seems all the more important to me if we think Nehru is unlikely to buy it. It seems to me that Nehru might best save face by rejecting what both sides have to offer at this point. And even if he ultimately buys MIGs we want to put our friends in India in a position to say in the event of an aid cut or other adverse consequences that Krishna Menon and his supporters brought down disaster on India by pushing through the MIG deal despite the fact of a reasonable alternative.

Galbraith too thinks there is some chance that if we make enough of a fuss about their taking MIGs, combined with a good counter offer, the Indians may end up taking neither in the immediate months ahead. This would be the best outcome by far.

However, Nehru's response to Sandys confirms our feeling that to offer the Orpheus engine alone would not suffice even for our minimum purposes. Therefore, it still seems important to us that some supersonic fighters be at least tentatively offered as well. The Mirage seems out and we are not able to sell 104's for rupees at this time. On the one hand, we fear that if the US provided this type of equipment to India for the first time, Ayub would be unable to contain a Pakistani reaction which might endanger our use of the key facilities of which you are aware. On the other hand, Nehru would be least likely of all, from his domestic political viewpoint, to consider an offer of 104's from us as a real alternative to that from the USSR. We also would have a most difficult domestic problem. Finally, either the Mirage or 104 would involve the same element of subsidy to which Nehru objects. So we are thrust back on the Lightning.

Let me add that Galbraith has just come in from Delhi urging that a plausible alternative beyond the Orpheus remains essential if Menon is not to have a clear hand. As I see it, only Lightnings offer this alternative.

For these reasons, I hope you can agree to indicating to the Indians that if they are interested you are prepared to discuss with them a sale of one squadron of Lightnings on reasonably competitive terms. If the financial side of the package we proposed gives you serious problems, I am prepared to pick up a greater share of the cost, especially if the dollar drain can be minimized; however, I recognize that the Indians might not accept Lightnings in any event.

In the last analysis, you and I share a great responsibility for attempting to forestall an expanded Soviet military presence in the sub-continent. We only press the Lightning offer upon you because a comparable Western alternative to MIGs, even if not accepted, seems so important to keeping up the pressure which we both agree is essential at this point.2

With warm regards,”

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-1962. Top Secret; Niact; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Cameron and Komer, cleared by McGhee, and McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Grant. Repeated to Karachi, New Delhi, and Paris eyes only for Rusk.

1 See footnote 2, Document 139.

2 Macmillan responded on June 20 that he agreed with Kennedy's general assessment and had given instructions for re-examination of the possibility of selling Lightnings with a view to formulating proposals for the Indians. (Telegram 6825 to London, June 20; Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-2062)

141. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 141. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, June 20, 1962, midnight.

4119. Eyes Only for President. I met Nehru for an hour at 7:15 and, subject to finding a definite alternative to MIGs and Menon's operations on return, I am reasonably encouraged. Though looking tired Nehru was alert and seemed less affected by his illness than I had expected. Except for pleasantries at beginning and end entire discussion was on the MIGs. I made these points: (1) That our concern was with effect acquisition on Indian reputation for neutrality and nonalignment and political effect in US. Interpretation was more important than the fact. I noted that word MIG like U-boat was highly evocative and that we hadn't raised objection to 12s or helicopters.

(2) That purchase would be for rupees and no one, myself included, would perceive that food sales for rupees was aid while airplane sales for rupees a commercial transaction.

(3) [apparent omission] Expensive and sophisticated weapons in the area, that we continued to believe the main chance lay with economic development which these planes put in double jeopardy by adverse Congressional reaction as well as diversion of resources.

In response Nehru said that MIGs had come to attention in normal course of looking at supersonic fighters. Investigating officers “not at all pro-Soviet” found them simpler and better suited to manufacture in India than American, British, French. He cited particular doubts about the Lightning. Indians were also attracted by the price. He then said he appreciated our reaction and the problem that the purchase would present for the President vis-a-vis the Congress and public.

On the matter of aid he tried somewhat unenthusiastically to insist this was a commercial purchase and the rupees would soon be spent in the normal course of events. I responded with an argument previously used that this put a curious interpretation on our restraint on spending rupees. In the end, I think he rather yielded the point.

Nehru then said that he was of two minds on buying such equipment and perhaps they were safer without it. He agreed only because Pakistan had the planes, recalling his refusal of an offer of planes by Eisenhower. I took the occasion to give him a fill-in on background of arms aid to Pakistanis, the technical limitations of supersonic fighters and to minimize the importance of the resulting Pakistan air power. I noted that we were not offering India 104s because we accepted her policy of nonalignment. We would be in a poor position to protest aid from the Soviets that impaired that policy if we offered it ourselves.

There was a good deal more discussion in this vein but the foregoing will give the general flavor. Toward the end the following 3 points of importance emerged: (1) Nehru said that no offer has been made by the Soviets and no negotiations have been entered into. In response to a direct question he said that while despatch of an investigating team was being considered there would be “no decision in the immediate future or the near future.”

(2) I asked him to consider a British counter-offer on comparable terms, including the Orpheus, and noted our willingness should the need arise to help on dual-purposes materiel relative to the Northern border. While I mentioned the C-130 as an example, I left the numbers fuzzy, recalling that we had previously helped him out with similar equipment. He said he would consider British offer.

(3) He said that Sandys had reminded him of the promise to consult before going to the Soviets for planes, a promise which he said had slipped his mind. He had given promise at behest of Mountbatten, implying that it wouldn't have been given to anyone else. He left me with the impression that he intends rather reluctantly to honor it.

I have the impression of substantial progress in getting the deal postponed. This is on the assumption of a counter-offer which it will be evident was always essential in the background and, needless to say, Menon will bend every effort to remove the block when he gets back, and his ability to do so is of course related to the Prime Minister's susceptible state of health. During the next few days I will talk with Morarji Desai and, should he initiate the discussion, with TTK, but I must avoid seeming to build up a campaign. The press swarmed over me after my meeting and in view of the special sensitivity of our role in this matter I said nothing either on the record, off the record, or for background and would urge the same curious [cautious?] policy on Washington.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-2062. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to Paris eyes only for the Secretary and to London and Karachi for the Charge and/or Ambassador only.

142. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 142. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, June 21, 1962, 11 a.m.

4122. Eyes Only for Acting Secretary. Pass White House for President. Reference Embassy telegram 4119.1 With President's agreement I would urge a letter along following lines. The purpose as you will see is to confirm the fact of delay and consideration of a British alternative.

“I was very glad to get Ambassador Galbraith's report of his talk with you. The news that the purchase is not imminent and that you will be able to consider an alternative British offer comes to us as a real relief. I am not less grateful for knowing that you are under considerable political pressure on the matter.

“As Galbraith has told you the word MIG arouses special emotion and in this election year here we have been having particular trouble with aid legislation. Apart from the India cut, which we have succeeded for the moment in getting largely restored, and Poland and Yugoslavia where we have come to expect trouble, we had a serious setback on payments to the Philippines. This was particularly indicative of the Congressional mood for our good relations with that country have always been an especial source of pride in the Congress and throughout the US.

“I am sure you realize that we do not want to put pressure on our friends or even seem to do so and decisions such as these are wholly yours. But where, as in this case, they involve matters of deep common concern, and in particular our ability to help each other, I know you would wish me to place the problem before you.

“Ambassador Galbraith told me that he found you looking decidedly more fit than the newspaper accounts of your illness had led him to expect. I am delighted and I hope the improvement continues and that you accord yourself the proper care.”2

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-2162. Top Secret; Niact.

1 Document 141.

2 In telegram 4304 to New Delhi, June 21, Galbraith was instructed to deliver the text contained in telegram 4122 to Nehru not as a letter but as a personal message from President Kennedy. The telegram, sent eyes only for Galbraith, cautioned that the White House was concerned that there be no leaks about the message “in view of possible repercussions.” (Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-2162) Galbraith indicated in telegram 4183 from New Delhi, Document 147, that the message had been delivered.

143. Memorandum of Conversation 143. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, June 21, 1962.

SUBJECT

Supersonic Aircraft for India

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Aziz Ahmed, Pakistan Embassy

Mr. Salman Ali, Political Counselor, Pakistan Embassy

M-Mr. McGhee

NEA-Mr. Grant

SOA-John N. Gatch

Mr. McGhee told the Ambassador that he wanted to describe in general terms the efforts on the part of the U.S. and the U.K. to forestall Soviet penetration of the Indian military establishment by the provision of MIG-21s. Mr. McGhee said that we saw the situation as follows: India has a threat to its borders from Communist China; to meet this threat and to balance its air strength with Pakistan's F-104s, India had been seriously considering acquiring a supersonic capability; and we and the U.K. thought that, if India was determined to acquire these planes, it would be better for the planes to come from the West. We believed Soviet influence in the Indian Air Force undesirable, and further believed if there were no alternatives to the Soviets, Krishna Menon's hand would be strengthened in the coming struggle for succession in India.

Mr. McGhee said that, for the foregoing reasons, the U.S. and the U.K. had been discussing the possibility of the U.S. selling India some unspecified transport aircraft and of the U.K. selling some Lightning aircraft. In addition the U.K. was considering the offer of an engine that India could manufacture. He pointed out that both we and the U.K. had supplied India with this type of equipment in the past. He made no specific mention of terms of payment. Mr. McGhee emphasized the U.S. conviction that we and the U.K. were acting in Pakistan's interest as well as our own in this regard.

Ambassador Ahmed said his government disagreed on the seriousness of the Indian threat from the north. Furthermore, India had been informed in May 1960 that Pakistan was going to get F-104s and was only now raising a howl about it. The Ambassador said his government believed India's real motive in getting jets was to increase its strength toward Pakistan. The Indian seizure of Goa, the several bellicose and belligerent statements made by Indian political leaders during the past six months, and now this attempt to get supersonic planes all convinced Pakistan that India meant to threaten it rather than Communist China.

The Ambassador said that there would be an adverse effect on public opinion in Pakistan if the West supplied supersonic aircraft to India. His government was not really convinced that the Soviets had made a genuine offer, and believed the Indians might be using the threat of an offer as a means of bringing pressure to bear on the West to make a counter offer.

Mr. Grant interrupted to say that, according to intelligence available to us, the Soviets were prepared to supply MIG-21s to India if asked, and would do so rather quickly if the Indians accepted the offer.

Ambassador Ahmed said that, in any case, a Western offer, if accepted, will amount to a grant of military assistance to India. The people of Pakistan would view this as an unfriendly act perpetrated by two countries—i.e., the U.S. and the U.K., who are supposed to be Pakistan's allies. Pakistan believed that if India was determined to have supersonic jets, it would be better if they came from the USSR rather than the West. This would at least widen the split between the USSR and Communist China. If, on the other hand, the planes come from the West, tensions will mount between Pakistan and India because the latter will feel free to take a tougher line on Kashmir than in the past.

Mr. McGhee said that Pakistan should be less rather than more apprehensive if India got planes from the West since the West would be in a position to limit the supply. He added that the U.S. doubts that India has any intention of committing aggression against Pakistan.

Mr. Grant reminded Aziz Ahmed that on May 28 the Ambassador had expressed the concern of his government that an Indian supersonic acquisition would result in a serious military imbalance in South Asia. The U.S. and the U.K. are trying to prevent just such a situation since, once Soviets are in the field, they can, and probably will, aggravate any imbalance to suit their own purposes. Mr. Grant added that we see three advantages to the Western counter offer: (1) anti-Menon forces in India will be strengthened; (2) there is a possibility of a long delay before the Indians make up their minds to take either plane; and (3) even if the Western offer is accepted there will be less chance of a real imbalance being created.

Ambassador Ahmed replied that a long delay was unlikely, because both Nehru and Krishna Menon had made this a prestige issue. The serious thing, as far as Pakistan is concerned, is that the West is setting a new pattern by this offer to supply arms to India. The West has no assurances that, even if India accepts the Western offer this time, the Indians would not later turn to the Soviets for different types of military aid. India would thus have the means of putting almost unlimited pressure on the West. In Pakistan the difference between U.S. policy towards allies and neutrals would be further blurred.

Mr. Grant said that the central problem remained to prevent a major additional imbalance in the subcontinent. We have had and continue to have the closest sort of relationship with Pakistan as an ally. We believe we are acting in Pakistan's best interests.

Mr. McGhee said there was a basic contradiction in Pakistan's position. On the one hand it wanted to prevent or minimize an imbalance and on the other it believed it would be preferable to have the planes come from the Soviet Union. Such an arrangement would establish an open-ended channel for an Indian military buildup.

The Ambassador asked what specifically he could tell his government. Mr. McGhee said that the U.S. and the U.K. had been discussing means of forestalling the Soviet attempt to provide India with MIG-21s. Duncan Sandys and Ambassador Galbraith had had separate conversations with Nehru and had each elaborated on the possible adverse consequences for India of a MIG-21 transaction. They had encouraged Nehru to explore the possibility of Western alternatives before making a decision. No specific offer to India had been made and no financial terms had been discussed.

The Ambassador thanked Mr. McGhee and Mr. Grant for the information.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-2162. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted on July 3 by Gatch and approved in M on July 11.

144. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot) to Acting Secretary of State Ball 144. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot) to Acting Secretary of State BallSource

Washington, June 22, 1962.

SUBJECT

Developments in the Kashmir Dispute Before the Security Council

We thought it would be useful to recapitulate briefly some of the principal developments regarding the Kashmir case in the Security Council.

You will recall that the genesis of our intimate involvement with the Kashmir dispute before the Security Council arose during Pakistani President Ayub's visit to the United States last year. Among other things Ayub felt that he had received a commitment from the President to support Pakistan if the issue of Kashmir were raised by Pakistan in the Security Council. After India had rejected the Black mission, Pakistan, against the advice of the United States, in fact brought the Kashmir issue to the Security Council. It soon became clear that Pakistan expected the United States to assume a major active responsibility for advancing Pakistan's position and that an excessively broad interpretation was being placed by Pakistan on the President's commitment. Accordingly, the Department sought to limit Pakistan's interpretation that the United States should actively manage the Kashmir issue in the Security Council to a successful conclusion (Pakistan is not a member of the Security Council). A working definition of the President's commitment was, therefore, agreed in the Department and transmitted by memorandum for Mr. McGeorge Bundy, the White House, on May 17, 1962 (Tab A).1 The working definition reads as follows: “With respect to the Security Council, we believe the United States is committed to sympathetic consideration of and support for any Pakistan initiatives in the Security Council which advance a settlement of the problem. This would include sponsorship of a Pakistan draft resolution even if it were to draw a Soviet veto. We would vote in favor of resolutions which are consonant with the earlier United Nations resolutions (UNCIP) and attempt to enlist support among other members of the Security Council for such resolutions. The United States is not committed, in our view, to vote in favor of any resolution which radically departs from the intent of the earlier resolutions, although we would, of course, examine any such resolution on its merits.”

Meanwhile, our Mission in New York had been instructed to encourage the Pakistani Delegation to put forward its own proposals and resolutions which we would then hope to be able to support. The reason behind this instruction was that, in view of the excessive interpretation by Pakistan of the President's commitment, it was important to make clear to the Pakistanis that we were in fact discharging the commitment, once and for all. This tactic proved effective and on May 15, 1962, Zafrulla Khan, the Pakistani Representative at the United Nations, presented the United States Delegation with two texts of resolutions. Zafrulla at the same time also informed our Delegation that he would see the Irish representative, Ambassador Boland, on the next day and seek his sponsorship of a resolution (New York's 3745).2 On May 17 the Department instructed the Mission to welcome the submission by Pakistan of both draft texts and offer to sponsor and work for the adoption of either (Deptel 2983 to New York).3 On May 19 in a conversation with President Ayub and the Pakistani Foreign Minister, our Ambassador underscored our offer to sponsor and work for the adoption of either draft resolution as a significant affirmative decision on our part in implementation of the President's assurances to President Ayub of last summer (Karachi's 2044).4

Pursuant to Zafrulla's initiative, Ambassador Boland of Ireland together with the United Nations representatives of Ghana, Chile, Venezuela, and the United Arab Republic attempted to draft a resolution acceptable both to Pakistan and India. Behind the scenes we strongly encouraged this initiative to have others sponsor the resolution and worked to assure a feasible text. On June 5 the Boland drafting group (the so-called Little Five) made its final drafting concession to the Indian position by changing a specific reference to third-party assistance to a broader reference to Article 33 of the Charter. This was done in an attempt to keep the Little Five together in the face of the wavering UAR Delegate (New York's 3913).5 However, unrelenting Indian counterpressure against this resolution was being exerted in the Little Five capitals, in New York and in New Delhi where Krishna Menon charged that the Little Five were fronting for the United States and the United Kingdom (New Delhi's 3944).6

By the time Menon had arrived in New York on June 17 the UAR and Ghana had already decided not to co-sponsor the compromise resolution. The Chilean representative had also backed out of sponsorship on his own initiative, thus reducing the Little Five to Ireland and Venezuela. Although the UAR and Ghana defections had been expected to occur despite our persistent efforts, the Chilean action was an unpleasant surprise. Further efforts were being taken to hold the group together when the Venezuelan Delegate, expecting to be a candidate for a high General Assembly office in 1963, showed signs of losing his nerve before Menon's onslaught. Accordingly, on June 19, the Department telephoned the Embassies in Caracas and Santiago to request that the Venezuelan and Chilean representatives co-sponsor, or in the case of the Chilean representative, at least vote for the compromise resolution (Deptel to Caracas 1295, Santiago 1004).7 The representations in Santiago appear to have been successful in assuring an affirmative Chilean vote (Santiago's

1060)8 and Embassy Caracas reported that the Venezuelan Delegate had an absolutely free hand (Caracas 1475).9 Presumably in the interests of his personal aspirations this Delegate then exercised his free hand to withdraw from co-sponsorship, at which stage the Irish Delegate expressed unwillingness to be the sole sponsor. Our Mission immediately made a further effort, assisted by the Irish and French Delegates, to persuade the Venezuelan Delegate to co-sponsor but he flatly refused. In order to keep the resolution alive, our Delegation later that afternoon (June 20) discussed the entire situation with the Pakistani Delegation and acceded to its request that the United States sponsor alone, if necessary, the Little Five text (New York's 4071).10 Two steps were then taken. In order to maintain pressure for the Chilean affirmative vote, essential to a Security Council majority, our Embassy in Santiago again was instructed to approach the Foreign Office and by telephone on June 21 the Embassy reported the Chilean Delegate had a free hand. Meanwhile, the Irish and British Delegations had, at our Mission's behest, recommended to their governments that they be permitted to co-sponsor with the United States. A rapid response was received the morning of June 21—the Irish could not co-sponsor with the United States; the British would if we requested them to do so. Simultaneously our Embassy in New Delhi warned against US-UK co-sponsorship (New Delhi's 4131).11

At this point, the White House was consulted directly and the President decided personally to persuade the Irish to sponsor the compromise resolution alone.12 He was successful and a favorable Irish reply has now been received. Meanwhile, the Department instructed our Mission in New York to seek a 24-hour postponement of Security Council consideration of the Kashmir debate. Accordingly, at the afternoon meeting of the Council on June 21, against Soviet and Indian objections, the United States proposed and the Council approved by a 7-2-2 vote that the meeting be postponed until 3 p.m. on June 22. We expect the Irish to put forward the compromise Kashmir resolution at that time.

As you can see from the above, we have operated on two basic assumptions: (a) that it would be strongly preferable to have other Security Council members sponsor the resolution; and (b) that if this did not prove feasible, the commitment to Pakistan required us to sponsor a reasonable resolution.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/6-2262. Confidential.

1 Not printed.

2 Dated May 15. (Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/5-1562)

3 Dated May 15. (Ibid.)

4 Dated May 20. (Ibid., 690D.91/5-2062)

5 Dated June 5. (Ibid., 690D.91/6-562)

6 Dated June 8. (Ibid., 690D.91/6-862)

7 Both dated June 19. (Ibid., 690D.91/6-1862)

8 Dated June 20. (Ibid., 690D.91/6-2062)

9 Dated June 19. (Ibid., 690D.91/6-1962)

10 Dated June 20. (Ibid., 690D.91/6-2062)

11 Dated June 21. (Ibid., 690D.91/6-2162)

12 According to a telephone conversation on June 21 between Cleveland and Ball, President Kennedy phoned the Irish Ambassador in order to get Ireland “back on board.” (Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Subjects, India, 1961-1963)

145. Editorial Note 145. Editorial Note

On June 22, 1962, the U.N. Security Council met to conclude the debate on Kashmir which grew out of the initial request by Pakistan on January 11 for a meeting of the Council to consider the issue. (See Document 89.) Frederick H. Boland, Ireland's Representative to the Council, submitted a draft resolution that made reference to earlier resolutions adopted by the Council concerning Kashmir and, in light of those resolutions, urged India and Pakistan to enter into direct negotiations to seek a settlement to the dispute. (U.N. Document S/5134) After a lengthy debate, in which the Indian and Pakistani Representatives repeated well-established positions, the Council voted in favor of the resolution by a vote of 7-2, with 2 abstentions. (U.N. Document S/PV.1016) The United States voted in favor of the resolution, which was vetoed by the negative vote cast by the Representative of the Soviet Union.

In India, Prime Minister Nehru reacted to the Security Council vote in a statement made on June 23 during a foreign policy debate in the Indian Parliament. Nehru expressed “deep regret and sorrow” that the United States and the United Kingdom should “almost invariably be against us” on subjects like Goa and Kashmir. He stated that the Kashmir debate had “hurt and injured” India, and had created “doubt in our minds about the goodwill” of the United States and the United Kingdom toward India. (Telegram 4165 from New Delhi, June 24; Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/6-2462)

146. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 146. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, June 24, 1962, 1:31 p.m.

4351. Eyes Only for Ambassador From Bundy. President asks your judgment on next steps with Nehru in light of his remarks on Kashmir vote. President questions timing and content of further loan arrangements and is puzzled by Nehru's apparent inability to understand that Pak 104 deal precedes this administration.

These are Sunday morning questions, but I think you can sense their thrust.

In partial response suggest despatch full text of Nehru remarks, but your own comments would be even more valuable.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/6-2462. Secret; Priority. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy and approved in S/S by Rogers.

147. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 147. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, June 25, 1962, 10 p.m.

4183. Pass White House Eyes Only for President. Eyes Only for Acting Secretary. Reference: Deptel 4351.1

I had begun drafting response for what I considered a predictable Presidential inquiry prior to receipt. Nehru was in extremely self-righteous mood reflecting a larger attitude here and since he gives the tone to the press and politicians we will no doubt have more of it.

Obviously it was a nasty accident that our representations on the MIGs coincided with the Kashmir ballot in New York. Both are highly emotional issues here. Nehru had been hit very hard on the MIGs by Macmillan, Gore-Booth, Sandys, myself and by the confirming message from the President.2 Then came this debate.

His flare-up is related to at least three matters where I judge our position to be sound and one matter where we might wisely reflect on the wisdom of our course. I begin with the matters which the Indians find distasteful but where the medicine is good.

1. The GOI in general and Nehru in particular clearly dislike suggestions that they should tailor their behavior more carefully to American political and public reactions. This is new idea. Until past year we have been so wary of seeming to attach strings that there has been literally almost no mention to Prime Minister of the effect of Indian actions on aid prospect. Avoidance has become the standard of good manners. Mention of the effect of their actions on aid is by our own standard improper and indecent. This has always seemed to me an intolerable situation. I have made it clear that American public opinion is a highly relevant consideration. Nehru's reference to indirect pressures is his protest against these reminders which he says are an impairment of “India's independence.” Obviously no country is that independent.

2. He is annoyed over my labeling of Soviet rupee sales as aid. On this too they have had it ever so good. For if Soviet rupee sales are not aid then dollars and hard currencies can be reserved for economic assistance and the Soviets can be used for military hardware. The uneasiness when I have attacked on this point has been visible.

3. There is the conviction in India as elsewhere that we are so pathologically afraid of Communism that to take our aid and remain non-Communist is a great favor. We have affirmed this by a tendency to a supplicant role in which we take ever so seriously India's problems and never mention our own. This relationship is unhealthy as well as undignified. Yet it conditions Indian attitudes and causes surprising reactions when we depart from our erstwhile meekness.

On the other hand, the Indians have legitimate grounds for objection to the two symbolic battles we have waged on behalf of our allies and against them in the UN this past year. Both of these allies, so far as one can tell, have considered their relationship with us largely important for advancing their private quarrels in the non-Communist world. (Here helping with our anti-Communism is also considered a real nice favor.) And we have allowed ourselves to become involved unusefully in these far from exemplary quarrels. The rewards, while perhaps greater than from our alliance with General Phoumi, give grounds for reflection, to wit as follows: 1. We supported Portugal in the UN on Goa. We succeeded in antagonizing India. We did not “save” Goa. We seem to have partially alienated the Portuguese. We got the Russians a very good press. This would seem a low score.

2. We supported Pakistan in the UN on Kashmir (I am aware of super-innocuity and Irish screen). We recognize, as do even intelligent Pakistanis, the UNCIP resolutions and the plebiscite are out of date and bear in no practical way on a settlement. We got nothing practical for Pakistan. We got a bad press in India. Again the Soviets got a magnificent one. We left the Pakistanis still complaining about Americans, still wondering if Mohammed Ali is too pro-American, still negotiating with the Chinese. This also no high score.

In light of our specific commitments, we had no alternative in this latter case. But clearly we must soon have some concern for the parochial and messy issues in which our lesser allies involve us and the consequences. As soon as military needs can be made to allow we must obviously try to get in a position where we can stand in dignity and some majesty above these disputes. We must recognize that outside of Europe alignment and non-alignment are mostly differing techniques for extracting concessions from the US. We must not be supplicants of the non-aligned or subordinates of allies. Both positions are weak and unworthy. In these precincts when one hears talk of being faithful to our allies we should ask if it means being unfaithful to ourselves.

As to the immediate future, I doubt that there is anything very dramatic we should do. I will downplay aid announcements. I would hope that having warned of what Congress might do as the result of the MIG deal it won't do it anyway. In a calmer time I will go over all these things again with Nehru but I would not think it wise to hit him again right away.

3. I am seeing both Desais in next two days and will weigh in on that part of the Prime Minister's speech having to do with indirect pressure. I will ask them both if they would prefer not to be warned about possible US reaction to Indian moves.

4. I will do missionary work with other members of GOI on the Pakistani 104s. I confess I thought I had made some progress with Nehru on responsibility for the 104s and the accidents and misadventures of history that caused the previous administration to offer them. Incidentally, I did evidently persuade Nehru that these supersonic planes are an expensive novelty which unmanned interception apparatus is making obsolete. He quoted my advance technical briefing more or less verbatim in his speech. Nehru texts being sent Embassy telegrams 41793 and 4180.4

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/6-2562. Secret; Priority.

1 Document 146.

2 See Document 142.

3 Telegram 4179, June 25, transmitted the text of Nehru's remarks on Pakistan and Kashmir in the Indian Parliament on June 23. (Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/6-2562)

4 Telegram 4180, June 25, transmitted the text of Nehru's remarks concerning the purchase of supersonic aircraft during the debate cited in footnote 3 above. (Ibid., 791.5622/6-2562)

148. Telegram From the Consulate General at Calcutta to the Department of State 148. Telegram From the Consulate General at Calcutta to the Department of StateSource

Calcutta, July 1, 1962, 10 a.m.

1. From Ambassador Galbraith. Unless Washington has an energetically adverse view based on factors not evident here I consider it desirable that on an early occasion, perhaps in answer to press conference question, I say that as a practical matter, and without reference to merits of the case, we consider plebiscite question dead and that any Kashmir settlement will obviously now have to be found in other directions. The advantages of such a statement are: (1) It reflects the realities of the situation as even intelligent Pakistanis agree. Myths, such as possibility of plebiscite, no more desirable here than elsewhere.

(2) It will put me back into political operation from which the debate and Menon victory has largely excluded me. This is important for influence on other pending and more vital issues. It is also the reason for saying it here.

(3) It will vitally help pro-American groups here who are now sadly on defensive.

(4) Emphasis on purely practical aspects of position will protect Stevenson.

(5) Statement wherever made will clear our position and insure against another damaging round on this subject a few months hence.

(6) Presumably there will be a Pakistan reaction. That, it will be agreed, is partly because they would prefer to have issue continued ad infinitum, ad nauseum even with no affirmative gain if it provides the negative return of worsened US-Indian relations. This we cannot countenance. Statement here will center at least part of reaction on me rather than President or Secretary State. It will also give measure of freedom from the language—it was Galbraith's. However statement assumes that we have played this game for last time.

You will see need for timeliness for full effect as well as to clear position for work on other issues.1

Mattison

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/7-162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution.

1 Galbraith sent an undated message, via a special channel, to McGeorge Bundy to ask him to discuss telegram 1 from Calcutta with President Kennedy. Galbraith stated that, in his view, the statement he proposed to make was “the kind of sensible air cleaning political action which situation requires but which contains just enough momentary static so that working level Department would never initiate or willingly to clear.” He felt that all that was involved was a simple statement of the realities of a situation already accepted by intelligent Pakistanis. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 7/1/62-7/10/62)

149. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 149. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, July 2, 1962, 8:49 p.m.

6. For Ambassador Galbraith. Re Calcutta's 1 to Dept1 which being repeated Karachi and USUN. The President personally and the Department are energetically averse to your making a statement to the effect that the United States believes that plebiscite question dead and Kashmir settlement has to be found in other directions.

1. It would be unwise to make the statement now even though we may believe that the UN exercise has been unproductive and that we should try to avoid a repetition of it. A statement along the lines you propose would have a strong adverse effect in Karachi and not have countervailing advantages in New Delhi. It would appear to be a retreat under Menon's pressure.

2. Nehru's speech has caused intense irritation in Congressional and government circles here—an irritation which the President shares. The large aid commitments we have recently made to India in no way diminishes the feeling.

3. Judgment here is that your best tactic is to say that the resolution was in fact a moderate one which it would have been difficult for us not to support. You can say privately that we made strong efforts to moderate it, and without these efforts it would have been much stronger.

Finally, it is up to you to show that we are the injured party in this situation, not the Indians.2

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/7-162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted in NEA by Cameron and Ludlow, cleared by Cleveland and Kaysen, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Calcutta.

1 Document 148.

2 McGeorge Bundy reinforced telegram 6 to New Delhi with a July 3 message sent to Galbraith by the special channel which reads: “State's Niact 6 to you does reflect the President's own sentiments. He practically dictated the telegram to Carl [Kaysen], along with some other comments that are too hot even for this channel.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 7/1/62-7/10/62)

150. Editorial Note 150. Editorial Note

On July 4, 1962, President Ayub of Pakistan and the Shah of Iran released a statement at the conclusion of the Shah's visit to Pakistan, in which the Shah expressed concern over the state of relations between Pakistan and Afghanistan and offered his services to mediate in the dispute. Ayub expressed his appreciation and accepted the offer. (Telegram 22 from Karachi, July 4; Department of State, Central Files, 788.11/7-462)

On July 9, the Department of State instructed the Embassy in Tehran to inform the Shah that the United States was gratified at his initiative in the dispute. The U.S. position was to remain in the background and not be identified with the Shah's efforts. But the Embassy was instructed to assure the Shah that the United States was prepared to act in a supporting or complementary role in any negotiations that might result from the Shah's initiative. (Telegram 12 to Tehran, July 9; ibid., 788.11/7-762)

151. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 151. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, July 5, 1962, 6:31 p.m.

91. Eyes Only for Ambassador. Deptel 7062 to London,1 4428 to New Delhi, 2806 to Karachi. There follows for your information text of Prime Minister Macmillan's message to President of July 3:

“I have now had a further discussion with my colleagues about this very complicated problem. As I mentioned in my message of June 29 there is quite a chance that the Indians will quietly drop the whole idea of buying fighters; Nehru's recent public statements seem further to support this view. All the same, I think we should both keep up the pressure and leave the Indians in no doubt about the serious effects which their purchase of Russian fighters would have on public opinion in Western countries.

Nevertheless, it is possible, and indeed perhaps probable, that the Indians will ask us what we have to offer. So we must be ready to meet this event.

There are two problems—the physical and the financial. So far as the physical question is concerned, we are ready, in spite of all the difficulties, to make one squadron of Lightnings available and postpone deliveries to our own forces.

Then there is the probable reaction from Pakistan. You mention your natural anxiety about your facilities there. But, as you know, we also have important facilities of a similar nature in Pakistan. Sandys explained the whole position frankly to Ayub, who was very understanding and recognized the seriousness of allowing the Russians to infiltrate into India's defense system. However, whilst the Pakistan Government may understand the problem and acquiesce in our action, there will doubtless be biased criticism in the Pakistan press and Parliament. I am sure you would not wish us to bear this entirely on our own. I suggest, therefore, that any Western offer of fighters to India should be openly seen to be a joint move in which you and we are both associated.

Now for the financial problem. The full cost of the Lightnings including ancillary equipment will run to between 10 and 11 million pounds sterling. As the Indian situation is pretty desperate we shall, in effect, have to make them a credit or a loan or give them some financial help in some other way without much hope of repayment. It looks as though this assistance will have to go further than we have ever been ready to go to help even our allies or members of the Commonwealth to acquire modern armaments. In our present position we really could not put up more than one quarter of this total, which was the proportion which you will remember we agreed on for the Orpheus engine. Do you see your way to meeting the other three quarters either by paying us or by paying the Indians?

Apart from finding the money the complications of your system of grants and Congressional votes, combined with the complications of our system of Parliamentary control will make it quite difficult to work out how payment can actually be made. Perhaps it might be a good plan if you could authorize somebody from your Embassy or someone sent from Washington to discuss with our experts how, if at all, the finance could be arranged.

The Indian Finance Minister is in London this week and will certainly ask for more aid. For financial reasons this would not in any case be easy. But even on matters where we could help we propose for the moment to be non-committal. We shall avoid any quotable suggestion of a link between fighters and aid; at the same time we shall leave Desai in no doubt that the British people are becoming increasingly anxious about India's general attitude towards the West.

I should be grateful if you would let me know how you now see this business.”

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/7-562. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted by Cameron, cleared by Rewinkel and Bromley Smith, and approved by Cameron. Repeated to New Delhi and Karachi eyes only Ambassadors.

1 Telegram 7062 to London, June 30, repeated the text of Macmillan's June 29 message to Kennedy. Macmillan referred to his discussions with Sandys following the latter's return from India and drew the conclusion that Nehru might be thinking of dropping the idea of buying fighters of any kind. But he noted that Nehru might not have the final word on the subject, and added that it continued to be important to coordinate a U.S.-U.K. proposal to put to the Indian Government. (Ibid., S/S Files: Lot 66 D 204, Macmillan Correspondence with Kennedy, 1962, Vol. III)

152. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 152. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, July 6, 1962, 10:41 p.m.

141. Eyes Only Ambassador. Please deliver following message from the President to Prime Minister Macmillan soonest. Advise date, time delivery:

“July 6, 1962

Dear Prime Minister: Thank you for your message of July 3, 1962.1 I am encouraged by the prospect of agreement on including a squadron of Lightnings in our spoiling offer to the Indians. This should increase the chance, about which we too are hopeful, that India will end up by delaying indefinitely any purchase of supersonic aircraft.

We suspect that Air Vice Marshal Dutt's trip to London may be in order to smoke out our position. Therefore I hope you will do what you can to get him interested in the Lightning. Of course, the longer we can draw out the discussions of this matter the better.

We are prepared to send over a small group of experts to discuss in some detail how we might share the cost. If ultimately necessary and desirable, we will find some way to compensate you for three-fourths of the cost of one squadron of Lightnings and ancillary equipment through our participation in joint R & D projects. We would hope to do so in a way which would minimize any early drain on our gold reserves. Having just taken a number of difficult decisions in a variety of fields to improve our balance of payments situation, I would be loath in this case to move too soon in the opposite direction.

I am also concerned over making any offer of Lightnings to India openly a joint US/UK financial responsibility. Lacking as we do any position as “historical supplier” to India, a public offer by us of what in effect would be military assistance to the Indians could have a number of undesirable consequences. The tone of Nehru's recent discussions has been such that it would be most difficult for me to offer him this kind of assistance in competition with the Soviets at this point. As you know, this is a moment in our legislative process at which the very important financial details of the Foreign Aid Bill hang in the balance. The effect on the Congress of my offering military aid to India on top of our already large economic program there might well be very serious. Accordingly, I strongly prefer that any prospective US sharing of the financial responsibility for Lightnings be kept as quiet as possible.

Therefore, I hope that you can go forward and dangle the prospect of Lightnings before the Indians without revealing any US financial role as yet; meanwhile we will send our team as soon as you feel it appropriate to deal with possible arrangements between us.

Sincerely,

John F. Kennedy“

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/7-662. Secret; Niact; Verbatim Text. Drafted in the White House; cleared by Komer, Kaysen, and by Talbot in substance; and approved in S/S by Slater. Repeated to New Delhi.

1 See Document 151.

153. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 153. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, July 12, 1962, 11 p.m.

104. I had very satisfactory 45-minute private talk with President Ayub in Karachi today. All subjects listed Department's telegram 28071 discussed except Pakistan requests related to security guarantees, contingent planning and increased arms assistance. Ayub did not raise any of these topics.

Remainder this telegram deals with Afghan relations problem which may require immediate action. Other topics will be reported separate messages.

We reviewed present status Afghan issue. I stated my belief that Afghan position may become somewhat more flexible than heretofore. It seemed to us that there may soon be some negotiating room on both sides, and we hoped no opportunity would be lost to press for early solution. President gave me summary of Afghan portion of his recent Murree conversations with Shah of Iran. This corresponded closely with reports from our Embassy in Tehran, although as noted in Embassy's telegram 702 GOP position on Consulates less forthcoming than reported by Iranian Foreign Minister. Ayub said Shah urged him to allow reopening Afghan Consulates and trade agencies under close GOP police surveillance, but Ayub responded that he disliked appearance of making prisoners of Afghan representatives.

President said he was entirely willing for either Iran or US to attempt good offices and he presumed that we would concert with Iranians. He felt any third party approach to Afghans should be on a very high level and he assumed that if Iran undertook exploratory talks, Shah himself would get in touch with King.

Ayub showed in various oblique ways that he is slightly more inclined to try seriously for a settlement than he has been heretofore. I believe Shah impressed him with growing menace to entire region of increased Soviet penetration of Afghanistan, which is facilitated by Pak-Afghan rupture. Undoubtedly GOP as well as Afghanistan is feeling some cumulative pinch from cessation transit traffic and trade. Finally, Ayub seemed increasingly impressed with argument I and others have advanced that sweeping and abrupt Pak move against Consulates and trade agencies last September encouraged extreme Afghan reaction and prejudiced GOP case. I believe he now suspects that GOP handling of matter last fall may have been mistaken, notwithstanding legitimacy of GOP grievances.

When I told him that I thought some concessions might be elicited from Afghan side if Afghan face could be saved and if some reciprocal concessions could be made on GOP side, he evinced interest. He said he would be willing to consider guarded GOP exploratory conversations with Afghan representatives, but when I endeavored to probe on this he drew back, saying there was at present no place where high level Pak and Afghan representatives could get together and he felt it would be better for first move to be made through Iranians or us. He still insists he must have some sort of assurances of proper conduct of Afghan Consuls in Peshawar and Quetta and decent treatment of Pak Consuls in Afghanistan, but he granted that assurances could be private and in form that would not be demeaning to Afghans.

I outlined to him suggestion for initial attempt at agreement on partial reestablishment of Consular and trade agency facilities, coupled with a joint statement of the two governments to effect that “they have agreed to work toward early full reestablishment of Consular and trade agency offices, to function in accordance with the usually accepted tenets of international practice.” I pointed out that this formula could be construed in Pakistan as an implied assurance on part of Afghanistan Government as to the propriety of official conduct of its Consular and trade representatives and correctness of its treatment of GOP Consular offices. I did not of course go into matter of how Afghans could at same time interpret phrase as an implied admission on part of GOP that its abrupt closure of these offices was not in accordance with traditional international usage.

Unfortunately, President still has belief that diplomatic relations should be restored first and that lower level relations should be reestablished afterwards on a step by step basis as relations gradually improve.

I pressed on him my conviction that Afghans would feel that they could not agree to this and that effort should be for reestablishment of Consular, trade and transit relations first, or at least simultaneously with restoration diplomatic relations. While President did not commit himself on this, I believe way is open here for Shah to move discreetly into situation in preliminary way in Kabul, and would hope that Holmes could be authorized to give Shah substance of foregoing for his background use.

McConaughy

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/7-1262. Secret. Repeated to Kabul and Tehran.

1 Telegram 2807 to Karachi, June 30, provided general guidelines for McConaughy's talks with Ayub and Mohammed Ali. (Ibid., 690D.91/6-3062)

2 Dated July 9. (Ibid., 788.11/7-962)

154. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 154. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, July 13, 1962, 9 p.m.

114. Embtel 104 to Department.1 In course my July 12 conversation with President Ayub, he thanked us with warmth and earnestness for our role in Security Council consideration of Kashmir issue. He asked me to convey his deep appreciation to the President. I told him that I felt SC consideration of matter was not entirely futile exercise, notwithstanding Soviet veto. Reaffirmation of UNCIP resolutions was useful and Soviet position had been exposed through misuse of veto. I said we did not perceive any useful step we could take at this time to contribute to settlement. Perhaps best course would be to stand back for a while and try to gain perspective which might point way to some new initiative. I added that any attempt toward a settlement would have to have Indian as well as Pakistani cooperation. Resort to use or threat of force was unacceptable, as I knew he would agree. Ayub assented and said he too felt that perhaps a waiting spell was advisable for all interested parties. He did not have any immediate motive in mind.

He said that his reports indicated Nehru was a very sick man and that his grip on the helm might be relaxing slightly already. He thought decline of Nehru might be quite gradual but he felt his days as head of Indian Government were numbered. He did not wish any harm to Nehru but he could not help but wonder if eventual successor government might not be more tractable and more inclined work reciprocally toward better Indo-Pak relations.

I said GOP could not be certain of a more cooperative successor government in India after withdrawal of Nehru. It was entirely possible that following government might be more difficult to deal with. I expressed hope that if Ayub had bilateral conversations in mind he would move promptly and not wait for disappearance of Nehru from scene. I expressed view that something constructive might come out of talks and even if talks failed completely at least Paks would have demonstrated willingness to talk and to search for solutions without imposition of any conditions such as 10-day time limit on preliminary talks as was stipulated last autumn. This stipulation had been misinterpreted in some quarters to Pakistan's disadvantage.

Ayub said he was not opposed in principle to high level private talks with Indians and he would be prepared to have a private exchange with Nehru if cause of better Indo-Pak understanding might reasonably be expected to gain thereby. He did not find prospect particularly encouraging or palatable, but he was willing to make any effort which offered fair prospect of progress and he recognized that a seemingly negative position on bilateral talks while Indians maintained a seemingly positive position put Pakistan in an unfavorable light. He simply did not want to enter into an ill-prepared or premature endeavor which was foredoomed to failure, and which would have to be publicized as such, to the detriment of the objective.

I asked Ayub if he did not think any talks which might ensue should cover whole range of principal Pak-Indo problems and not be confined exclusively to Kashmir, which would have to be predominant subject.

Ayub speculated on jockeying for power in India which might be expected to follow departure of Nehru. He seemed to feel that considerable reliance could be placed on Desai to consolidate Right Wing elements and break Krishna Menon's drive for power. He doubted if Desai could win leadership of government but felt he would play influential role. GOP was inclined to give considerable credence to reports that Nehru wanted to pave way for his daughter Indira Gandhi to succeed him at least nominally. Ayub doubted she had qualities required to assume and exercise actual powers of head of government, but she might fill a high titular position. He recognized that accession to power by Krishna Menon would be an unqualified catastrophe, and that nothing should be done which would tend to improve his prospects.

President was strikingly mild and relaxed on subject of supersonic planes for India. I spelled out full rationale of our concern at MIG possibility. He accepted our reasoning substantially in toto. He seemed to feel that matter would probably not come to show-down. He thought Soviet offer might prove to be to some extent a bluff, since Soviets would recognize that full acceptance MIG offer by Indians would isolate India from West and throw heavy burden of economic support and subsidization of India on Soviet Union. He said he was confident Soviets would be unwilling to pick up enormous tab for economic development to India now paid by U.S. and other Western countries. Therefore, he thought Soviet Union in show-down would probably welsh on its offer, having better use for its resources elsewhere. He also noted with interest my remark that Nehru seemed disposed to postpone indefinitely a final decision on matter. It was evident from Ayub's moderate view of possibility that UK may feel compelled to offer few Lightning planes to India, that Sandys did excellent job when he saw Ayub last month. Although Ayub was naturally not happy at prospect, he seemed resigned to it and understood reasoning back of it. I made clear to him extent to which we had borne in mind Pakistan's views and interests in our consideration of matter and he was grateful for this. Although he knows we are not entirely disassociated from British in this matter, he evinced no disposition to reproach us. He conjectured that Indians might be tempted to accept Soviet offer to establish an assembly plant for Soviet jet engines in India, with a view to installing the engines in British Lightning air frames.

Comment: Pakistani High Commissioner to India, Hilaly, saw President just before me and tells me that he pressed President to enter into private bilateral talks with Nehru. He feels it is all important for this to be done before Nehru's health fails further. He says President was noncommittal and Hilaly expects to see President again in Rawalpindi before returning to Delhi. President apparently went a little farther with me than with Hilaly in indicating his willingness in principle to consider talks. However, he was quite passive in his attitude and obviously is not now inclined to take any strong initiative. My impression is that he has not thought matter through completely and has not formulated any approach to be used in talks. He is unenthusiastic or at least unconvinced as to merits of talks at this stage but recognizes that an expressed unwillingness to engage in talks is not a good stance. Therefore, we should not take any great measure of encouragement from his attitude, although it does offer a slight opening which might be enlarged by dint of some effort if we believe that our influence should now be exerted actively in favor of talks.

McConaughy

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/7-1362. Secret.

1 Document 153.

155. Memorandum of Conversation 155. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, July 19, 1962.

SUBJECT

U.S.-Pakistan Relations

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary of State

His Excellency Aziz Ahmed, Ambassador of Pakistan

Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

Mr. M. Masood, Minister, Embassy of Pakistan

Mr. Salman A. Ali, Counselor, Embassy of Pakistan

The Ambassador called at his request to convey his Government's response to three suggestions that the Secretary had put to him privately on May 28.1

1. The Ambassador said his Government welcomed the Secretary's suggestion for continuing and frank discussions between the two governments to identify clearly areas of agreement and disagreement between the United States and Pakistan. The Government of Pakistan did not, however, feel that there were major areas of disagreement, even though the Pakistani press and public opinion at times had been quite critical of American policy. The Secretary suggested further that he and the Ambassador might fruitfully engage in a fairly broad review of matters of common concern and that the Embassy and Mr. Talbot might work out an informal agenda. The Ambassador also welcomed this suggestion.

2. With reference to the Secretary's idea that broadened contacts at all levels between Pakistan and India would demonstrate Pakistan's good intentions and help Indo-Pak relations, the Ambassador said that his Government, considering India's present aggressive mood and the Kashmir position, doubted it could do anything now to ease tensions between the two countries. Rather, it feared that anything it might do or say could well produce the opposite result. It had concluded, therefore, for the time being it was better to say nothing, although unfortunately it was hard to prevent the Central and Provincial Assemblies from breaking silence, especially in the aftermath of communal riots. The current tensions were regrettable, the more so because something might have been done to improve over-all relations about two and a half years ago, when the mood was better. The Pakistan Government would have liked to be able to find some hopeful prospect of opening up discourses with moderate leaders in India at this time when the transition of power seemed imminent, especially as it felt tragedy would ensue if Krishna Menon should gain strength enough to succeed Mr. Nehru.

The Secretary expressed his appreciation of the thought the Pakistan Government had given to this question, adding that there might come a moment, perhaps at very short notice, when effective contact across the border would be important. He recalled that six or seven years ago at a time of trans-Atlantic frictions Prince Bernhard started a valuable program of bringing official and non-official Europeans and Americans together for private and frank talks about trans-Atlantic relations. Would there be anything like this on the Indo-Pak scene that would be worth encouraging to stimulate contacts on a private basis? For example, could the Pakistan Institute of International Affairs make contact with the Indian Council of World Affairs, both being bodies comparable to Chatham House? The Ambassador agreed to consider this question further with Mr. Talbot. In the meantime he suggested that it might be helpful if the American Ambassador in New Delhi could keep in touch with the Pakistan High Commissioner there to consider such possibilities.

3. On the Secretary's third point—that Pakistan might consider making a formal unilateral declaration abjuring the use of force in disputes with India—the Ambassador affirmed his understanding that this was related to Pakistan's aide-memoir of May 28. He assumed that the Secretary had meant that if the United States should, as requested in that aide memoire, agree that it would come to Pakistan's aid should Pakistan be attacked by India, then India would ask the United States what assurances could be given that Pakistan would not launch an attack against India. The Secretary agreed. The Ambassador said his Government feared that if it were to make the suggested statement, India would ask it to sign a “no war” declaration. That would return the two countries to a controversy that had continued for two and a half years over a question of what alternative machinery could be set up, if war were ruled out, for the settlement of disputes existing between them. There had been talk of tribunals but at that time Mr. Nehru had not agreed to the inclusion of an independent member of any tribunal, nor had he any other proposal as to how to proceed if the Indian and Pakistani members of tribunals should fail to agree on any issue. Doubting that Mr. Nehru had changed his views, the Pakistan Government believed that nothing would be gained by reopening the controversy. Also, Pakistan understood that the Indians believed they already had full assurance that the United States would come to India's aid in the event of a Pakistani attack. Mr. Bowles had made this statement in a speech in Delhi last August. The Secretary observed that we had better look at the text of the speech. What bothered him, the Ambassador, however, about our giving assurances to India against a Pakistani attack, along with assurances to Pakistan against an Indian attack, was that it hardly fitted the spirit of the alliance between the United States and Pakistan to assure a non-allied country against aggression by one of the partners in the alliance.

The Ambassador stated that Indian armed forces had doubled in the past five years and that expenses were still rising. Pakistanis wanted to know against whom India was arming itself. Since Goa there had been statements which if not outright threats had been indicative of provocative intentions. The Indians were now saying much that concerned Pakistan; it was not Pakistan that was threatening India.

The Ambassador added that “they” (presumably his Government) had also said that even if India gave the requested assurances Pakistan would still worry about any military assistance that might be given to India by the West, i.e. by the United States, or by Britain, or by France. Such action would be resented by the Pakistani people, since their Government could not tell them of the secret assurances they had extracted from India. The Pakistani Government also would not rule out the possibility of an Indian attack against Azzad Kashmir. Indeed, the Ambassador feared that it had been the encouragement that India had drawn from Western policies that had freed India to get on with its military buildup. The Indians thought they could get away with anything.

The Ambassador then gave reactions to statements he had heard from Mr. McGhee about the idea that the British might give the Indians an alternative to the reported Russian offer of supersonic aircraft to India. Mr. McGhee had made four points, as the Ambassador had understood him. These were: (1) that acquisition of MIGs would open up unlimited opportunities for Soviet involvement in the Indian military establishment; (2) that this would strengthen Krishna Menon's position; (3) that it would jeopardize the security of British military equipment in use by the Indian armed forces; and (4) that the reaction in this country would be very bad if India concluded a MIG deal. The Ambassador felt, however, that actually it would be good if India's actions should bring an adverse reaction in this country, because only in that way would India learn. At the moment India's foreign reserves were in an extremely parlous state. How could it be talking about getting supersonics? None of Krishna Menon's designs could succeed unless India continued to get aid from the United States. The MIG deal would doom him because the Congress Party, which was led and financed by a largely conservative group, would be unhappy with the resulting impact on American aid. As for the question of British military security would not the Russians be taking a comparable risk? Why were they not afraid of such a result? In fact, to the Ambassador these arguments looked wide of the mark. He thought the real explanation of British interests might be found in the comments of two British newspapermen who had told him that “for us this is purely a commercial deal; that is all.”

The Secretary interjected that that statement had not a shred of reality.

Continuing, the Ambassador said that the Indians had always maintained a military disparity of about three to one (the United States, he said, had called it two and a half to one but there was not much difference between the two estimates) over the Pakistani armed forces but in aircraft the disparity was seven to one. The Indians had been informed in 1960 about Pakistan's coming acquisition of F-104s and they knew Pakistan was getting only 12 of them. Why should this number of aircraft trouble the Indians so much? Why should they be expressing their agitation only now?

The Secretary suggested that this could be related to matters concerning China and the northern border of India. The Ambassador doubted this. He said the Soviets had told the Pakistan Ambassador in Moscow that the Indians had deliberately planned the northern border excitement to assure aid from the United States.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90D/7-1962. Confidential. Drafted by Talbot and approved in S on August 13.

1 The three suggestions noted here were not recorded in the memorandum prepared on Rusk's conversation with Ahmed on May 28; see Document 126.

156. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 156. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, July 19, 1962.

McGB:

President asked Taylor the status of UK air offer to Indians (I wish that one of these days JFK would call me with such questions). I told Ewell we had no news whatsoever. Of course we've had no reply to JFK 6 July message to PM1 grudgingly agreeing to pay three-fourths of Lightning costs.

I got State and DOD both to tell London last week to find out what's going on. So we should hear soon.

It's also unclear whether reported Indian purchase of MIG engines for HF-24 is fact or rumor, or what impact it might have. I'd agree with Galbraith that, if true, it means Indian manufacture of MIGs is off. Thus the worst thing we feared has been short-circuited.

Galbraith is most unhappy (Delhi 198)2 with State instruction telling him to lay off ginning up Indian requests for US equipment, including C-130s. When Carl and I cleared last Macmillan message with President, he asked about C-130s. I told him Indians had displayed little interest and seemed to be buying more Soviet AN-12s. So he said let's forget about the C-130s; we'll be paying enough for the Lightnings as it is.

Ken is unhappy at losing any card, however weak, but we're getting word to him that we saved Lightnings by sacrificing C-130s.3 Having always thought C-130s the weakest part of our spoiling offer, I had no hesitation. All State is asking Ken to do is quit peddling C-130s. If Indians turn around and show interest without further encouragement, that's different; we'll play that by ear.

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert Komer, 7/62. Secret.

1 See Document 152.

2 Dated July 18. (Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/7-1862)

3 Telegram 232 to New Delhi, July 21. (Ibid., 611.91/7-2162)

157. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 157. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, July 24, 1962, 8:10 p.m.

498. Eyes Only Ambassador. There follows for your information text of Prime Minister Macmillan's message to the President of July 19:

“Dear Friend

Thank you for your message of July 61 about fighters for the Indians.

The Indian team were here last week and carried out an evaluation of the suitability of Lightnings for their purposes. Indications are that they would be interested in both purchase of Lightning Mark IIs and manufacture under license in India of Lightning Mark IIIs. It looks as if they would not regard the development of the Orpheus 12 engine for use in their own HF 24 aircraft as an alternative to the manufacture of Lightning Mark IIIs. They might in fact wish to have both.

We are proposing to play the financial part of the discussions long and not to put any specific proposition at this stage. Meanwhile I am grateful for your helpful undertaking that you would find some way to compensate us for three-quarters of the cost of a squadron of Lightnings. I should add that what the Indians mean by a squadron is sixteen front line aircraft plus four back-up aircraft. I also welcome your offer to send over a small group of experts to discuss the matter in more detail and I hope that this can be arranged as soon as possible. It would be helpful if this group was empowered to discuss other possible ways in which you might compensate us as well as the one you have mentioned, which is through our participation in joint R and D projects.

I quite understand the difficulty you would feel at this time, particularly while Congress is still sitting, over making any offer of Lightnings to India openly a joint United States/United Kingdom financial responsibility. There are also difficulties for us in taking the whole public responsibility on ourselves. But I think we can postpone further discussion on this particular issue for the moment.”

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/7-2462. Top Secret; Verbatim Text. Drafted and approved by Cameron and cleared with BNA and the White House. Repeated to New Delhi and Karachi eyes only Ambassadors.

1 See Document 152.

158. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 158. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, July 24, 1962, 10:12 p.m.

503. Eyes Only for Ambassador. Please deliver following letter to Prime Minister from President. Advise date, time delivery.

“July 24, 1962

Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

I was glad to receive your letter of July 19th,1 with the latest word about the activities of the Indian team. Frankly, I am becoming increasingly concerned about the potentially rising financial cost, both to you and to us, if we actually have to make good on our Lightning offer.

I am dubious about our ability to go as high as the twenty aircraft mentioned in your letter, particularly if it becomes necessary and desirable for us to pick up three-fourths of the hard currency cost. Up to this point, I had thought our offer would be twelve, plus a trainer or two. We are also anxious to restrict the size of any Indian jet buildup, lest it create irresistible pressures for more F-104s from the Pakistani. Therefore, it might be well for you as well as for us to hint in Delhi that if Indian appetites are too large, it may only lead to a further arms race. I would favor offering India only twelve first, and would consider going higher only after further thought.

I agree that at this stage the best thing is for our experts to get together to firm up the likely cost of a package and possible ways and means of sharing it. I assume that the Orpheus 12 offer is now a nonstarter, which will give us a bit more leeway. We will send a team over promptly to discuss all aspects of the problem.

In the light of our mutual problems, we will also want to reach a clear understanding beforehand on how any offer is to be presented publicly. Even after the Congress adjourns, I would still see major risks of adverse repercussions from open US association with it. Moreover, our current impression is that Ayub would accept with good grace UK sale of Lightnings to India, provided that there were not too many. We will take this aspect up further with Ormsby Gore.

Sincerely,

John F. Kennedy“
Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/7-2462. Top Secret; Verbatim Text. Drafted in the White House and approved by Charles K. Johnson (S/S). Repeated to New Delhi and Karachi.

1 See Document 157.

159. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 159. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, July 25, 1962, 8 p.m.

279. Eyes Only Acting Secretary State, pass White House. I have just had several hours luncheon with T. Krishnamachari and I think I have the plane business taped at last. This is information of the highest importance which should be closely protected. We will give general outlines to British here but leave further communication to your judgment. Facts are as follows: (1) Menon, in effect, shot down the Lightning even before the team departed for London. Team has returned to confirm that the plane won't do. This is the honest opinion of at least one member. Menon presumably instructed the others on the required decision. As indicated in other telegrams Prime Minister and other civilian ministers have access only to Menon's political technique. This holds that Lightnings are heavy, too costly (this of course being in advance of any knowledge of terms) and (he says) unavailable before 1964. The Indian team was declined access to the Mark III: Menon thoughtlessly omitted to mention its non-existence.

(2) Some weeks ago the Prime Minister reached a decision to send a team to Moscow to look into the MIG's and get an offer, unless Menon's then adverse view of Lightning was modified by London visit. (Reflection on odds against such reversal probably unproductive.)

(3) Team according to T.T. Krishnamachari has now gone to Moscow to test fly MIG, negotiate terms for purchase and manufacture. The team does not have power to conclude deal. At this point we are not certain that TTK's information is accurate. Our military people believe that some obvious candidates for any team are still in India.

(4) The pressure leading to the dispatch of this team, again according to TTK, apart from Menon, was the strong sentiment in Parliament for self defense and more recently skillful linking in Cabinet of the China border defense with Pakistan defense. He stresses growing Parliamentary power of Menon. Civilian politicians do not understand these planes are unuseable in mountains against Chinese. (In fact, TTK, who prides himself on Renaissance breadth, thought they had some use and retreated when I showed with Mach 2 data and problem of fields and control.)

(5) Prime Minister was undecided for a long while and Cabinet extensively discussed the American reaction to decision and sending of team. Decision so far has not been between Lightnings and MIGs but as between MIGs and no purchase at all.

(6) There are “always slips between cup and lip” but purchase is now on rails. However, Soviet offer must be obtained and decision taken on acceptance. This will require time—some weeks I would sense.

(7) Making appropriate use of T.T. Krishnamachari's vanity and with appropriate caution considering his ambiguous position while he reaches conclusions on Menon's projects and other questions of principle, I made case for the adverse effect on American public opinion and unleashed other arguments now familiar. I also took soundings on whether another effort with the Prime Minister would be useful.

Without recounting details there is one more gambit which has been on our minds here, which I have tried soundings and which might conceivably work. Pakistan is still the political nub of this problem. Were I to propose that Indians forego the MIG's if we assure of standstill on similar weapons to Pakistanis, they might buy. I am not optimistic but it would strike me as a very good bargain (and much cheaper than Lightnings) if we could bring it off and even the discussion might have a long delaying effect. I gather we are not scheduled to give Pakistanis any further fighter aircraft for another 4 or 5 years so even supporters of Pakistan armed power are giving up nothing of importance. It would give me a handle to explain facts of air power on China frontier to Prime Minister. Perhaps this discussion might lead on to stabilization on tanks which our military people here think will cause more trouble here when known than 104's, God forbid. Also time is running out on past argument that arms aid to Pakistanis was inherited policy. Nehru is leaving town today and will not be back until Monday. I think I had better have another try at him then. While noting doubtless well-grounded Washington aversion to initiatives in this quarter do bear in mind I must have something to talk about. There should, I am sure, be no formal withdrawal of Lightning offer since this would strengthen his position. But unless Indians revive, my judgment would be to let it rest.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/7-2562. Secret; Niact. A handwritten notation indicates that the telegram was repeated to Karachi and London.

160. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 160. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, July 27, 1962, 8:43 p.m.

318. Eyes Only Ambassador. Embtel 279.1

President and Department believe that, if MIG deal all but settled, we should start disengaging from too vigorous opposition. As we see it, an alternative has been made available for their consideration, they have heard arguments and are in position to make their decision in knowledge of possible consequences. We have therefore accomplished at minimum immediate objective of giving Menon's opponents a stick to beat him with if MIG deal results, as we would expect, in adverse consequences to Indian economic development. We wish to avoid getting any more deeply into this matter, thereby making it more difficult for us to extricate ourselves. If MIG deal goes through, as seems ever more likely, we want to be in position to observe its consequences in detached fashion, avoiding any implication that, as Ambassador Nehru implied, Indians were forced to decision by US pressure. Such a stance will be essential to quiet and restrained work which will be needed to rebuild US-Indian relations.

However if upon reflection you decide that you would like to have another go at Nehru along lines suggestion contained last paragraph reftel Department has no objection if approach is kept in low key. In talk with Nehru you authorized repeat to him as you have done to other Indian leaders (Embtel 4230)2 assurances that we do not plan to provide any more F-104's to Pakistan and that therefore present equilibrium is both most economical and best. FYI—As of this time such statement can be made. Our internal planning for Pakistan calls for replacement of one obsolescent F-86 squadron in FY 1966 but type of replacement aircraft has not been determined. We are thinking in terms of F-5A's but Pakistanis have not been told of this. They undoubtedly assume they will receive modern aircraft within general program of modernizing Pakistan armed forces as F-86's become obsolescent. End FYI.

If you think wise, you could further point out to Nehru that if Indians acquire or build several squadrons of MIG-21's, it will create great pressure on us from Paks to provide similar aircraft. We want to avoid another arms race of type which Indians themselves have argued we created by our aid to Pakistan. Therefore, even if Indians determined to go ahead with MIG deal, we hope they will carefully consider how many they buy or build. FYI—Best solution at this point might be if Indians bought a few MIG's but did not build. End FYI.

We also agree it would be useful for you to explain to Prime Minister facts of air power on Sino-Indian frontier. Such a discussion might give you an opportunity to emphasize again to him rapidity with which supersonic planes become obsolescent. By time MIG assembly line could be established in India MIG-21's from line would already be out of date.

Department does not agree to bringing other major items of military equipment to Pakistan under stabilization umbrella. As far as tanks are concerned we have supplied Pakistan with 230 M-47 tanks up to 30 June 1962 under our military assistance program. We are committed to supply an additional 274 of these tanks and delivery has been scheduled as follows: 130 in FY 63, 72 in FY 64, 72 in FY 65. GOP has been informed of these planned deliveries and schedule. We do not believe it would improve our standing in Indian eyes to go back on commitment to an ally, not to mention broader implications of such action in entire area.

We agree with your judgment that there should be no formal withdrawal of Lightning offer but that it should be allowed to rest unless Indians revive it. If we push it at this time we might find ourselves confronted with an Indian attempt to straddle issue by taking squadron of Lightnings from West and a MIG manufacturing capacity from Soviets. You will recall [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] reports3 Morarji Desai as talking in these terms. This we want to avoid. You will agree that our efforts with British have been directed towards coming up with an alternative to MIG's not as a prestige stopgap until Indian production of MIG's could be gotten under way.4

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/7-2562. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Cameron on July 26; cleared by U. Alexis Johnson, INR, and DOD/ISA, and with the President; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi and London.

1 Document 19.

2 Dated June 29. (Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/6-2962)

3 Not found.

4 On August 4, Macmillan sent a message to Kennedy in which he indicated that his government had also reached the conclusion that India had decided upon the MIG aircraft, and there was no point in pursuing the sale of the Lightnings. (Repeated in telegram 735 to London, August 6; Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/8-662)

161. Editorial Note 161. Editorial Note

The sixth meeting of the India consortium, organized by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, took place in Washington on July 30, 1962. The consortium resumed the discussions which had adjourned without conclusion in May. The meeting was attended by the members that had participated in the meeting on June 2, 1961 (see Document 24), plus Austria, Belgium, Italy, and the Netherlands. The representatives of Austria and the Netherlands attended as observers. Belgium and Italy joined the consortium, raising the number of member countries to ten.

According to the press release issued at the close of the meeting, the consortium considered India's requirements for fiscal year 1962/1963, the second year of its current 5-year plan for economic development. Preliminary commitments for the year had been made at the June 1961 meeting. Because of the addition of Belgium and Italy as contributing members, the total committed by the consortium for 1962/1963 increased to $1.07 billion from the $955 million anticipated in 1961. The U.S. commitment for the year was $435 million. The United States had indicated at the 1961 meeting that it intended to contribute $500 million for 1962-1963, but Congressional requirements mandated that the U.S. contribution be proportionate to the contributions of the other members. The U.S. representative indicated that the United States was prepared to match further commitments of other members of the consortium up to a total U.S. contribution of $500 million. (Telegram 340 to New Delhi, July 30; Department of State, Central Files, 891.00/7-3062)

162. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 162. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, August 5, 1962.

SUBJECT

Afghan-Pakistan Transit Dispute: Shah's Mission Inconclusive; Future Prospects Not Bright

The Shah of Iran undertook on his own initiative to mediate the Afghan-Pakistan transit dispute. The Shah consulted in Rawalpindi, Kabul, Rawalpindi and Kabul in that order. He returned to Tehran on August 1 after spending about two weeks in the area. His mission was not immediately successful. The Afghan position continued to be that the reopening of Afghan trade agencies and consulates was a prerequisite to the resumption of normal relations. Pakistan's position, as subsequently confirmed to Ambassador McConaughy by Ayub, similarly showed no give. In fact, the account given to our Ambassador to Pakistan takes an even harder position than Iranian sources have reported. The Government of Pakistan at present shows no inclination to restore Afghan trade or consular offices in the frontier region in spite of previous indications that they might be willing to make some accommodation. The Government of Pakistan, however, reiterated its willingness to facilitate Afghan transit trade through Pakistan.

The Shah's efforts, however, appear to have obtained the consent of the disputants to further talks in Tehran under his aegis. The present unyielding attitudes of the disputants, however, does not augur well for the outcome of the talks. The Shah's activity seems to have contributed little to a solution but the Afghans appeared appreciative of his efforts and therefore Iranian-Afghan relations probably benefited. The United States position has been to remain in the background during the Shah's mission but to be prepared to assist if appropriate. We believe for the present we should continue this policy but we shall keep it under close review.

BW1

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/8-562. Confidential. Drafted in SOA by Carle and Laise on August 4 and cleared with GTI.

1 Benjamin Weiner initialed for Brubeck above Brubeck's typed signature.

163. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy 163. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President KennedySource

New Delhi, August 5, 1962.

* [Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 4/1/62-8/31/62. No classification marking. This letter has not been declassified by the Indian Government. The substance of the letter is summarized in Sarvepalli Gopal, Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography (London: Jonathan Cape, 1984), Vol. 3, pp. 217-218, as follows: “In the same spirit, Nehru wrote to Kennedy thanking him for all the sympathy and friendship he had shown to India, more particularly in regard to aid for development. The United States had not only given India generous assistance but had taken the trouble to induce other countries also to do so. However, it was the friendly and sympathetic attitude, even more than the aid, for which India was grateful. ‘My colleagues here and I are particularly anxious to have the friendship of the United States in the great tasks that confront us. I believe that this friendship is good not only for our two countries, but also for the world.' This had little to do with aid and, even if circumstances arose which might make it difficult for the United States to help India in her development, the Indian Government would still value the friendship of the United States and work for close relations between the two countries. Differences of viewpoint should not affect this friendship. ‘I can assure you, therefore, that whatever might happen, our attitude will continue to be to encourage friendly relations between our two countries.'”]

164. Letter From the Ambassador to India (Galbraith) to President Kennedy 164. Letter From the Ambassador to India (Galbraith) to President KennedySource

New Delhi, August 6, 1962.

Dear Mr. President: I learn in the newspapers of your long summer evenings in the White House and it occurs to me that I should help you out with some good reading.

Politically things remain in a repulsive state. Nehru is still in indifferent health although he has picked up strength during the last few weeks while parliament has been in recess. (It assembles again today.) For years the reins have been nearly all in his hands. Now he neither drives nor relinquishes. The other ministers, with the exception of Menon—and to some extent Desai—are so completely accustomed to passivity that they cannot change.

Menon continues his drive and, I am sure, has considerable plans for an autumn campaign in New York and perhaps elsewhere. He got a large boost out of the Kashmir debate and has certainly considered ways and means of getting another lift including the possibility of some shooting along the Pakistan border. This would also have the merit of taking attention away from China where his sympathies and fellow-travelling instincts make him vulnerable. (He is also I think worrying considerably lest the China border flareup give the Soviets second thoughts on MIG's with the slap at China thus implied.) The snow closes off any danger from the Chinese around the middle of November. Until then last year the Chinese had been dominating the headlines; Menon completely cured that by going into Goa. I would be surprised if the notion of a repeat performance has entirely escaped him. However there are also more risks this time.

I continue to feel fairly clear on the policy we should follow which involves a careful triangulation between Menon and his supporters, his opposition here and your opposition in Washington. We must do everything possible to avoid building Menon up as we have in the past. This includes, to replay a record, denying him the highly emotional issues at UN and concerning Pakistan that we have given him in the past and making it clear that we consider him a kind of antique radical whose tactic of alienating everyone in sight is a diplomatic novelty that does more harm to India than anyone else. In a curious way he is the Hindu Dulles—alienating people as he goes. (Give the phrase Hindu Dulles to someone.)

For Menon's opponents our basic policy is the aid program. It makes them the responsible people who hold the country together.

I am also persuaded that it would have a good effect here and a good ultimate effect in Washington if we were to be cooler in our general technical, economic and cultural assistance to India than in the past and I have been moving along this line. In past years we have sometimes been so eager to help and so anxious to explain ourselves that the Indians have forgotten both how to ask or be grateful and they have come to conclude that it is the business of the world to understand them. Even our friends do not get credit for help that is too eagerly offered—and which the opposition hastens to say the Americans will provide anyway.

I have been making it clear that I think Indian reaction to our problems in getting them aid is exceedingly curious. I am taking up the subject in suitably broad, bland terms in a speech to Indian M.P.'s this week.

Some of this bears on my own role here. Our original conception of Indian policy now going on two years ago was that by aid and the right kind of representation we could get considerable help from the Indians. We haven't got much and I doubt that my high-minded salesmanship of the New Frontier has been at fault. I am enormously admired up to the very moment when I make a request. I will go into my future, a topic which crosses even my totally selfless mind, sometime in the future.

As you will have seen, I have put the MIG discussion on ice. I think it served a useful purpose. We raised the threshold against buying Soviet equipment and we let our friends in the Armed Services here know there was an alternative. However I must say that Menon, with his control of all channels of technical knowledge, shot down the Lightning with appalling ease. In the end I began to develop a few reservations, which I gather you shared, about the cost (in overseas dollars) of this package.

I am still far from certain that the MIG deal is going to come off. I have been spreading the idea that they are useless toys with some success, and I continue to think that the Soviets will be reluctant to arouse Chinese passions at a time when they are pressing the Chinese and Indians to stop playing war with their elbows on the northern border.

[Here follows discussion of issues unrelated to India.]

Yours faithfully,

Ken

* Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Special Correspondence, John Kenneth Galbraith. Confidential.

165. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 165. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, August 10, 1962.

SUBJECT

Possibility of Sino-Indian Negotiations over the Border Problem

Ambassador Galbraith has reported a conversation he had with Prime Minister Nehru on August 6, during which Mr. Nehru indicated the Indians “expect to have negotiations with the Chinese.” The talks would be after the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' meeting in September and would probably be conducted on the Indian side by Foreign Secretary M.J. Desai. Nehru expressed some worry about the number of men up in the mountains “who wonder who is going to shoot first.” Mr. Nehru apparently does not expect much in the way of concrete results from the talks, but thinks they will calm the atmosphere.

Prime Minister Nehru was explaining to the Ambassador a statement he had made earlier in the day to the opening meeting of the current session of the Indian Parliament. According to the press, Mr. Nehru told the Parliament that the Indian Government on July 26 had sent a note to Peiping which pointed out the necessity of avoiding incidents and proposed, when current tensions have eased, to resume discussions on the basis of the report on the previous talks held in 1960. Peiping's reply had been received by the Indian Government the day before, August 5. Mr. Nehru read excerpts to the Parliament. The excerpts apparently gave Peiping's approval of the Indian suggestion for further discussion on the boundary question but repeated Peiping's previous charges of Indian advances into Chinese territory. Peiping indicated that there “need not be any preconditions for Sino-Indian discussions.” Mr. Nehru characterized the note as rather disappointing but said that the Indian Government was examining the note and hoped to send a reply at an early date.

The full text of neither note is yet available so that assessment of the probability of meaningful Sino-Indian negotiations on the border in the near future must be very tentative.

The GOI has always maintained that it desires to settle the dispute by negotiation; but it has always made plain that it will only negotiate if Peiping is willing to admit there is substantial validity to the Indian position on the border question. The most fundamental aspect of the Indian position is the principle that the border is well-defined by geography, tradition and treaty and that the only matter subject to negotiation is the determination of how the principle applies to certain minor areas in dispute where surveys have not been undertaken. Peiping, however, claims that the entire border is undefined and that the Indian Government should negotiate from a tabula rasa, as it were.

When the Chinese note suggests “there need not be any preconditions” for Sino-Indian discussions, Peiping seems to be repudiating India's fundamental position and insisting on its own point of view as the point of departure, just as in the past. The China border question is such an emotionally charged question of national prestige among such a wide segment of literate Indian opinion that it would be extraordinarily difficult for Mr. Nehru to enter into actual negotiation with the Chinese on the terms Peiping now proposes. However, conversations about the border, short of actual negotiations, could undoubtedly be justified to Indian public opinion as they were in 1960.

We have had repeated indications [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] during the last month that the USSR has been suggesting to the Indians the possibility of a friendly settlement of the border issue. The Soviets have made what appear to be offers of mediation for this purpose; Mr. Nehru has reportedly turned down these offers. We have also received reports of renewed suggestions from Peiping to the Government of Burma for it to try to persuade the GOI to hold talks with Red China, possibly in Rangoon.

It should also be noted that the military activities in Ladakh of the past three months appear now to have reached a stalemate. Indian and Chinese outposts are sufficiently close to each other that their mutual presence inhibits significant further advances on the ground by either side along the nearly 200-mile frontier from the Karakorum Pass to the Spanggur Lake. There are no indications that either side wishes to start up full-scale fighting at present.

Therefore, it is understandable that India and Red China should wish to shift from the game of military maneuvering on the ground to the pursuit of their objectives by diplomatic means. It is entirely possible that the diplomatic maneuvering may lead to further official conversations between the two governments.

But we remain of the belief that a greater willingness to compromise will have to be exhibited by Peiping before actual negotiations leading to a settlement can take place.

A.E. Breisky1

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 8/1/62-8/21/62. Confidential.

1 Breisky signed for Brubeck above Brubeck's typed signature.

166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, September 13, 1962, 2:07 p.m.

498. Re Deptel 471 to Karachi.1 Following based on uncleared memcon.

Secretary and Ambassador Ahmed met September 11 for approximately one hour. Following brief exchange on Cuban and Berlin situations and Zafrulla's candidacy, Secretary asked whether Ambassador had received any indication of specific subjects President Ayub wished to cover in his talk with President. Ambassador replied that only specific subject mentioned so far was MAP requirements, but he assumed Ayub wished, among other matters, full survey US-Pakistan-Indian relations including MIGs and Kashmir.

Secretary then stated that perhaps best place begin in discussing US-Pak relations was US attitude toward allies vs. neutrals.

He developed at some length our view of value of alliances to participating countries. Among points made by Secretary were that: 1. Since alliances formed for specific and agreed reasons, success of alliances should be assessed by how well the alliances have fulfilled their original purpose;

2. Essentially various alliances in which we participate were formed ensure independence of members;

3. No member of our alliance system has so far lost its independ-ence;

4. Over years allies have definitely fared better than neutrals in our treatment; and

5. US did not view alliances as meaning members had to agree on all subjects, particularly those unrelated to basic agreed purposes of alliance.

Ahmed commented at length that people of Pakistan believed distinction in treatment of allies and neutrals had become blurred; they demand with increasing insistency to know what special value accrues to Pakistan as an ally. To them it appears that, in fact, India receives same essential benefits without costs and risks of being an ally. He then noted that crux of issue for Pakistan is whether ally supports Pakistan on Kashmir issue. He dwelt at some length on familiar Pakistan views on Kashmir. He repeatedly stated that a Kashmir solution was key to future stability on the subcontinent.

Secretary replied that in his view Pakistan received considerable benefits from alliances and without them would be in isolated and uncomfortable position. In addition, could critics of alliances convincingly show that Pakistan's relations with neighbors would be better if Pakistan were not in alliance? Referring to Kashmir the Secretary remarked that US was caught in middle of problem in which we had no hand in creating. We approached subcontinent as a whole and we saw in Kashmir a problem which was diverting energies and resources of both nations from key problems of development. Pakistan is aware that we have also lost considerably in India because of our support to Pakistan. Pakistan, as well as other countries, should realize that in such matters US leverage and powers of persuasion are limited.

Time scheduled for appointment ended before Secretary could go further into our views Kashmir and other Indo-Pakistan-US problems, and it was agreed he would meet again with Ahmed before President Ayub arrived.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790D.11/9-1362. Confidential. Drafted by Naas on September 12 and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi, Kabul, and London.

1 Telegram 471, September 7, noted that the meeting between Rusk and Ahmed scheduled for September 11 was the first in what might prove to be a series of meetings designed to explore and define basic areas of agreement and disagreement in U.S.-Pakistan relations. The immediate purpose of the meeting was to prepare for the Kennedy-Ayub talks scheduled for later in the month. (Ibid., 790D.11/9-762)

167. Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs 167. Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian AffairsSource

Washington, September 19, 1962.

STATUS OF INDIAN NEGOTIATIONS FOR MIG'S

Indian interest in acquiring a supersonic aircraft capability has not abated. This capability appears to include a certain number of supersonic planes, the rights for the manufacture or assembly of jet fighters of foreign design in India, and the manufacture of the Indian-designed fighter HF-24 and a foreign engine for it in India. India has already announced plans for securing one item in this package. It has signed an agreement with the Soviet Union for the manufacture in India of a Soviet jet engine for use on the Indian-designed HF-24.

Agreement on manufacture of an engine for the HF-24 has been accompanied by continued attempts by India to reach agreement with the Soviet Union to secure additional items in India's desired supersonic packages. It seems probable that the Indians will reach agreement with the Soviet Union on the purchase of some MIG-21 fighters before the end of the year. However, it seems less likely that there will be an agreement in the foreseeable future providing for the manufacture of MIG's in India.

At the end of August all members of the Indian evaluation team which had gone to Moscow to inquire into the purchase and manufacture in India of MIG's had returned to New Delhi. We understand that the leader of the team has reported favorably on the aircraft; some members, however, consider the MIG-21 to have certain serious drawbacks. Ambassador Galbraith has reported that Nehru has become increasingly cool to the expenditures necessary for a MIG deal and his disposition is to postpone it or scale it down. When asked about the MIG deal by reporters in London on September 9, Nehru said, however, that “negotiations have gone a good bit further.” He added that India looked upon the MIG deal “as a normal commercial transaction without any political implications.” He said India could get better terms from the U.S.S.R. because of the nature of the Soviet economy. Krishna Menon, whose political prestige is intimately involved in the MIG issue, has been steadily pressing for approval.

Because of the absence from India of key GOI ministers, India may not announce a decision on a MIG deal until after Nehru returns to India, if then. (Nehru will make brief visits to France, Ghana and Nigeria prior to his return to India on October 1.)

There are several reasons why an agreement to manufacture MIG's in India seems less likely to eventuate than an arrangement for purchase. On the Indian side, critics of a MIG manufacturing agreement argue that MIG-21's manufactured in India would be obsolete by the time they became operational, estimated at two to three years from the time an agreement is concluded.

On the Soviet side, there have been indications that the Soviets have been experiencing doubts, for both technical and political reasons, about providing India with a manufacturing capability for the MIG-21. The Soviets apparently have had some question about Indian ability to handle so complicated a program as manufacturing supersonic fighters. This seems to us to be reasonable caution on the part of the Soviets. Additionally, we have received reports that the Soviet Union has been meeting strong Communist Chinese objections, particularly to the proposal for manufacturing MIG's in India.

The Indians have repeatedly said that the right to manufacture is an essential element in their determination to acquire a supersonic capability. Soviet reservations regarding manufacture might therefore have an effect on the entire MIG deal.

As expressed by Ambassador Galbraith in a recent assessment, “It could be that the MIG deal is expiring not with a bang but a whimper.”

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 9/14/62-9/21/62. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. Transmitted to the White House on September 19 under cover of a memorandum from Brubeck to Bundy noting that the paper was sent at Komer's request.

168. Memorandum of Conversation 168. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Newport, Rhode Island, September 24, 1962, 12:30-2:45 p.m.

SUBJECT

Kennedy-Ayub Talks at Newport, Rhode Island

PARTICIPANTS

President Ayub

Ambassador Aziz Ahmed

President Kennedy

Assistant Secretary Phillips Talbot

Ambassador Walter P. McConaughy

The following subjects were discussed:1 I. Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Meeting in London: Common Market Problem;

II. Pakistan-Afghanistan Relations;

III. Pakistan-India Relations;

IV. Presentation of President's Science Advisory Committee Report on Waterlogging and Salinity in West Pakistan.

II. Pakistan-Afghanistan Relations

President Kennedy asked President Ayub what he thought the prospects were for some sort of solution of the Afghan problem. President Ayub indicated that he was not optimistic about the outlook for an improvement in relations. He gave a summary of the history and present status of the mediation effort of the Shah of Iran, substantially along lines already reported by our Embassies in Tehran, Karachi, and Kabul. Although the chances for a settlement did not seem promising owing to Afghan unwillingness to show any flexibility, he thought that a meeting of the three Foreign Ministers, or other representatives of the three governments, could still be arranged, to take place shortly after they returned from the General Assembly. The meeting would have taken place in Tehran before the General Assembly, if Afghan Foreign Minister Naim had not had to cancel because he wanted to take his son to Europe for medical treatment.

President Ayub said he felt there was little hope for Afghanistan so long as the present Royal Family remained in power. He characterized the Royal Family as being entirely indifferent to the needs and interests of the mass of the Afghan people. He termed the regime as cruel and motivated by expediency. He said the ruling family had formed its opinion that the Soviet Union was going to take over South Asia and was shaping its policy accordingly. He felt that the Afghan Government was influenced by this estimate when it broke relations with Pakistan and terminated trade and transit arrangements with Pakistan. The Afghan rulers had always played one side against another and their assessment of the present situation caused them to lean toward the Soviet Union. He thought they would have given the Soviets an opening, regardless of the policy followed by Pakistan.

President Kennedy expressed the deep concern of the U.S. Government at the adverse trend of events in Afghanistan. It was clear that the extension of Soviet influence was proceeding at a rapid rate. It seemed to the U.S. that the break with Pakistan had accelerated the adverse trend. It had made the Afghans far more dependent on Soviet trade than on the trade route through the Soviet Union. It had tended to isolate Afghanistan from the free world countries and had made it extremely difficult and expensive for the Afghans to receive any free world economic assist-ance. We do not feel that Afghanistan is irretrievably lost, but a major effort must be made to save the situation. Restoration of relations between Pakistan and Afghanistan seems essential to the success of the effort to counter the expansion of Soviet influence. President Kennedythen outlined, in general terms, our thinking as to how Pakistan-Afghanistan relations might be restored. He indicated the U.S. would be prepared to assist the financing and construction of short rail extensions into Afghanistan from Quetta-Chaman to Spin Baldak and from the Khyber Pass to a connecting point in Afghan territory. With the completion of this rail extension, which would require some months for consruction, it would be possible to send Afghan goods across Pakistani territory to Afghanistan in sealed cars in bond, with no transshipment or handling of the merchandise in Pakistan required. This would mean Afghan Trade Agencies would not be required. Our proposal was that the Pakistan Government allow the stationing of Trade Agencies in Peshawar and Quetta temporarily, such Trade Agencies to be closed as soon as the rail extensions are in operation. Diplomatic relations and trade and transit arrangements under this plan would be re-established immediately, along with the temporary reopening of the Trade Agencies. Consulates at Peshawar and Quetta would not be established now under the proposal, but small consulates would be reopened as soon as the Trade Agencies were closed. Since the number of Afghan representatives would be small, they could be kept under surveillance. The President said that, if desired, we would be willing to assist the Pakistani authorities in satisfying themselves that the Afghan representatives were not engaging in improper activities.

The President observed that this formula would achieve the objective of restoring Afghanistan's access to the free world and would improve the prospects of keeping Afghanistan out of the Soviet camp. It would save the face of both Afghanistan and Pakistan and would give Pakistan reasonable protection against objectionable activities of Afghan representatives among the tribesmen.

President Ayub indicated that he had considerable reservations to this proposal. He was agreeable to the rail extension, Chaman to Spin Baldak, which was already contemplated, but he seriously doubted the financial and engineering feasibility of a rail extension from the Khyber Pass into Afghanistan. Nor did he think this was necessary. A trucking service from Peshawar over the existing highway was far more economical and practical. This trucking service had always worked well and could continue to do so. The Afghans could pick up the goods in Peshawar and handle the traffic arrangements in any way they pleased. Every facility would be granted by the Pakistani authorities even to the extent of some sacrifice of Pakistani traffic requirements. He thought the cost of extending the line through the very difficult mountainous terrain of the Khyber area would be enormous and long delayed and impossible to justify. The existing short line west of Peshawar was a difficult engineering accomplishment which was very expensive when it was built some decades ago. Even then the British could justify it only on military grounds.

President Ayub thought that if the Afghan ruling authorities were really interested in restoring trade, they would have accepted the U.S. compromise proposal of last March which Pakistan had accepted and which would have enabled the Afghans to supervise and document the transit traffic in Pakistan (although this was not really necessary), by means of Afghan Trade Agents stationed in Karachi, who would have had the right to travel periodically to the border points in connection with the transit traffic. The fact that the Afghans had rejected this, and had terminated the limited sixty-day resumption of transit traffic which continued through February and March of this year and which had worked very satisfactorily, showed that the Afghans did not really put a high priority on resumption of trade and transit.

President Ayub said that he did not see how Pakistan could safely permit the return of Afghan government representatives to the sensitive tribal area. They were all trouble-makers and they had orders to stir up the tribesmen. There has been great improvement in the peace and stability of the tribal area since the departure of the Afghan representatives last year. Before that, there had been numerous bombing and shooting incidents, some of them rather serious. In one clash, 700 had been killed. Furthermore, President Ayub thought that public opinion in Pakistan was a factor which had to be taken into account, especially since the return of constitutional government last June. The public understood the Afghan problem, and would regard President Ayub and his government as “fools,” if the return of Afghan local representatives was allowed on practically the same basis as before. President Ayub felt there would be no legitimate consular work for Afghan consuls in the Northwest Frontier area anyway. They would only be there for subversive purposes. He was willing to permit the Afghans to have all the consulates they wanted in Rawalpindi and beyond, but no closer to the border than Rawalpindi. It seemed to President Ayub that the logical first step would be for the Afghans to agree to the re-establishment of diplomatic relations. After this was accomplished, efforts could be made to restore other relations, step by step.

President Kennedy pointed out that the Afghan sensibilities had to be considered. The Afghans had been offended by the Pakistan action of last year in closing the Afghan offices. The Afghans would certainly need to give assurance as to proper conduct of their representatives and they could not expect an exact return to the former situation. With only a small Afghan consulate eventually situated in Peshawar and with the various safeguards, it seemed unlikely that the Afghan representatives could create serious difficulties, or threaten Pakistan security. The U.S. had been able to control Communist consuls in New York without any great difficulty. Mr. McConaughy noted that it was customary for a neighboring country to have a consulate in a nearby friendly city as important as Peshawar. There would be some visa work and other traditional work for an Afghan representative to perform in Peshawar.

President Kennedy urged President Ayub to view the problem from a broad standpoint, bearing in mind the very large stakes involved. He hoped that President Ayub could overlook some of the local factors in view of the much wider implications of the problem. It was our view that the prospects for saving Afghanistan from satellite status were greatly reduced by the continuation of the impasse between Pakistan and Afghanistan and that the security of Pakistan itself would be threatened in a major way by the entry of Afghanistan into the Soviet orbit.

President Ayub said he agreed on the great danger to Pakistan inherent in the present situation and outlook. He said he expected to be confronted with Soviet or Soviet-controlled forces on his border with Afghanistan at some time. He felt that Pakistan's policy was not responsible for the mistaken policy of the Afghan rulers. He felt that a change in the government of Afghanistan and some sort of confederation between Pakistan, Iran and Afghanistan was the only hopeful way of dealing with the security problem. Under present circumstances, the Soviets were very confident and did not feel it necessary to show their hand openly in Afghanistan. Their technicians and advisors were being very correct and were staying in the background. The Soviets were able to use central Asian nationals to do their work when necessary. These people could hardly be distinguished from the natives of Afghanistan. He thought the Soviets were playing their game very cleverly in Afghanistan and possibly would not have to make a show of aggressive force, which would have a damaging international effect.

President Ayub then said rather reluctantly that, in view of President Kennedy's views, he would be willing to consider permitting the establishment of Afghan “tentacles” in the Quetta-Chaman area, and in the Khyber area, but not in Peshawar itself. He might consider allowing an Afghan representative in say Landikotal, between Peshawar and the border, but Peshawar was too sensitive and he could not consider authorizing the reopening of an Afghan government office there. The Afghans still had permission to station representatives of the Afghan banks there, but official representatives could not be permitted in Peshawar.

President Kennedy noted that there was a basis for discussion in this offer of President Ayub's even though it did not go so far as we had suggested. We thought it was important for representatives of the two countries to get together in the presence of Iranians as soon as possible to try to work out an agreement. He hoped that President Ayub could authorize his people to start the discussions.

President Ayub said that this would be acceptable. He thought the Foreign Ministers might initiate the discussions in Tehran, after an initial preliminary meeting in New York while they are all present at the General Assembly. He expressed his distrust of Afghan Foreign Minister Naim, whom he described as devious and shifty. He said he preferred to deal with Daud, whom he described as tough and difficult, but blunt and forthright.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 10/62. Secret. Drafted by McConaughy on October 1 and approved by the White House on October 15. Kennedy's meeting with Ayub at Hammersmith Farm in Newport, Rhode Island, grew out of a request by Ayub for an informal visit to the United States following a State visit to Canada. (Memorandum from Rusk to Kennedy, August 15; ibid., 7/62-8/62)

1 Memoranda of conversation dealing with items I, III, and IV are ibid.

169. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 169. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, September 26, 1962.

Your meeting with Naim1 will be the first (and perhaps last) real chance we'll have to influence the basic outlook of the Afghan regime.

All in town are convinced that Moscow is slowly but surely binding Afghanistan to it in a way the Afghans sooner or later won't be able to escape. The latest is a sensitive report2 that USSR is insisting on a three-year export monopoly on karakul and rugs, major Afghan exports. Our Embassy claims this would signify the “virtual end of RGA economic independence.” Whether or not Kabul is in fact past the point of no return, the trend is certainly clear.

Dominant Soviet influence in Afghanistan would so increase the pressures on Iran and Pakistan as to justify a major forestalling effort on our part. Such an effort would involve largely US economic aid. But here we run afoul of the Pushtunistan issue and its derivative, the transit dispute, which prevents us from even getting much aid in.

We've just tried moving Ayub on this issue without much success. He's probably willing to compromise but won't restore status quo ante as Kabul insists.

So we've got to get the Afghans to come halfway too. The only means I see is to drive home to Naim and his brother Daud how dangerous a spot we think they're in and how little we can do to help so long as our entry through Pakistan is blocked.

To me, this requires lifting the discussion above the level of Pushtunistan and transit. There is no purchase in letting Naim give you his usual long harangue on these; he is letter perfect and passionately convinced he's right.

Instead I'd urge stressing our concern over the skillful game Moscow is playing—half a billion in loans and grants, 3-4000 Soviet technicians, and reorientation of most Afghan trade toward the Bloc. The Soviets have been very cautious to date, but Naim should ask himself what they might do once they have Afghans in their grasp.

Naim's comeback will surely be to appeal for greater US aid and support. Here I think we should frankly ask him whether he thinks we can desert our ally Pakistan on Pushtun issue, when we fully recognize Durand Line. We can't even continue present aid program effectively till the border is opened anyway.

If Naim shows any give, you could tell him: (1) you personally told Ayub that both he and Afghans must recognize that their common security interest far transcends their lesser disputes—Afghanistan must have a friendly Pakistan in its rear and vice versa; (2) we are convinced that straight restoration of the status quo ante is unacceptable to Ayub, but; (3) he seems willing to compromise and agreed to foreign ministers talks under Iranian auspices in New York; (4) we urge Afghans to pick up this gauge before something sours the prospects again; and (5) there can be a reasonable settlement if both sides will keep their larger mutual interests clearly in mind (pp. 4-5 of State's Talking Paper3 have more details).

The Afghans, who are horribly isolated, may just feel that the USSR is coming out on top, and that they have to bend with the wind. So you may want to weave in a few remarks about the Bloc's current troubles and our confidence we're ahead, though pointing out as a fact of life that we would have a hard time helping Afghans if they got too enmeshed by Soviets before they woke up and called for help.

My sense is that you might just be able to break this logjam. As was the case with Sukarno, these proud, sensitive Afghan leaders might take from you what no one else can really get across.

Bob Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Security, 1961-1963. Secret.

1 Kennedy was scheduled to meet with Afghan Foreign Minister Naim on September 27.

2 Not found.

3 Not printed. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, 9/14/62-9/26/62)

170. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 170. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, September 27, 1962, 5:46 p.m.

560. 1. Ayub discussed US military assistance with Secretary McNamara September 251 in frank and cordial atmosphere. Ayub said he did not wish alter scope US military aid nor seek enlargement agreed force base, but hoped US performance on delivery agreed items could be improved.

2. McNamara said he would see to it that any serious deficiencies in delivery would be corrected expeditiously. FYI: McNamara undertook that delivery level in FY 1963 would be at least twice, perhaps 2-1/2 times that achieved in FY 1962.2 However, FY 1962 deliveries were abnormally low because of SEA and Berlin priorities, so that net performance for the two years is not above prior delivery schedule. End FYI.

3. No increase in MAP was requested or committed. Under agreed MAP ceiling a submarine for Pak Navy was committed for delivery not earlier than FY 1964. 1961 commitment of 4 C-130's reaffirmed and UASF survey team will be sent to study how meet remainder Pakistan's air transport needs, and a further increment of transport aircraft will follow, although not necessarily C-130's.

4. FYI: Current MAP includes delivery to Pakistan of 130 tanks, chiefly M-48's during FY 1963. 72 tanks are programmed for later delivery. As noted above this does not represent any increase over previous MAP level. There is no increase in fighter aircraft inventory. Attrition aircraft both F-86 and F-104 will be provided in kind as required. End FYI.

For New Delhi

Dept considers it possible Ayub may try through press to create impression, as he did in 1961, that his trip has resulted in increased or at least more glamorous US military assistance. If Karachi perceives no objection Ambassador Galbraith may wish forestall effect of such an effort by informing GOI immediately of results Ayub's talks with McNamara. Ambassador authorized pass to GOI information in paragraph 3 only. If submarine is questioned, he could say that it will be used to train Pak Navy in ASW. If it later develops Ayub publicizes commitment to increase delivery, Ambassador also may draw on all of paragraph 2.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790D.11/9-2762. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Gatch; cleared by Kettelhut, Cameron, and William Bundy; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to New Delhi and USUN for the Secretary.

1 Ayub met with McNamara in Washington on September 25 and then visited New York before returning to Pakistan on September 27. A memorandum of this conversation is in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, SA #47, Pakistan, 200.6-333, 1962.

2 This undertaking was confirmed in an aide-mémoire signed on October 13 by Talbot, and delivered to Foreign Minister Ali on that date. A copy of the aide-mémoire was transmitted under cover of a January 18, 1963, memorandum from McNamara to the Secretaries of the Army and the Air Force expressing his concern that the terms of his commitments to Ayub were not being met. (Ibid.: FRC 67 A 4564, Pakistan, 1963, 000.1-091.4)

171. Memorandum of Conversation 171. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, September 27, 1962, 11 a.m.

SUBJECT

Meeting of the President and Prince Naim

PARTICIPANTS

The President

H.R.H. Prince Naim, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister for Afghanistan

H.E. Mohammed Hashim Maiwandwal, Ambassador of Afghanistan

Mr. James P. Grant, Deputy Assistant Secretary, NEA

The President opened the conversation with an expression of his concern and interest in strengthening relations with Afghanistan, and of his concern with the problems which were arising out of the relations between Afghanistan and its neighbors, and possible means for their solution.

Prince Naim responded, in English and in a very low voice dropping on occasion to a whisper, with a little speech in which he expressed his appreciation of the interest of the President in Afghanistan, in aid for development and in the resolution of the border problem. He regretted the lack of results in the latter area, noting that it appeared Pakistan was not desirous of reestablishing normal relations between the two countries. Prince Naim noted the delicate situation in Afghanistan, and that it was a part of the frontier of the Free World, but in contrast to the United States, a part of the old frontier. Its society was not of the type of its neighbor to the north and, left alone, would not evolve in that direction.

Prince Naim noted that Afghanistan was in a very exposed location, continually confronted with economic and political isolation. He said that the Pakistan policy of denying the true facts and of pressing for the increased isolation of Afghanistan from the Free World was making Afghanistan more and more dependent, and dangerously so, on its northern neighbor. This constituted a dangerous threat not only to Afghanistan but to the Free World as well.

He said there were two principal issues between Afghanistan and Pakistan. The first was the complicated Pushtunistan issue which will take much time and patience to solve. The second was the issue of Afghanistan's access to the sea.

The President interjected at this point that he could not understand why the issue of trade through Pakistan to Afghanistan could not be separated from the other issues between the two countries, and why a solution could not be found for this problem standing alone.

Prince Naim stated that it was more than a problem of just physical movement of goods, that there was a real question as to what kind of trade was possible in the absence of consular and trade offices to take care of the papers and consular activities associated with the movement of goods and people. Without consular facilities it was extremely difficult for traders and other personnel, such as truck drivers, to function. On the other hand, he said, it is possible to separate the border/trade problem from the general Pushtunistan issue and this was what the Afghans proposed. He said that the Pushtunistan political problems raised by the Pakistanis in connection with the consulates were imaginary ones in that the Afghans, given the open border, can pass freely back and forth.

The President returned to the theme that it should be possible for Afghanistan, if it really wants to, to reach an agreement with Pakistan allowing trade and aid to flow smoothly through Pakistan, and that it should be possible to solve that problem without having to solve other problems.

Prince Naim stated that it is a matter of life and death for Afghanistan to maintain its trade and aid ties with the West. Unfortunately Pakistan had mixed the subject of consulates and trade agencies, necessary for trade and aid goods to pass, with the broader political issues. Prince Naim said that Afghanistan was most willing to guarantee that its consular offices would not engage in improper political practices and would abide by conservative international practices. If the Pakistanis had some suspicion of a problem they could declare the person involved persona non grata. Also, the building of one or two rail spurs would help since when finished there would no longer be a need for trade agencies in the frontier area. However, consular facilities will be required for the thousands of Afghans who travel along the two routes from Pakistan into Afghanistan.

The President then said that he wished to affirm most strongly our friendship for Afghanistan and our desire to be of help. However, he believed that Afghanistan could not long exist in a position of growing dependency on the U.S.S.R., that under the best of circumstances independence of a country cannot be maintained readily by complete dependence on one country. The Iran route was useable to a point but too expensive. In his opinion Afghanistan needed to make adjustments to reach some solution of its problem with Pakistan.

Prince Naim replied that the undesirable and growing dependence on the north is a result of moves by the Pakistanis. He noted parenthetically that when Afghanistan came to the United States for military aid in 1952-53 the United States turned down the request even though Afghanistan said it was threatened on both borders. He noted that in education they were still placing their dependency in this field in the West, and on the United States particularly. Progress did need to be made on solving the transit problem and he expressed the strong hope that both the United States and the Shah of Iran would continue their good efforts. However, he doubted whether it was possible for there to be a successful negotiation if the United States gives Pakistan the feeling of United States support for its position.

The President interjected to note that the United States had only a limited capacity to influence Pakistan, that each country seemed to feel that the United States had the capacity to influence its neighbor although not itself.

This brought a laugh from Prince Naim, who then continued that if discussions can continue it should be possible to meet the basic needs of both countries with the possible exception of the question of prestige for each. Prince Naim stated that he had an appointment with the Iranian Foreign Minister and the Pakistan Foreign Minister as soon as he returns to New York, with the Iranian Foreign Minister serving as host. He hoped that at that time he could convince Mohammed Ali that a consulate with a senior and a junior officer is a small matter to be holding up the progress of much larger interests.

He also requested that the United States continue to show its willingness to continue shipping goods through Iran and to provide support for the Five-Year Plan. He noted that a large amount of information had been given to the United States on the plan and many discussions had been held with the AID officials but nothing definitive had yet evolved. He noted that it was extremely important that aid continue to flow over the Iran route if the hands of the Pakistanis were not to be greatly strengthened.

The President replied that the United States was willing to continue shipping through Iran as we have been in the recent past but that we are not in a position to give a long-term commitment in detailed support of the Five-Year Plan. He noted, however, that we are discussing projects with the Afghans and are prepared to continue aid at least previous annual levels subject to the availability of well prepared projects, Congressional appropriation of funds, and satisfactory means of shipment.

Prince Naim stated quite vigorously that shipment through Iran to Afghanistan is possible at the same price as through Pakistan. He said he understood our problem on long-term commitments but he felt that the project approach was not yet working very smoothly, there having been many discussions and examinations already without much action.

The President promised to look personally at the status of the projects in Afghanistan after Congress had appropriated funds. He noted, however, that there seemed to be a real difference between the Afghans and United States officials on the cost and amount of goods which could be shipped through Iran. He again reiterated the need to restore transit through Pakistan. He said that he had talked to Ayub and hoped the countries were not too far apart and could carry out careful discussions in New York and Iran.

Prince Naim stated once again that he would talk to the Pakistanis and was confident of agreement if the Pakistanis would be more flexible and stop their pressure. He noted that the additional cost of shipping goods through Iran was a small cost in comparison with the vastly greater costs if Afghanistan were lost to the Free World. He did not feel safe now as to the future of Afghanistan; it would need the moral and financial help of outsiders if it were to survive.

The President replied that the United States is a long way off and even though it is very anxious to be of help it can at best play a limited role. He stated that he was not convinced, after talking to Ayub and Naim, that it would be possible to reach a general accord but at least it ought to be possible to reach an agreement on how goods from the United States can flow across Pakistan to Afghanistan. The President closed on the question of the source of greatest danger: that arising from complete dependence on the Soviet Union or that from some adjustment with Pakistan to enable goods to flow again.

Prince Naim said, in reply, that dangers are present in any course of action but that his government, as all governments, must maintain its national life. Afghanistan, like West Berlin, is landlocked and dependent on routes through other countries. As with West Berlin, if a landlocked country does not stand up for its rights where does the process of attrition stop?

The President closed the meeting by noting that there was a real problem in balancing the factors involved. He assured Prince Naim of the very strong United States interest in Afghanistan and of our willingness to be of assistance.

The tenor of the meeting throughout was cordial.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Memoranda of Conversation, 7/61-9/62. Secret. Drafted by Grant. Naim was in the United States as head of the Afghan Delegation to the U.N. General Assembly.

172. Memorandum of Conversation 172. Memorandum of Conversation

New York, September 27, 1962.

[Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 80 B 01285A, DCI (McCone) Files, DCI (McCone) Memo for the Record, 24 Sept-31 Dec 1962. Secret; Eyes Only. Extract—2 pages of source text not declassified.]

173. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 173. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State1

New York, September 29, 1962, 4 p.m.

Secto 49. Following Based on Uncleared Memcom. Prince Naim saw Secretary bilateral substantive talk this morning. He took major portion of hour to describe compromise formula he said had been agreed upon previous evening in long discussion with Mohammed Ali at Aram dinner which lasted until 1:30 this morning.

Formula, he reported, envisages restoration consular functions at Peshawar and Quetta but by diplomatic personnel specifically assigned this function. After initial period, which Naim had suggested might be month or six weeks, offices would become regular consulates with regular consular personnel. He had told Mohammed Ali if Pakistan were to have any complaint about subversive activities of consular personnel, GOP should make complaint to him as Foreign Minister about individuals and have them withdrawn in accordance normal diplomatic practice, instead of closing consulates. He assured Mohammed Ali GOA would not use consulates for subversion.

Formula also envisages opening of trade agencies briefly until completion of rail spurs. He stated he expected this would take no more than 3 months in one case and 8 or 9 in other.

Naim indicated his realization Pakistanis had to “save face.” He said he felt sure he could persuade GOA accept compromise as stands but he is not sure Mohammed Ali can or will persuade GOP.

(SecDel heard briefly from Aram this morning that compromise proposals aired at dinner. He expressed uncertainty whether they acceptable to both governments.)2

Naim also reported discussion regarding propaganda problem. He said GOA did not regard Afghan public discussion what is happening to Pushtoons as “propaganda.” He apparently took position much GOA “propaganda” mere reaction to what GOA heard from Pakistani propaganda. But Naim said he had agreed not to attack Pakistani personalities in Afghan output.

Secretary said he much encouraged this report of progress in negotiations.3

Secretary explained US interests in Afghanistan's freedom and “serenity” and showed how these important to US. An Afghanistan that is serene and free removes possible source of difficulty for US/Soviet relations.

Secretary discussed our firm interest in Afghanistan's economic development but our inability to make commitments of contractual nature. Naim discussed possibly some misunderstanding of work commitment but expressed need for GOA know as precisely as possible areas it can expect US assistance for 5-year plan. Secretary indicated desire be as precise as possible; said we would see, after AID bill passed, how we may make more precise what we can say about assistance to 5-year plan. We hoped be as helpful as possible without making any commitments we cannot be sure to carry out. Throughout this portion of discussion Secretary stressed importance Afghan access to variety of countries in world as one determinant how helpful outside countries, especially US, could be toward 5-year plan.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 602.8990D/9-2962. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Tehran, Kabul, and Karachi.

2 Rusk met with Iranian Foreign Minister Aram on October 5 and received a more complete account of the discussion that led to the compromise formula. Aram felt that it might prove difficult to persuade Ayub to accept the formula. He planned to recommend that the Shah send a message to Ayub supporting the proposed formula, and he suggested that it would be helpful if McConaughy was authorized to weigh in with Ayub in the same vein. (Memorandum of conversation, October 5; ibid., NEA/SOA Files: Lot 64 D 544, Naim Visit, Sept 1962)

3 The Department of State's position on the compromise formula brokered by Aram was outlined in telegram 599 to Karachi, October 4. The Department felt that favorable momentum pointing in the direction of the solution of the transit impasse should be encouraged. But in this instance, it was advisable for the United States to retreat into the background and let the three nations involved work out a solution. (Ibid., Central Files, 689.90D/10-462)

174. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 174. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, October 15, 1962.

SUBJECT

Fighting on Sino-Indian Border

Fighting on the Sino-Indian border has become much more serious and has imposed a heavy logistical burden on the Indians. Diplomatic efforts to ease military tensions on the border have failed at least for the present. In response to Indian requests, the U.S. is giving assistance to make possible certain limited purchases designed to ease Indian military transport and communications problems. Additionally the Departments of State and Defense are studying the availability on short notice and on terms acceptable to India of transport, communications and other military equipment in order to be prepared should the Government of India request such U.S. equipment to cope with the Chinese threat.

Military Situation:

The focus of military activity has shifted from Ladakh on the western border with China to a point just east of Bhutan on the eastern border along the MacMahon Line. According to the Indians, some 300 to 400 Chinese troops crossed the MacMahon Line on September 8 or 9, threatening Indian outposts near Dhola, one to two miles inside Indian-claimed territory. In point of fact, it is unclear as to whether the MacMahon Line lies north or south of this area. Firing between the opposing forces began on September 20 and continued intermittently, with light casualties on both sides, until October 10 when it became much heavier. Both sides have accused the other of provoking the initial firing on September 20. Nehru announced on October 12 that in the October 10 fighting the Chinese had suffered nearly a hundred casualties, and the Indians, seventeen. He said he had ordered the Indian Army to clear Indian territory in the Northeast Frontier.

This is the most serious engagement of the Sino-Indian dispute. The Indians claim the Communist Chinese were responsible for initiating the fighting on October 10. India, however, may itself have been responsible for this action in order to expel the Chinese from the Indian-claimed territory in this area which is of far greater strategic importance to India than is Ladakh. While we have no confirmation of Indian responsibility, the Indian Foreign Secretary informed Ambassador Galbraith that Indian forces have been under orders to open fire on Chinese on Indian-claimed territory in the Northeast in contrast to their orders to move as possible but not shoot in Ladakh. Moreover, the Indian Army has greater strength and resources in this area than in Ladakh.

Intelligence reports indicate that Indian air transport facilities have been put under severe strain by supply operations in support of the Dhola operation. We have had difficulty in arranging for routine U.S. freight charter flights from Calcutta to Katmandu because of this situation.

In the meantime, there have been no reports of incidents in Ladakh since early September when the Indians state four Chinese soldiers were killed in a still unpublicized engagement near the Chip Chap River.

We consider that the Chinese objective in shifting the focus to the East has been to put additional pressure on the Indians to come to the negotiating table on Chinese terms. We do not believe either side desires the conflict to become more extensive than the present skirmishing on the border. Considerations of “face” could, however, intensify this skirmishing. The Indians are now publicly committed to expel the Chinese from Dhola and the Chinese are equally committed to remain where they are.

Diplomatic Situation:

India's more firm military policy, implemented last spring of stopping or pushing back the Communist Chinese in Ladakh, resulted in several minor military skirmishes. Concerned that the resulting military tensions should not lead to a widening or intensification of the conflict beyond the point of Indian capabilities, India initiated an attempt about two months ago to calm the situation by diplomatic activity. (See our memorandum of August 15, 1962.)1 In a series of notes India proposed preliminary talks for the purpose of creating a climate in which later negotiations on the border could take place. Under pressure from Parliament, Nehru's position hardened to the point of insisting that such talks should have as an objective the re-establishment of the previous “status quo of the border,” i.e., the withdrawal of the Chinese from the parts of Ladakh which they occupied.

The Communist Chinese maintained their position in favor of negotiations on the border, but “without pre-conditions,” i.e., without withdrawal or acceptance of the Indian position that the border is delimited. Reasserting this position the Chinese proposed that negotiations be initiated in Peiping on October 15, and that both sides should withdraw 20 kilometers from their present positions prior to negotiations. The Indians agreed to talks on October 15, but on their own terms. With such distance between the two positions, reinforced by actual fighting, the prospect for an actual meeting has been dim.

In its latest note on the subject dated October 6 India repeated its willingness to hold discussions with the Chinese under the conditions previously indicated, but further indicated that it would not enter into talks under duress and that therefore the Communist Chinese would have to terminate their latest incursion across the MacMahon Line first.

U.S. Action:

Since the Dhola activity began, the Government of India has made three requests for U.S. assistance in arranging for Indian purchase of spare parts and military transportation and communications equipment. Recognizing the connection with the border engagement, we have given the requests priority attention.

1. On October 2 the Indian Foreign Secretary asked for Ambassador Galbraith's assistance in urgently procuring C-119 spare parts for purchase by the Government of India. Although hindered by the chaotic state of Indian supply and procurement procedures, the Air Force determined what parts were needed, made available stocks on hand, and ordered immediate local manufacture of those stocks which were unavailable. These parts, with the exception of two unidentifiable items, are currently in the process of shipment to India.

2. On October 4 the Indian Embassy asked the U.S., in view of the emergency, to agree to divert two Caribou transport airplanes, on order with De Havilland of Canada, to the Indian Air Force for purchase. The Secretary of Defense directed that the Defense Department comply with the request and the Department of State on October 11 informed the Indian Embassy of the U.S. Government's willingness to make the aircraft available for purchase. The delivery date is expected to be in the last week of October.

3. Our Embassy in New Delhi informed us October 3 that the Indian Defense Ministry had directed the Indian Embassy in Washington urgently to request export licenses to permit the purchase of 250 ANGRC-9 radios for use along the Sino-Indian border. Although the U.S. has not as yet received such a request, the Army is trying to work out problems of availability in advance.

In addition to the above steps taken in response to specific Indian requests, we are attempting to determine what additional steps the U.S. Government might take should the Government of India request further assistance. The Departments of State and Defense are inquiring into the early availability of transport, communications, and other military and quasi-military equipment on terms which would be likely to be acceptable to India. We do not plan to discuss such specific assistance with the Indians, however, unless the Government of India itself raises the subject.

John Lloyd2

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 10/15/62-10/20/62. Secret.

1 Not found.

2 Lloyd signed for Brubeck above Brubeck's typed signature.

175. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 175. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, October 15, 1962, 6 p.m.

1225. Policy. Given the prospect of continuing and possibly more serious conflict on the Northern Frontier it would seem well that we be clear as to the line being pursued here in dealing with the Indian Government. If the Department agrees we will continue to be guided by the following rules: (1) We have natural sympathy for the Indians and the problems posed by the Chinese intervention.

(2) We will be restrained in our expressions in the matter so as to give the Chinese no pretext for alleging any American involvement.

(3) We hope for a settlement acceptable to India. We should be careful to avoid any suggestion that Chinese trouble may force a reconsideration of India's foreign policy. If there is such reconsideration it will obviously begin with Indians.

(4) We will not offer assistance. It is the business of the Indians to ask. We will listen sympathetically to requests. Where, as in the case of the C-119 spares or the Caribous the request is one to which we believe we should accede, we shall move with all promptness and efficiency to supply the items. Mission feels that recent Washington reaction on spares and Caribous was especially impressive to the Indians.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-1562. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Hong Kong.

176. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 176. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, October 16, 1962, 8:24 p.m.

643. Karachi's 713.1 Based on uncleared memcons. Following capsule version both conversations may prove useful.

Secretary

Mohammed Ali discussed three points with the Secretary: (1) SEATO; (2) Kashmir; (3) Pak-Afghan transit.

(1) SEATO

Mohammed Ali explained he had deliberately missed SEATO lunch because venue implied luncheon was an official meeting rather than an informal gathering. Secretary commented on necessity Foreign Ministers utilizing such opportunities as UNGA offered to get together, and regretted any misunderstanding that had arisen over nature of luncheon meeting.

(2) Kashmir

Mohammed Ali emphasized necessity US pressure on India to move towards settlement. Secretary doubted we could apply effective pressure and speculated on the feasibility of: (1) Commonwealth action; or (2) UN action leading towards joint administration of Kashmir. Secretary also asked whether Kashmir issue not simply symptom of deeper communal problem between Pakistan and India. Mohammed Ali rejected this suggestion, and said both countries would welcome with tremendous enthusiasm and relief a solution to Kashmir. Secretary said US would have another look at the problem.

(3) Pak-Afghan Transit

Mohammed Ali said he had found Naim “inflexible” in his insist-ence on return to status quo ante. He believed, however, that railspurs should be built as these would eliminate trade agency problem. As Pak-Afghan subject was raised only briefly, Dept later checked with Mohammed Ali to see whether he had arrived at any kind of understanding with Naim and Aram in New York. He said he has agreed to present a formula to Ayub. His formula differs from that reported by Naim and Aram in timing—i.e., consulates are not to be opened until after railspurs completed, but still appears negotiable.

President

Mohammed Ali discussed three points with the President: (1) Pak-Afghan transit; (2) Pak-Chicom border talks; and (3) Kashmir. Meeting ended with brief private talk.

1. Pak-Afghan Transit

President bore down hard on necessity keeping negotiations alive in Tehran. Mohammed Ali reiterated that Naim was being “inflexible” but confirmed he had sent formula back to Ayub.

2. Pak-Chicom Border Talks

Mohammed Ali at first noted “my enemy's enemy is my friend,” thus implicitly admitting that GOP was using negotiations as means of putting pressure on India. Mohammed Ali then voiced familiar line on subject—saying that all GOP wanted was remove possible threat of border trouble with Chicoms. President emphasized that threat of Communist bloc overlies Pakistan as well as India. Admitted that all countries do not view danger alike and it important that those who do work together even though others like neutrals were getting “a free ride.” Mohammed Ali welcomed this point of view which he said Pakistan shared.

3. Kashmir

Mohammed Ali reiterated strong plea he had made to Secretary, and solicited US public statement of support but ensuing discussion resulted in no agreement as to possible further steps.

Summary

Both meetings frank and hard-hitting but cordial, and Mohammed Ali obviously anxious convince us that he is still on our side, though concerned about his own political future and problems raised by his pro-American reputation.

Dept believes you should concentrate with Ayub on: (1) necessity keeping momentum on Pak-Afghan problem going by authorizing Mohammed Ali go to Tehran for further negotiations; and (2) excellent opportunity presented by recent Indian overtures for Ministerial-level discussions on outstanding Indo-Pak issues.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790D.11/10-1662. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Gatch, cleared by Laise, and approved by Talbot.

1 In telegram 713, October 16, McConaughy asked for summaries of Foreign Minister Ali's recent conversations with President Kennedy and Secretary Rusk. (Ibid.) According to an October 15 briefing memorandum from Brubeck to McGeorge Bundy, Ali met with Rusk on October 13 and with Kennedy on October 15. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 10/62)

177. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 177. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, October 18, 1962, 10 p.m.

1279. I talked with Prime Minister for half an hour this afternoon following his return from Ceylon and anticipating my departure for London. He looked exceedingly well and was in good spirits. Most of the conversation was on the Chinese border situation on which he spoke with great earnestness. The following emerged: 1) The Indians have taken the decision that the Chinese must be driven out whether it takes a year, five years or ten. He spoke with great firmness on this and asked that I make clear this determination to the President.

2) This determination clearly does not extend to any or all methods. It involves rather keeping steady pressure on the Chinese by the ground forces in the area and he implied that this intention now extends to Ladakh.

3) The weather is getting extremely cold in the Nefa combat area and the Chinese came in with better clothing and other protection against the climate. Their supply problem is far easier. Their road head is much nearer—some six miles—and their supply train is simpler. “We learned too many complicated things from the British.”

4) The Indians are getting winter equipment to their troops but the losses from air dropping are so heavy they are having to resort to overland supply.

5) He expressed deep alarm about the prospect of war in this area and his discontent with those who had described efforts to avoid it as appeasement.

6) He said the Chinese may have occupied Longju but noting its location immediately on border he discounted its importance.

In general discussion I reiterated our general position of sympathy. I noted that this had been affirmed by the Secretary to Mrs. Gandhi. Of the latter he had not heard and asked what the Secretary had said. I gave him a general account. He said he thought our policy was correct and sound and certainly it was much appreciated by the Indians. I told him in turn that we fully realized the difficulties of the area, and the need for a policy of caution and patience noting that in US one occasionally encountered an individual more concerned with proving his bravery than his wisdom.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-1862. Secret. Repeated to Hong Kong.

178. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 178. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, October 22, 1962, 5:13 p.m.

118. Karachi's 715 to Dept1 and previous. Following is summary US behind-the-scenes effort over past month move Pak-Afghan transit dispute toward solution, and our estimate of chances of making progress.

President saw Ayub Sept 24, Prince Naim Sept 27 and Mohammed Ali Oct 15. Secretary saw Ayub Sept 27, Naim Sept 29, Aram Oct 9, and Mohammed Ali Oct 13. Naim, Mohammed Ali and Aram had long dinner meeting Sept 28.

At dinner meeting formula proposed by Aram was reportedly agreed on for referral to Ayub and Daud by Mohammed Ali and Naim respectively. If it appears there is room for further meaningful negotiations, meetings will be held in Tehran under GOI aegis.

Conversations here subsequent to dinner meeting suggest formula proposed by Aram may be subject to different interpretations. He himself says key element in formula is that Afghan diplomats from Karachi should be detailed to Peshawar to perform consular functions. The Persian version does not specify when regular consular personnel might be assigned. Naim's understanding, as described by Ambassador Maiwandwal to us, is that Afghan Embassy officers temporarily assigned to consular functions in frontier offices would be replaced by regular consular officers “month or so” after diplomatic relations resumed. Mohammed Ali's understanding as given to the President is that these frontier offices will be maintained and manned by diplomatic personnel until rail spurs are completed. Then when need for trade agencies is eliminated regular consular personnel will be permitted to establish regular consular posts in Peshawar and Quetta. Since differences in understandings appear to be in detail and timing rather than principle, formula appears promising in that it would seem to allow requirements of “face” to be met. Whether it meets Ayub's domestic requirements is an open question, however.

As indicated in Karachi's 715, Mohammed Ali has sent outline formula, as he understands it, to Pakistan and will discuss it with Ayub upon his return. Mohammed Ali not scheduled to leave New York until October 26. We have no present intentions to make further representations to him on transit problem while he is here. Naim in London and still plans go home via Moscow, arriving in Kabul at the end of the month.

From here it seems we have done all we usefully can do for moment. We are particularly mindful Mohammed Ali's insistence with Ambassador McConaughy evening Sept 24 that US remain in background and Iran's efforts be kept in forefront. So far Pak-Afghan squabble has recently been overlooked in press here, and Tehran meeting would appear natural result of Shah's previous efforts rather than result of US intervention.

We believe Daud can accept principle of formula. As Foreign Secy Dehlavi pointed out to Ambassador McConaughy, Pakistan decision rests squarely on Ayub and thus, ultimately, success or failure also rests on him. Dept is not without hope that he will show at least enough flexibility to authorize Mohammed Ali to negotiate in Tehran.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/10-762. Confidential. Drafted by Gatch on October 19; cleared by Laise, Bromley Smith, and with GTI; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to London, Tehran, and USUN.

1 In telegram 715, October 17, McConaughy reported that Foreign Secretary Dehlavi had indicated that Foreign Minister Ali was not optimistic about the possibility of a settlement with Afghanistan in the wake of the meeting he had in New York on September 28 with Naim and Aram. Ali's pessimism stemmed from the fact that the Afghan Government was still insisting upon the status quo ante as the basis for the settlement. (Ibid.)

179. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 179. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, October 22, 1962, 9:56 p.m.

664. Karachi's 748, Department's 660 to Karachi.1

In telegram 748, October 22, McConaughy stated that the approach outlined in telegram 660 might be taken by Ayub as suggesting that the United States saw Pakistan as responsible for past India-Pakistan border difficulties and suspected that Pakistan might seek to exploit the Sino-Indian conflict. McConaughy thought a more effective approach would be a straightforward appraisal of the serious turn the conflict had taken and the threat it posed to the entire subcontinent. (Ibid., 691.93/10-2262)

1. Our suggested approach (Deptel 660) not intended assess blame for past border difficulties but to acquaint Ayub with our views re necessity for all of us to avoid any actions which would add to India's difficulties at this critical juncture in Sino-Indian relations.

2. Dept would naturally wish to avoid provoking unproductive reaction which you predict (Karachi's 748).

3. Ambassador should stress to Ayub our view that Sino-Indian border developments have taken such a serious turn as to threaten security of entire subcontinent.

4. In view of this threat, would hope Ambassador could explore with Ayub what useful gestures GOP might make that would help Nehru and GOI psychologically. For example, Ayub might wish consider sending private message to Nehru recalling many past GOP statements that there would be no recourse to force by Pakistan in attempting to settle disputes with India and assuring Nehru that India can feel secure in putting forward its maximum effort against threat from the north.

5. From standpoint our objectives, we would not wish to elicit at this stage Pakistan proposal joint defense. If proposal made publicly, Indians would likely regard it as primarily propaganda. If made privately, Indians might feel Pakistan trying take advantage India's critical position by forcing India accept what has been clearly unacceptable in the past. FYI. We are exploring on urgent basis what further steps we might take to encourage parties get together in this and other connections. End FYI.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Gatch, cleared by Cameron and by Jeffrey C. Kitchen, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

1 On October 20, Chinese forces launched major offensives in the Ladakh area of Kashmir and across the disputed border into India's Northeast Frontier Agency. In telegram 660, October 21, the Department instructed McConaughy to convey to Ayub the undesirability of any action which would prevent India from concentrating on the Chinese attack and to suggest to Ayub that he propose a mutual understanding with Nehru to keep the border between India and Pakistan calm during the crisis. (Ibid., 691.93/10-2162)

180. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 180. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, October 25, 1962, 11 p.m.

1384. Eyes Only for Secretary. Pass Eyes Only Secretary McNamara, White House for Bundy.

1) While we hold to the estimate that the Chinese have limited objectives in the NEFA, on the other hand today's fighting has brought them still further south and in considerable force. Late reports indicate that Towang, a communications and administration center some 20 air miles south of the MacMahon line has fallen. Our mind must now be open to graver ambitions extending to much of NEFA and eliminating India's natural mountain spine as fortification.

2) We still have had no formal request for assistance. This reflects in our best judgment intention to make one more try for Soviet restraint of ChiComs plus the reluctance of Menon to confess the total defeat of his hopes and policy. On the other hand Foreign Secretary M.J. Desai yesterday and Finance Minister Morajai Desai this evening told me that such a request is inevitable and imminent.

3) According to a wealth of information and most recently this evening from Finance Minister Desai we know that the Indians are fighting with vastly inferior weapons. They have World War I rifles vs. the modern automatic weapons of Chinese, few mortars, inadequate machine gun support.

4) It seems obvious we cannot offer weapons prior to being requested. It would be politically unproductive for us to do so. However, in view of the military and political situation it is plain that we may have to act with utmost urgency when the request is made. Our great promptness will have maximum favorable effect on Indian troop morale, on political climate toward the United States and most important in deterring further Chinese advances.

5) Under these circumstances and in line with present Washington knowledge of forces operating under NEFA conditions, we believe it important that contingency planning for air-lift movement of weapons and ammunition get under way at once. Thinking should be in terms of infantry weapons for immediate use by (say) two divisions plus of professional ill-equipped infantry operating under mountain conditions. This would be with view to moving arms to NEFA base within hours after request. We are fully aware of the many missing elements for such planning but now believe it would be negligent not to make preparation on basis of presently available knowledge.

6) Would you advise us urgently of reaction and of information which we should seek to supply bearing in mind the limitations on our ability in this respect.

7) This reflects view of Attaches.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/10-2562. Secret; Niact. Relayed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the White House.

181. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy 181. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President KennedySource

Washington, October 26, 1962.

Mr. President:

Here is some background for you before seeing Ambassador Nehru.

1. The Indians are in retreat along a wide area of their border in both the Northwest and the Northeast. The Chinese have occupied some inhabited places. They are now beyond the territory they had previously claimed.

2. The Chinese offer of a cease-fire and mutual retreat of 20 kilometers from the present line of battle was rejected by the Indians.

3. Pravda characterized the offer as reasonable and urged the Indians to accept it. This and intelligence that Soviets told Nehru they couldn't intercede for him suggest that Soviets have decided to remain at least tacitly on Chinese side.

4. We are now prepared to do the following things if you approve. a. Help the Indians with arms and equipment on a military assist-ance basis if they ask for it. Up to now, as you know, they [we?] have been dealing with them on a cash sale basis.

b. Make a public statement through Galbraith that we recognize the McMahon line1 as the traditional border between India and China2 (this is the Northeast border).

c. Approach Ayub with the suggestion that he recognize the danger and make some significant gesture; for example, breaking off in a public way his own negotiations with the Chinese about the border.

C.K.3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 10/26/62-10/27/62. Secret.

1 The McMahon Line between India and Tibet was negotiated in March 1914 by Sir Arthur McMahon, Secretary to the Government of India, and confirmed in Article 9 of the Simla Convention, initialed July 3, 1914, by representatives of the United Kingdom, China, and Tibet. The Simla Convention was not subsequently signed or ratified by China.

2 In telegram 1663, October 26, Galbraith was authorized to state that the United States recognized the McMahon Line as the traditional and generally accepted international border and fully supported India's position in that regard. (Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2562)

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

182. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 182. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, October 27, 1962, 2:20 p.m.

1677. Ambassador Nehru saw President afternoon October 261 to deliver letter from Prime Minister2 concerning serious developments on Sino-Indian frontier. Letter consists of description of Chinese aggression followed by operative paragraph in which PriMin says that he is confident that India in this hour of crisis “shall have your sympathy and support.” (PriMin's letter has appearance of circular communication to friendly heads of state and text being pouched.)

President told Ambassador that he would reply immediately to PriMin's letter assuring him that he of course had our full sympathy and support and that we were prepared to demonstrate this attitude in ways which might be helpful to him within our capabilities. President was receptive to Ambassador's suggestion that reply should contain no reference to arms or to aid. Ambassador said last he had heard from Delhi was that Indian Government still thinking in terms of purchasing arms.

Ambassador was also told that President would instruct Ambassador Galbraith to discuss situation with PriMin and to hold himself available to sort out with PriMin and other Indian officials India's needs and desires and specific ways in which we might be helpful.

President asked Ambassador what would be effect on Krishna Menon's future of Indian reverses. He said that Krishna Menon was an Indian problem and that we were not going to say anything about him but added that he was not an Indian asset. Ambassador replied that political considerations would undoubtedly require that Krishna Menon be kept on as nominal Defense Minister. On basis of his information he judged that PriMin had in fact taken over Defense Ministry and would run it with assistance of defense advisory group composed of senior military officers, all of whom opposed Krishna Menon.

Thrust of President's comments to Ambassador Nehru were that we were ready to be of assistance and when Indians told us what would be most useful we would work out terms and procedures.

For Ambassador: In connection with your determining an appropriate time for you to begin exploration with PriMin of Indian needs and desires and how we may be of assistance Presidential letter3 will be sent to you during weekend.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2762. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cameron, cleared by McGeorge Bundy and Kaysen, and approved by Grant. Repeated to London and Karachi.

1 A memorandum of Kennedy's conversation with Nehru, prepared by Kaysen, is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 10/26/62-10/27/62)

2 Nehru's letter, dated October 26, is ibid., Nehru Correspondence, 10/1/62-11/10/62.

3 See Document 187.

183. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 183. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, October 27, 1962, 10 p.m.

764. Deliver Immediately to Secretary Talbot. Policy. Embassy telegram 762.1 I broached Sino-Indian crisis with President Ayub in same October 26 conversation outlining serious implications of Indian reverses both in NEFA and Ladakh, especially former, and stating our conviction of ChiCom aggressive intent and action, limits of which not yet definable. I stated the strong case for GOP making positive gesture of sympathy and restraint to GOI. Emphasized identity of interest of both great countries of subcontinent in repelling common threat which cast same shadow over both. I spelled out that if ChiComs keep pushing south of McMahon Line in northeast, even graver and more immediate threat to Pakistan existed. I said explicitly that United States shares and sympathizes with Indian anxiety at mounting ChiCom threat. In this context I suggested that it would be helpful and appreciated move as well as major step to improve climate for future GOI-GOP negotiations, for President Ayub to send to Nehru, publicly or even privately, some expression of sympathy, assurance against any GOP diversionary move and understanding of dangerous position faced by GOI. I particularly stressed our view that an action by GOP to renounce opportunity to capitalize on present situation would be in its own interest in making GOI more tractable and flexible in later bilateral negotiations.

President Ayub assured me somewhat testily that his government of course had not taken and would not take any action which hamper GOI fight against Chinese Communists. However, he firmly rejected any possibility of special GOP message of comfort to Nehru. He did not consider such message would be either helpful or necessary. In first place, he did not believe such message would improve Indian military position vis-à-vis Chinese. Indians knew they did not need to keep existing large concentrations of troops on Pak borders, and could not use or logistically support any greatly increased troop strength in narrow and isolated mountain passes against Chinese anyway. Secondly, while Ayub fully recognized common danger in long-run of Commie China to India and Pakistan, he was not as concerned as we were by current Chinese penetrations since, in Pak view, they probably do not portend major thrust far beyond McMahon Line into India proper or a challenge at this time to fundamental national security of India.

Basically, Ayub indicated little sympathy for Indian position. He felt Indians had handled situation badly, issuing rash and boastful statements on intentions push back ChiComs, giving ChiComs some excuse for countermeasures and then proving totally incapable of handling subsequent military actions.

In commenting on the Indian attitude, Ayub also reverted to several favorite themes, unlikelihood GOI will reduce its military forces on Pak borders despite ChiCom threat and fact that Indians have alienated all their neighbors except USSR. He mentioned that Nepal, Sikkim and Bhutan were fed up with Indian treatment of them as protectorates, which policy was throwing them into arms of Commie China. He thought Burmese and Ceylonese were likewise increasingly resentful of India.

Ayub then suggested that this might be an opportune moment for United States to use its good offices to urge India to settle its difficulties with Pakistan. When I pinned him down, he acknowledged that what he had specifically in mind was that we use our influence to induce GOI to proceed now to a settlement of Kashmir dispute. I responded immediately that there was no reason to believe that this emergency was appropriate time for such an initiative. It would undoubtedly be considered by India as effort to take advantage of its extremity vis-a-vis China.

President viewed his proposal in different light, feeling that India, chastened by adversity, might be impelled to honor its commitment. He dismissed all other Indo-Pak differences as relatively trifling. Kashmir was the only really destructive issue.

My comments on general aspects Pak reaction to Indian plight will follow in separate message. I think it is clear however from course of our talk that, despite great seriousness ChiCom threat, it will require a near miracle in both India and Pakistan to wipe away the corrosive bitterness and establish cooperative basis for dealing with the crisis.

We can take some satisfaction in Ayub's assurance, even though privately expressed only to us, that GOP has no intention taking advantage of India's trouble.

Although we are not authorized by Ayub to convey this to GOI, we are not prohibited from doing so either.

If situation deemed to warrant it, I would recommend that we inform GOI of this assurance at high level in strict confidence.

McConaughy

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2762. Secret; Niact. Received in the Department of State at 3:09 p.m. Repeated to New Delhi.

1 In telegram 762 from Karachi, October 27, McConaughy reported on the part of his conversation with Ayub in Rawalpindi on October 26 which dealt with the Cuban missile crisis. McConaughy delivered a letter to Ayub from Kennedy which set forth the basis for the U.S. response to the crisis and indicated the desire to work in close concert with U.S. allies. Ayub responded by strongly endorsing U.S. actions. (Ibid., 611.3722/10-2762)

184. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 184. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, October 27, 1962, 8:44 p.m.

680. For Ambassador McConaughy. Talbot-McConaughy Telcon October 27,1 Karachi's 7642 and 7653 to Dept.

Text being transmitted septel of Presidential message4 you are to deliver to Ayub October 29. You will note suggestions in your excellent 765 have been taken into account including reassurances that any U.S. military assistance to India will be used only against ChiCom threat. We do not however feel it appropriate to make any commitment about Kashmir at this stage.

In presenting letter you should make following points: 1. If you have heard from Galbraith that Nehru has told him private assurances from Ayub would be welcome, emphasize this fact. (In absence of word from Galbraith, do not mention that we have approached Nehru on this point.)

2. Reiterate our view that Sino-Indian border conflict is second in importance only to Cuba in present global confrontation between the Free World and the Sino-Soviet Bloc. We expect our Allies in both areas will do all they can to meet the Communist challenge.

3. Re President's request that Ayub send a private message of assurance to Nehru, say that we accept without question the repeated GOP statements that it has no aggressive intentions toward India, and have often said so, but emphasize President's view of urgency of reassuring Nehru on this point.

4. As examples of other appropriate actions which GOP might take, suggest (a) Adjournment Pak-ChiCom border negotiations;

(b) Guidance to Pak press for positive approach;

(c) Private assurances to presently controlling Indian military leaders, eg. Cariappa or Thimayya, not only that Pakistan has no aggressive intentions but that Pakistan willing pull back its troops from cease-fire line in Kashmir as Indian troops deployed away from line.

All that you say to Ayub should reinforce our conviction that Pakistan support for India at this time of trouble will strengthen Free World resistance to Communist threat and ultimately create new and healthier climate in which Pakistan's problems with India could become more manageable. In all candor Paks now have an unparalleled opportunity to transform basic relationships in the subcontinent.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2762. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Talbot, cleared in substance by Kaysen, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

1 Not found.

2 Document 183.

3 Telegram 765, October 27, transmitted McConaughy's suggestions for points to be included in a Presidential letter to Ayub designed to “lift his sights above present restricted frame in which he now views Pak-Indian relations and Sino-Indian crisis.” (Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2762)

4 See Document 186.

185. Telegram From the White House to the Embassy in India 185. Telegram From the White House to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, October 27, 1962.

Eyes Only for Ambassador Galbraith From Kaysen.

Your message on the private channel,1 as well as your 1417 from Delhi2 received. We here agree with your assessment of the value of getting Menon out and the possible effect of the timing of our moves in bringing this about. Nonetheless, your argument in Delhi 1417 that political changes of great magnitude are in the wind suggests that Indians themselves will take care of Menon sooner rather than later. The President's letter3 with its generalized offer of practical support, leaving next steps up to you to take with Nehru and others in Delhi, need not have the effect of supporting Menon by giving him the opportunity to show his willingness to ask for U.S. aid and ours to give it through him. We again urge the importance of avoiding the slightest appearance of U.S. initiative and responsibility in removing Menon. Our efforts with Ayub will be such as to prepare the way to take advantage of Menon's disappearance without requiring it as a condition of forward motion. Therefore, we do not think you need go beyond instructions in our message of yesterday suggesting you move with discretion and without any public indication or explicit communication to the Prime Minister that Menon unacceptable to U.S. By timing of your moves after you deliver the President's letter to Nehru, you can help to bring about results you desire.

Department will shortly be sending their response to your 1417. This will have been drafted by Talbot in close consultation with me. We are in close touch in this whole matter, and I am the Department's channel to the President. Henceforth, it seems wise to avoid use of private channel unless absolutely critical because confusion of private and State Department dialogue might cause trouble. This the more true in that all officers senior to Talbot and me are preoccupied with other matters. The President, however, is interested and concerned and I am keeping him as fully up on the situation as his time permits.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Ambassador Galbraith, Special File, Miscellaneous Messages, 10/62-12/62. Top Secret; Sensitive. No time of transmission appears on the source text, nor does it indicate the channel through which it was sent.

1 A copy of this message, found ibid., bears a handwritten date of October 25. Another undated copy, found ibid., General, 9/27/62-10/5/62, is addressed to “President” and signed by “Galbraith,” in an unknown hand. In the message, Galbraith noted that the United States was certain to be asked to supply military assistance to India in considerable volume. He recommended that the United States make clear that “any help will require Indians, in their own interest, to be more considerate of our political and public opinion than in recent past.” Galbraith asked for guidance, however, on how vigorously to play his strong hand: “The immediate question concerns Menon. Does important American assistance require his effective elimination from the Defense-UN scene?”

2 Dated October 27. (Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2762)

3 See Document 187.

186. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 186. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, October 28, 1962, 2:42 p.m.

681. Deptel to Karachi 680,1 rpt info Delhi 1682, London 2337 and Deptel to New Delhi 1681,2 rpt info Karachi 679, London 2336.

There follows text of letter from the President to Ayub which you are instructed to deliver in accordance with Deptel 680.

“Dear Mr. President:

I was heartened by your response to my message on the Cuban crisis that was delivered to you by Ambassador McConaughy.3 In times like these, the support of friends and allies has a personal, as well as a political, significance.

We see another instance of Communist aggression almost as close to your borders as Cuba is to ours—the Chinese Communist attack on India. It also concerns me greatly. The Chinese have moved quickly, with large forces to take territory beyond that immediately in dispute; it is no longer a border wrangle. In my judgment, the long-run significance of this move cannot be exaggerated. The Chinese Communists, having established themselves on the near slopes of the Himalayas, will have secured a favorable position for further aggression. Thus they will put themselves in a politically dominant posture vis-a-vis India. But I think that this will be more than counter-balanced if their aggression has the effect of awakening India to the dangerous intentions of the Peiping regime, and turning the attention of the Indian Government and people to their true long-run security interests. These are interests which we all share. Certainly the United States as a leader of the free world must take alarm at any aggressive expansion of Communist power, and you as the leader of the other great nation in the subcontinent will share this alarm.

Unfortunately, press comment in Pakistan has already produced a negative reaction in India. This is particularly distressing at a time when a unique opportunity exists for laying the basis for future solidarity.

We now intend to give the Indians such help as we can for their immediate needs. We will ensure, of course, that whatever help we give will be used only against the Chinese. You, on your part, are in a position to make a move of the greatest importance which only you can make. This is to signal to the Indians in a quiet but effective way that the concerns—which you know I think totally unjustified—that have led them to maintain the greater part of their military power on their borders with you, should be put aside in the present crisis. Perhaps an effective way would be a private message from you to Nehru. You could tell him that he can count on Pakistan's taking no action on the frontiers to alarm India. No possible outside aid can increase the ability of the Indians to withstand the Chinese offensive as much as a shift in their own dispositions.

Knowing the history of Kashmir, I do not make this suggestion lightly, but in the hope and belief that the painful moments which India is now experiencing will teach them how much more important the threat from the North is to the whole of the subcontinent than any regional quarrels within it. Our own recent experience with the response of our Latin American neighbors when they were confronted with the Soviet threat in Cuba gives me ground for this belief. Action taken by you now in the larger interests of the subcontinent will do more in the long run to bring about a sensible resolution of Pakistan-Indian differences than anything else I can think of.

Further, I am sure that the lesson of such a change in Indian dispositions would not be lost on the Peiping regime. Communism has always advanced in the face of disunity in the free world. This crisis is a test of the vision of all of us, our sense of proportion and our sense of the historic destiny of the free nations.

With warmest personal regards,

Sincerely, John F. Kennedy“

Signed original being pouched.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2862. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cameron, cleared by Kaysen, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

1 Document 184.

2 Telegram 1681, October 27, summarizes the letter transmitted to Ayub in telegram 681 to Karachi. The Department noted that McConaughy's effort to press Ayub for the assurances sought in the letter would be reinforced by an indication from Nehru that such assurances would be welcome. The Embassy was instructed to seek such an indication from Nehru. (Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2762)

3 See footnote 1, Document 183.

187. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 187. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, October 28, 1962, 3:01 p.m.

1687. Deptel 1677 to New Delhi,1 rpt info London 2330, Karachi 677. There follows text of President's reply to Nehru's letter2 delivered to White House by Ambassador Nehru on October 26. You are instructed transmit this letter to Prime Minister:3

“Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

“Your Ambassador handed me your letter last night. The occasion of it is a difficult and painful one for you and a sad one for the whole world. Yet there is a sense in which I welcome your letter, because it permits me to say to you what has been in my mind since the Chinese Communists have begun to press their aggressive attack into Indian territory. I know I can speak for my whole country, when I say that our sympathy in this situation is wholeheartedly with you. You have displayed an impressive degree of forbearance and patience in dealing with the Chinese. You have put into practice what all great religious teachers have urged and so few of their followers have been able to do. Alas, this teaching seems to be effective only when it is shared by both sides in a dispute.

“I want to give you support as well as sympathy. This is a practical matter and, if you wish, my Ambassador in New Delhi can discuss with you and the officials of your Government what we can do to translate our support into terms that are practically most useful to you as soon as possible.

“With all sympathy for India and warmest personal good wishes.

“Sincerely, John F. Kennedy“

Signed original being pouched.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/10-2862. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cameron, cleared by Kaysen, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi and London.

1 Document 182.

2 See footnote 2, Document 182.

3 Galbraith was instructed, in delivering the letter to Nehru, to tell him that President Kennedy believed that a letter from Nehru to Ayub would strengthen Kennedy's hand in persuading Ayub to act in a helpful way during the crisis. (Telegram 1686 to New Delhi, October 28; Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/10-2862)

188. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 188. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, October 29, 1962, 1 p.m.

1443. Dept's telegram 1687.1 Ambassador saw Nehru just before noon to deliver President's letter. Nehru made definite request for US military assistance.

Ambassador and DCM later saw Menon briefly at latter's request. Menon reaffirmed request for assistance and said list of requirements would be delivered to Embassy tonight or tomorrow.2 Stressed urgent need for automatic weapons and long-range mortars.

Ambassador is now seeing Foreign Secretary Desai and will draft full and important telegram on these conversations within next hour.3

Most important that Department's comments to press stress that request for US military assistance was made by Prime Minister Nehru personally. Embassy taking same line here with press.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/10-2962. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and Karachi.

1 Document 187.

2 See Document 192. The initial U.S. response to the Indian requests was outlined in an October 31 memorandum from William Bundy to McNamara. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, India, 091.3 MSP, 29 Oct 62)

3 Galbraith's account of his conversations with Nehru and Menon indicates that Menon attempted to take credit for arranging for military aid from the United States by asking to meet with Galbraith before Galbraith met with Nehru. Galbraith responded that he had to deliver the President's letter to the Prime Minister before he could meet with Menon. Nehru then made the request for military assistance. (Telegram 1448 from New Delhi, October 29; Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/10-2962)

189. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 189. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, November 1, 1962, 6 p.m.

1525. Eyes Only for SecState. Pass Defense Eyes Only DefSec, Joint Chiefs of Staff. The last fortnight has presented us here with an interesting problem in being abreast of and giving a measure of guidance to a great change in Indian policy. To have been ahead of the change would have aroused grave suspicion. To have been behind would have invited the same discredit into which some of India's other professed friends have fallen. On the whole things have gone well. And I have great admiration for the way that Washington, the heavy distractions of the Cuban crisis notwithstanding, has provided intellectual, moral and material support and guidance. This is not the voice of the most banal believer in American perfection in these matters.

In the days ahead I see a new danger. That is that in our natural desire to help the Indians we will overwhelm them. They do not want to break quickly with their past beliefs. Words like nonalignment still have great evocative power. Phrases like military blocs, military alliances, even Pentagon still have a bad sound. In particular a large influx of American military personnel however well-intentioned could have a most damaging effect. And numbers could quickly get beyond my power to control and guide our political posture and response. You will already have seen in my cables indications of my anxiety that I be consulted on all plans to send people here and that it be clear to all who come that they are under my full organizational direction and control and that we select scrupulously for quality as opposed to numbers or conventional tables of organization. This no doubt reflects normal bureaucratic attitudes which I have acquired with remarkable celerity but it also reflects my deep concern for the complex task we face here and my hope that it can be discharged with credit to all of us. At this end we will continue to insure an environment in which the officers we request will function in a closely-knit and harmonious group that will, I trust, reflect full credit on the organization and services whence they come and which fully reflect the concerns and views of the latter. If my requests for help seem unduly modest or even if it should occasionally be evident that larger numbers might produce slightly better guidance to Indians or slightly more refined requirements you will realize I am sure that I am acting in response to overall considerations of our position here.1

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/11-162. Secret.

1 In telegram 1904 to New Delhi, November 6, a joint State-Defense message, Galbraith was assured that there was no intent in Washington to send a large number of military advisers to India. JCS Chairman General Maxwell Taylor had selected Major General John Kelly to head a small observation group of 12-21 people and to advise the Embassy on matters relating to military assistance. General Kelly and his group would serve as part of the Country Team under Galbraith's direction. (Ibid., 791.5/11-462) Galbraith concurred in the proposed arrangements in telegram 1675 from New Delhi, November 8. (Ibid., 791.5/11-862)

190. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy 190. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President KennedySource

Washington, November 3, 1962.

Mr. President:

Attached is the current situation report on the Sino-Indian border war you requested. It was prepared by the Department of State, in consultation with the Central Intelligence Agency and the Department of Defense. It represents the agreed views of all three.

I would add one comment on section 3 of the memorandum. Section 3-b (page 5) is devoted to difficulties that the new situation in India will raise for our relations with Pakistan. It seems to me that the problem could be stated a little more sharply in a somewhat different way. We are now faced with the necessity of making the Pakistani realize that their alliance with us had been of immense value to them. This comprises not only the substantial economic and military assistance we have given, but also the general support that the alliance provides in their relations with India. They are obviously the weaker power, and they have been able to maintain as strong a line on Kashmir as they have in part because of the existence of our support in the background. We are now beginning to confront them with the fact that we are really not able to support their demand for a settlement via plebiscite, and that their best opportunity for settlement on terms something like ratification of the status quo may be passing from their grasp. This will be a difficult and painful process, but it is one we must push through.

C.K.1

Attachment2

Report on Current Activity on the Sino-Indian Borderand Estimate of Future Developments

India is facing its most serious crisis since independence. Large-scale Chinese Communist attacks (see map attachment)3 in the Northeast Frontier Agency (NEFA) have resulted in Chinese advances at a number of points, some of them approximately 15 miles south of the McMahon Line, and in Ladakh the Chinese Communists have overcome Indian forward positions and threaten the principal Indian bases in that area. Moreover, the Soviet Union has supported Peking's proposals for negotiation on terms unacceptable to the Indians. These developments strike at the heart of India's policy of nonalignment and have far-reaching internal consequences. India has turned to the West for assistance in meeting its military requirements. The development of a closer Western relationship with India is causing an almost traumatic reaction in Pakistan. Pakistan's foreign policy over the past decade has been directed in large part towards correcting the imbalance of power with India through the special alliance relationship with the West.

1. What is Going On: A Military and Political Review

Military

The present phase of the Sino-Indian border conflict began early last spring when India decided to put out advanced patrols and outposts in the Ladakh area in an effort to forestall further Chinese advances there and eventually to push back some of the Chinese outposts. In July the Chinese demanded that the Indians withdraw their forward patrols and threatened, if they did not do so, to invade NEFA. Instead of withdrawing, the Indians intensified their forward patrolling activities in the months that followed.

There is now evidence that in August and early September the Chinese concentrated their troops at points along the NEFA border. They launched an attack on October 20. Within a week the Chinese Communist forces advanced at several places within NEFA, reaching at one point near the Bhutan border a position approximately 15 miles south of the McMahon Line. Simultaneously, the Chinese attacked in Ladakh and eliminated the forward posts established by the Indians last spring and summer.4 Total Indian casualties are in the neighborhood of 5,000.

Chinese gains have been a result of a combination of advantages over the Indians, most notably a better supply situation, more modern equipment and larger numbers of men.

At the present time, the Chinese seem to have halted their advance in NEFA. In Ladakh the Chinese have also halted along the boundary line which they claimed in 1960, but they are in a position to move against important Indian positions just west of this line.

As the Chinese have moved further into Indian-claimed territory, their supply problems have increased but even so they still appear to have a limited advantage over the Indians in this respect. The present halt in the Chinese Communist advance may be designed to permit them to regroup, resupply and prepare for further limited advances. At a minimum the Chinese Communists will consolidate, with some minor tactical adjustments, and dig into their positions in preparation for the severe winter. The indications are that they want to hold the territory which they now occupy, at least as a bargaining counter; they show no particular interest in a negotiated settlement; nor do they seem interested thus far in extending their military activities beyond the disputed border areas. Future Chinese Communist military action may well be determined in large part by Indian moves.

Political

The rapid Chinese advances in both NEFA and Ladakh have had a profound effect on Indian political thinking. The Indian leaders are being forced to re-examine some of the basic assumptions which have been central to Indian political life and attitudes. The great exponent of peaceful coexistence has been attacked by a nation which ostentatiously shared this attitude. The effectiveness of nonalignment as a policy has been clearly brought into question. The Soviet Union's action in supporting an unacceptable Chinese Communist offer to negotiate the conflict has led the Indians to rethink their thesis that they could count on the Soviet Union to restrain the Chinese Communists and to provide India with substantial quantities of military equipment.

These developments cannot but have a far-reaching effect on the internal Indian power structure. The demotion of Krishna Menon, who has been widely criticized, from his position as Minister of Defense to that of Minister of Defense Production is one of the first public manifestations of these changes.5 The position of the Communist Party of India has been undermined. Other important changes will follow and increased strains will be placed on Prime Minister Nehru. We anticipate a long period ahead of adjustment and examination.

Also of very great importance, these developments threaten to place a heavy additional burden on an Indian economy already falling short of its economic development goals, and at the very time when the attainment of these goals is more important than ever.

2. What We and Other Western Countries are Doing

In face of reverses both on the border and in Indian foreign relations, Prime Minister Nehru asked for Western assistance. After deliberately waiting for the Prime Minister's request, the United States initiated an air shipment on November 1 of military supplies to India designed to reinforce Indian resistance on the border to the Chinese Communists. These initial shipments include:

40,000 Anti-personnel Mines

1,000,000 Rounds caliber .30 ammunition

200 Caliber .30 Machine Guns with mounts and accessories

54 81 millimeter mortars with mounts and accessories

100,000 Rounds 81 millimeter ammunition

500 ANPRC-10 radios

250 ANGRC-9 radios

India has also approached the United Kingdom, Canada, and France with requests for various types of military equipment primarily in the field of small arms, infantry support and anti-tank weapons, together with necessary ammunition, communications equipment, transport aircraft, and helicopters. India has also requested rapid delivery of equipment previously ordered, and apparently is making direct commercial inquiries about procuring aircraft in the United Kingdom.

Canada is currently attempting to determine availability of a wide range of equipment which would be useful to India. The United Kingdom has air-lifted a small amount of automatic rifles and ammunition, and is also determining availability of other items. The French have also air-lifted a small amount of small arms.

In addition, Turkey has offered India some light mountain artillery and ammunition. We anticipate this equipment will be available for shipment within the next two or three days, at which time we will airship it to India.

We are making every effort to establish coordination procedures with other Western governments to insure a concerted effort in our joint attempts to meet Indian military requirements.

In addition to military supplies, the United States has undertaken the following actions: a We have attempted to get the Pakistani to see that they have a major opportunity to lay a basis for better relations with India. These efforts have not yet been successful, but we believe we should continue to search out ways to get this across to the Pakistani.

b We have publicly stated that the United States recognizes the McMahon Line as the accepted international border sanctioned by modern usage.

c We are increasing the flow of intelligence on Communist China to the Indians.

Statements of sympathy and support from Western countries contrast sharply with silence from many important neutral leaders. Some neutrals have been in touch with both sides in an endeavor to lay the basis for a cease-fire.

3. Principal Policy Issues This Situation Raises for the United States

a We shall have to define a new relationship with India. Our military assistance is designed to help a friend, not win an ally. Western sympathy and support and Western military equipment will profoundly affect Indian thinking. We can expect the Indians to redefine their nonalignment policy, but we do not expect India to abandon this policy. Although India has been forced to re-examine the dimensions of its relations with the Soviet Union, we anticipate that India will try to avoid doing anything which would further restrict Soviet support. India needs Soviet economic aid, will want Soviet support in the United Nations on Kashmir, and still hopes to get a limited number of MIG-21's.

b We shall have to devise means to protect our important special interests in Pakistan and to keep Pakistan closely aligned with the West, in the face of our new relationship with India. Despite Pakistan's very great dependence on the United States, this may be the most difficult problem ahead. We had hoped that Pakistan leaders might have grasped the present opportunity to begin to lay the basis for mutually beneficial relations with India. Instead, the Pakistani seem to be recoiling from any reduction of tension with India. The last word is not in on this and Ambassador McConaughy is seeing President Ayub on November 5.

All present signs, however, point to at least a temporary widening of the breech between Pakistan and India, a Pakistani reassessment of the value of its alliance with the United States and increased political tensions within the country. Pakistan, which sought an alliance with the United States chiefly to offset India's preponderant military strength in the subcontinent, sees the value of this alliance much reduced in the face of United States military assistance to India. This situation bears the closest watch because Pakistan is, in fact, going through a traumatic experience almost equal to that of India.

a

c We must search out Indian military objectives and decide the extent to which we and our Western allies are prepared to support these. This involves not only Indian policy on the border but also the Indian attitude towards the modernization of its whole obsolescent military establishment. In their current state of disarray, the Indians themselves are not clear about their objectives. This, therefore, will be a continuing problem. In this connection one of the principal factors will be the impact of increased Indian military expenditures on the achievement of Indian devaelopment goals. The extent of this impact will depend in large part on how the Indians define their military objectives, the extent of resources diverted for this purpose, and the division of western assistance between military and economic sectors.

d We shall have to consider bolstering the border states (Nepal, Sikkim and Bhutan) to counter Chinese Communist efforts to bring them into the Chinese orbit. This will involve a re-examination of the basis of our current policy towards these states which is to try to fix firmly the major responsibility for these areas on India.

e We shall need to consider the implications of a possible Indian withdrawal from international responsibilities as the result of a reorientation of India's attention inward under the impact of the Chinese attack. Menon was the great exponent of India's participation in the international force in the Congo. There are already indications that the Indians are considering the withdrawal of their forces from the Congo. We also shall need to be alert to opportunities for capitalizing on new Indian attitudes in such specific areas as disarmament.

f We must examine carefully the implications of these developments for CENTO and SEATO.

The power relationships which affect the subcontinent have all been shaken up. The old problems there and the new ones should be looked at in this new light, in the days ahead, so that we can see both the dangers and opportunities which are emerging. These will extend far beyond the boundaries of the subcontinent.6

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/3/62-11/4/62. Secret.

1 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

2 Secret. A November 3 covering memorandum from Brubeck to Bundy, transmitting the situation report from the Department of State to the White House, is not printed.

3 Not printed.

4 In the northwest (Ladakh), about 6,000 Indian troops face about 10,000 Chinese. In NEFA there are some 30,000 Indian troops opposing the estimated 15,000 Chinese invaders, with another 20,000 Chinese in reserve across the border. [Footnote in the source text.]

5 On November 7, Nehru announced the resignation of Menon from the cabinet. (Telegram 1665 from New Delhi, November 7; Department of State, Central Files, 791.13/11-762)

6 A fuller assessment of the Sino-Indian border war and its implications can be found in SNIE 13/31-62, “Short-Term Outlook and Implications for the Sino-Indian Conflict,” November 9, 1962. (Central Intelligence Agency, Job 79 R 01012A, ODDI Registry of NIE and SNIE Files, Box 210)

191. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 191. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, November 5, 1962, 7 p.m.

820. Re Department telegram 715,1 Embassy telegrams 804, 805.2 I met with President Ayub for almost two hours this morning in Rawalpindi. Sneider accompanied me. Foreign Minister Mohammad Ali and Foreign Secretary Dehlavi also present.

Ayub had just completed long consultation with his advisers and said he was putting finishing touches on his reply to President Kennedy's October 28 letter.3 Ambassador Aziz Ahmed would deliver reply. He opened conversation by giving me gist of letter and reasoning behind GOP position. He said GOP was sad that Sino-Indian border dispute had erupted into open war, but GOP unable on basis of incomplete information available to it assess who initiated attack. Implied some responsibility rested with India. In any event GOP considers conflict limited war. Conflict limited in terms ChiCom immediate tactical objectives, equipment employed and number of men involved. Furthermore, if ChiComs had more than limited objectives, offensive would have been launched in May rather than in October when weather bad and frost already in area throughout day. ChiCom attack also made in mountainous area where large number troops cannot be employed; if ChiComs wished seriously invade India now they would have come through easier traditional route via Burma, which about ripe anyway for communist takeover. Consequently, defense preparations in India and arms aid to it in his judgment far exceed limited current requirements of actual military situation in areas where fighting now taking place. At later point, Ayub reverted to above theme and said as military man he unable understand Indian defeats except as tactical misjudgment of incompetent leadership, since he knew from personal experience good fighting quality Indian forces and satisfactory arms available to them.

Ayub then blamed Nehru for development of crisis saying that Nehru's policies had always been mistaken. Four pillars of Indian foreign policy—neutralism, isolation Pakistan, opposition western objectives, and anti-Americanism—now demonstrated to be complete mistake. Nevertheless, India still maintains 80 percent of its armed forces on Pakistan borders with remainder 10 days away; almost all Indian Navy in Bombay in threatening posture to Pakistan. Furthermore, Ayub said while one Indian infantry division and one brigade withdrawn from Pakistan border, Pakistan intelligence has reported that one armored division and one armored brigade moving to points close to Pakistan borders.

Ayub said under these circumstances Pakistanis had right to maintain own self-respect in own self-defense. Objective of GOP foreign policy he stressed several times was to free both India and Pakistan from anxiety about each other through settlement of differences including Kashmir. While Pakistan was not going to take advantage of Indian situation, only common sense for it to take precautions necessary for self- defense.

Ayub then discussed recent US actions in response Sino-Indian border situation. He said we have of course right to provide India with arms. However, he feels he has right to complain on the failure to consult with him in advance as promised by President Kennedy. Situation which has arisen is exactly that envisaged in understanding as calling for advance consultation before arms provided. He said he was grateful for assurances of the President on use of US arms only against ChiComs but he would not have asked for such assurances since India not to be trusted. Ayub then complained with obvious personal hurt regarding our pressures on him to make gesture to India. He said patience of Pakistani people who friends of US not beyond limit and they interpreted request for gesture as demonstration US not sympathetic with, nor understanding of Pakistan position and essential interests. This clear in Pakistani press. Although GOP trying quiet hostile press reaction, it difficult resist people's just feelings. Pakistan has free press, learned from US example, and cannot be controlled. Instead of pressuring Pakistan, Ayub urged that we encourage India establish friendly relations with its neighbors and by conciliatory moves which are long overdue court peace with Pakistan. Pakistan was prepared at any time to establish friendly relations with India. Later in discussion, when I pressed him, Ayub was more specific and said that he was prepared to more than reciprocate any change of heart on India's part but that was as far as Pakistan would go since it the aggressed one, oppressed, aggrieved party and since India was a bigger nation. Said GOP was replying at once to Nehru's circular appeal to heads of other governments for sympathy. He cited non-personal nature of this appeal as another example of Nehru's ineptitude and unwillingness to take initiative on specific overtures designed to meet India's problem here. Ayub said GOP would also release official statement on Pakistan position to press this afternoon (Embtel 819).4 Ayub concluded his presentation by reiterating Pakistan's right of self-defense, which he felt it would not be helpful for us to deny. (Comment: While Ayub did not make it explicit during conversation, I believe his emphasis on right of self-defense reaction to request for withdrawal Pakistan forces from Indian border.)

In response I sought convince Ayub of seriousness ChiCom threat to all subcontinent including Pakistan, necessity for US action support resistance ChiCom aggression, and reality of Indian resolve to repel Chinese aggression and to improve relationship with Pakistan. Drawing on material provided in Deptel 715 and Delhi's 1595,5 and using specially prepared map, I reviewed exact nature ChiCom attacks. I pointed out serious dangers involved if ChiComs used NEFA footholds as springboard for eventual broader attack on Assam plain, isolating it from rest of India. I also drew Ayub into discussion ChiCom and Soviet objectives, based on material supplied reference telegram, and pointed to possibility of Chinese demand for territorial concessions in Ladakh in return for withdrawal from points taken in NEFA. I pointed to indications that Soviets seem to be hesitantly coming down on ChiCom side against India, and that signs pointed to United Communist Front against subcontinent. Ayub commented that ChiComs particularly interested in Ladakh area to protect road from Sinkiang to Tibet whose construction, he said, Nehru had tacitly agreed to and then two years later had changed his mind.

Following this, I urged Ayub to forego reproaching Nehru for his past mistakes which he now recognizes and to take advantage of Nehru's awakening to realities Sino-Soviet threat. I stressed Pakistan and India should now work together to put out larger fire which threatens them both before getting down to settle own regional differences which not small, but not of same order of urgency as a conflagration. I expressed hope GOP would show under these circumstances sympathetic attitude towards India's difficulties which certain to evoke warm Indian response. I implied it would be sportsmanlike to extend hand of friendship to neighbor who was in trouble, letting by-gones be by-gones for a testing period. I said last thought which would occur to us would be a compromise of Pak security interests, and nothing in our policy even remotely suggested this.

Ayub responded by agreeing ChiCom threat matter of great concern of Pakistan and US. He expressed doubt Nehru yet convinced since he still maintained bulk of armed forces on Pak borders and did not seem disposed make any real move to settle Pak-Indian differences.

I then discussed with Ayub our military aid program to India. I disclaimed any US intention withhold particulars and mentioned that I had hoped to consult with him sooner at Hunza on this program. I said we intended to maintain strong controls to assure use US arms against ChiComs and to supply only material demonstrably needed in those combat theaters. When Ayub asked why Aziz Ahmed had been unable obtain details of these procedures, I said that I would provide them [to] Dehlavi. I also briefed Ayub on details of military equipment supplied to India and said we would keep GOP currently informed in future. Ayub commented that he did not think Indians wanted any but defensive arms to maintain present mountain positions, and then later remarked he did not understand urgent need since Indians had most of weapons supplied them as well as manufacturing facilities for automatic weapons. Next, I formally reiterated to Ayub our past assurances of our assistance in event aggression against Pakistan from India as set forth reference telegram and handed him aide-memoire to that effect.6 After some discussion, participated in by Dehlavi, of distinctions between first person diplomatic note, note verbale, and aide-memoire, which I dismissed as technical, Ayub expressed appreciation for these assurances and said that if made public by us they would have very healthy and settling effect in Pakistan. I agreed to transmit this request to Department.7

Ayub and I then engaged in further conversation during which I particularly stressed changing Indian attitudes as evidenced by Ghosh paper, Menon demotion from Defense Minister, Times of India editorial, etc, and desirability of GOP not pressuring India now on Kashmir but waiting for more appropriate negotiating climate after emergency. I pointed out we felt GOI would be more forthcoming in future if GOP now sympathetic. Ayub and Mohammad Ali expressed continued suspicion Indian motives, stating conviction that Menon position and influence with Nehru not actually weakened and that his change of portfolios was a mere tactical maneuver engineered by Nehru and Menon so that Menon could escape some of blame for current reverses. I took issue with this interpretation. Ayub restated Pak view that Indians remain hostile to Pakistan and must demonstrate changed attitude first before Paks make reciprocal gesture. Ayub also reverted to complaints that US pressuring Pakistan rather than India. In this connection he asked why Paks as friends of US always expected to make practically all the concessions to unfriendly neighbors who are not allies of US; he referred to the difficult concessions to Afghanistan which the US Government was pressuring him to make, and now again he is asked to make unilateral concessions to India involving, in his view, a certain indifference to essential Pakistani national and security interests. He thought US should instead be pressuring India to make tangible conciliatory gesture to Pakistan if effective effort against ChiComs and disengagement Pak-Indian forces (which he agreed to be desirable) were sought. GOP could not be expected allow its security be jeopardized or to bow to Nehru, who was enemy of India's real interests, as well as Pakistan's. In conclusion Ayub agreed again to reciprocate more equally any change of heart on India's part, stating he would fail in his duty to country if he did not reciprocate since Pakistan's basic aim is to establish conditions where both countries are free from anxiety and fear of the other.

Comment: My fuller comments will follow on further reflection. I had impression throughout our discussion, Ayub was restrained and calm although inwardly angered and upset. I had no chance to change his fundamental position, since decision already made and letter written. However, I believe his view of our action, motivations and attitude was somewhat better at end of session than at beginning. At no point did he threaten change of policy towards US or towards alliances but clearly he felt that Pakistan, and he personally, as friends of US had been let down by US, particularly through failure to consult with him in advance on military aid to India and through our pressures on Pakistan alone to make first gesture towards India.

Although he carefully refrained from explicitly reiterating his October 26 assurance to me about not creating trouble for India at this time, he clearly stated that it would not be common sense for Pakistan to precipitate military action against India, and of course Pakistan did not have any intention of doing so.

McConaughy

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-562. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to New Delhi.

1 Telegram 715 to Karachi, November 3, provided general guidelines for McConaughy's November 5 meeting with Ayub. (Ibid., 790D.11/11-162)

2 In telegrams 804 and 805, both dated November 2, McConaughy requested guidance for his impending meeting with Ayub. (Ibid., 690D.91/11-262 and 791.56/11-262, respectively)

3 See Document 186.

4 Telegram 819 from Karachi, November 5, transmitted the text of the statement issued by Ayub expressing hope that India and China would resolve their differences and confidence that the scope of the conflict would be limited. (Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-562)

5 In telegram 1595 from New Delhi, November 4, Galbraith volunteered lines of argument to be used by McConaughy in his meeting with Ayub. (Ibid., 691.93/11-462)

6 The assurance provided in the aide-memoire reads as follows: “The Government of the United States of America reaffirms its previous assurances to the Government of Pakistan that it will come to Pakistan's assistance in the event of aggression from India against Pakistan.” The text of the aide-memoire was transmitted to the Department as enclosure to airgram A-883 from Karachi, February 23, 1963; Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Karachi Embassy Files: FRC 67 F 74, 320 Pak/US Assurances.

7 On November 17, the Department of State issued a press release that noted the United States had assured Pakistan that if U.S. assistance to India were “misused and directed against another in aggression, the United States would undertake immediately, in accordance with constitutional authority, appropriate action both within and without the United Nations to thwart such aggression.” (Department of State Bulletin, December 3, 1962, pp. 837-838) On November 19, McConaughy wrote to Ayub and enclosed a copy of the November 17 press release. A copy of McConaughy's letter was transmitted to the Department as enclosure 1 to airgram A-613 from Karachi, December 5. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Karachi Embassy Files: FRC 67 F 74, 320 Pak/US Assurances)

192. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy 192. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President KennedySource

Washington, November 9, 1962.

Mr. President:

You asked two questions this morning about India: (1) What have we done to keep the Paks informed of our military assistance to India? and (2) How much have we actually shipped?

On the first, Talbot has talked to Aziz Ahmed, the Pakistan Ambassador, twice in the last ten days. He has emphasized to him that our help is limited to the problem of defending India against Chinese aggression, and that we were getting assurances from the Indians that were as effective as the assurances that the Paks had given us about the use of our military assistance to them. So far, he has described the nature of the weapons we have shipped, but not the exact quantities. The next time he sees him, which will be shortly, he will tell him something of the order of magnitude of the quantities. This has as yet had no visible effect in reassuring Aziz.

On the second, as of now we have shipped by air about $3-1/2 million worth (including shipping costs) of equipment and ammunition, adding up to some 800 tons. The list in the attached table1 shows the consolidated Indian request, what we have already shipped, and what will be shipped this weekend. We of course don't necessarily agree that everything they have requested should be shipped.

C. K.2

* Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, Security, 1962. Secret.

1 Not printed.

2 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

193. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 193. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, November 12, 1962.

The Pakistani are going through a genuine emotional crisis as they see their cherished ambitions of using the US as a lever against India going up in the smoke of the Chinese border war. Their plaint about lack of consultation is mere cover for this (if we'd “consulted” with the Paks, instead of notifying them, we'd still be arguing about Kashmir).

Given Pak bitterness, our pitch should be sympathetic understanding and no pressure. We can let the facts themselves work for us.

But I urge equally strongly that there be no give in our position. We have no need to apologize. If we compensate Ayub for our actions vis-a-vis India, we will again be postponing the long-needed clarification of our position, and this at a time when we've never had a better excuse for clarifying it.

Whether Pakistan moves from words to action depends on whether it is willing to risk its relationship with the US. Ayub probably isn't, but he may be a prisoner of Pak public emotions in this case. Moreover, even Ayub has found that a hard line often works well with us. I am convinced, however, that in the last analysis the Paks will realize that they get far too much from their US tie to be able to do without it. So if we can weather the current shock, we should be able to hold on to our assets in Pakistan, while still emerging with the sub-continent-wide policy toward which we aim.

R. W. Komer1

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 11/62. Secret.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

194. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 194. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, November 12, 1962, 8:34 p.m.

754. Ambassador Aziz Ahmed presented Ayub's letter (septel)1 to President this evening. President confined reply to statement he would be in touch again with Ayub. Ambassador then offered chart titled “Disposition of Indian Forces”2 showing three divisions in Kashmir, three divisions and one infantry brigade on West Pakistan border, and one division and two brigades on East Pakistan border, as contrasted to one division and one brigade in Ladakh and three divisions in NEFA area. Navy shown as concentrated in Bombay, except two small ships.

President suggested that while still uncertain whether Chinese intentions limited or to dominate area, India taking situation seriously, perhaps more so than President Ayub. Ambassador agreed that even if Chinese take only territory in dispute, it serious for India. Said Pakistan believes China wants to take disputed area, face India with a fait accompli, and then negotiate end of hostilities. Fact that Soviet supplying MIGs indicates Communists don't expect big war in prospect. However, perhaps next spring situation will be clearer.

President said he recognized Pakistan Government's interest in settling Kashmir dispute, asked what Pakistan thinks best course to achieve this. Ambassador answered that Pakistan understands that in India official circles building up a trend of feeling toward rapprochement with Pakistan. Pakistan believes this should be encouraged. Any gesture by Pakistan, e.g. to pull troops back from Kashmir border, would halt this favorable trend. He repeated familiar arguments that whole region will stay insecure, unstable and economically retarded so long as the Kashmir dispute remains unsettled. Pakistani people very much exercised over military assistance to India, he said, because, basing idea of what India might do in future on what it has done in past, Pakistan persuaded that any large scale assistance to India would only strengthen India against Pakistan and India would use this equipment at first opportunity against Pakistan. All political leaders have opposed the grant of military assistance to India by the US and the question of giving any Pakistani assurances to India.

President, replying deliberately and clearly, said question of assurances is matter for Pakistani decision, but US is interested in stopping the advance of Communism in Asia. Amount of US aid, as Ambassador knows, is minimal; if it should grow large we would discuss matter with Pakistan. It is important, President continued, that US indicate its opposition to the expansion of the Communist Chinese in Asia. We understand problem of Kashmir. Possibly out of all this will come some settlement. Can also understand Ayub's feeling that what is happening to India is result of its own foolish policies. On other hand, US cannot stand by idly while China tries to expand its power in Asia.

Ambassador returned once more to argument that if threat is real, what is important is not giving arms but freeing the Indian Army to fight against Chinese. At present, India fighting with hands tied behind back. This not merely question of improving relations between India and Pakistan but of stopping Communists. He did not see how India can accomplish this end unless it settled Kashmir with Pakistan.

President responded merely that he would be in touch with President Ayub again.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/11-1262. Secret. Drafted by Talbot, cleared by Kaysen in substance, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and to London for Grant, Gaud, and Bundy.

1 Document 195.

2 This chart is attached to a November 12 memorandum of conversation between Kennedy and Ahmed. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 11/62)

195. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 195. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, November 13, 1962, 5:37 p.m.

759. Deptel 754.1 Following is text letter from President Ayub to President delivered November 12. Letter classified Top Secret by GOP.

“From: Field Marshal Mohammad Ayub Khan, N.Pk., H.J.

5th November, 1962

Dear Mr. President,

I am grateful to you for your kind message of October 28, 1962,2 which was delivered by your Ambassador.

For the last fifteen years, India has posed a major military threat to Pakistan. She has built up her forces, may I say, mainly with American and British equipment three to four times our strength and has openly declared that Pakistan is her enemy number one.

Eighty per cent or more of her Armed Forces have already been earmarked against us and the bulk of them remain concentrated on our borders on ten days' state of readiness. We have been exposed to these aggressive designs all these years simply because the Indian Prime Minister himself is not prepared to honour his pledge in regard to so many agreements and especially in regard to the solution of Kashmir in which Pakistan is vitally interested for profound economic and security reasons. Therefore, by and large, we have spent these fifteen years in a state of mobilization which has been forced upon us by India. On top of all this, the recent conflict between India and China has led to developments of grave concern to us.

However, our own information, although meagre, leads us to believe that Chinese intention seems to be to occupy the territory which they believe belongs to them and over which there has been a dispute between her and India. Even Mr. Nehru thought it fit in his wisdom to declare in the Indian Parliament in 1954 with reference to the Chinese position in Tibet that ‘I am not aware of any time during the last few hundred years when Chinese sovereignty, or if you like suzerainty, was challenged by any outside country. All during this period, whether China was weak or strong, or whatever the Government of China was, China always maintained its claim to sovereignty over Tibet… . The British Empire in the days of Lord Curzon had expanded into and made several types of arrangements in Tibet. Now it is impossible or improper for us to continue any such arrangements … . These maps and treaties are all prepared by the British Imperialists. These treaties and maps are intended to show that we must act as they did.'

Militarily, however, we do not believe that China can bring to bear against India her major forces through the difficult terrain of the Himalayas to achieve decisive results, and even if she has any such intention the way to do it would be to outflank India through Burma. In our opinion, that would be a simpler way of doing it and in cost it would be cheaper. If the Chinese intentions were more than limited and they were to expand into the territories of Assam, we would have as much cause for concern as India, as our East Pakistan would be directly affected. We are making this appreciation about the actual situation in no light hearted mood.

Why has such a situation developed on this sub-continent and around India? We believe that this is the direct outcome of distorted and fallacious thinking on the part of Mr. Nehru and his associates and a consequence of a baseless foreign policy that he has been following. This foreign policy has been based on the following factors: (a) bend backwards to appease Communism;

(b) hoist the white flag of Neutralism to appease Communism and get other wavering nations to join him in order to be able to create a world nuisance value for themselves;

(c) intimidate and threaten Pakistan in order to politically isolate it and economically weaken it; and

(d) abuse the West, and especially the U.S.A., in season and out of season.

The events have proved that all that is happening to Mr. Nehru is the direct consequence of this warped thinking. We have been warning and pointing to this all along.

Mr. President, what you now ask of us is to give an assurance to Mr. Nehru of a kind that will enable him to deploy his troops at present concentrated against us elsewhere. I am surprised that such a request is being made to us. After all, what we have been doing is nothing but to contain the threat that was continuously posed by India to us. Is it in conformity with human nature that we should cease to take such steps which are necessary for our self-preservation? Or, will our own people ever accept such a position?

According to our information, India has withdrawn an infantry division and a half away from us but there are definite indications that they are moving forward their reserve armoured formations of one division and one brigade to battle locations against Pakistan. Similarly they now have a corps headquarters to control troops deployed against East Pakistan. The bulk of their Navy, barring a couple of small vessels, have been concentrated in Bombay harbour, ostensibly for refit but in reality to pose a threat to us. Under no stretch of imagination, Mr. President, can these moves be described as indications of peaceful intentions towards us by India. So, how can we, in a situation like this, be expected to show our friendship to them!

No, Mr. President, the answer to this problem lies elsewhere. It lies in creating a situation whereby we are free from the Indian threat, and the Indians are free from any apprehensions about us. This can only be done if there is a settlement of the question of Kashmir. This matter is sometimes stated as very difficult to resolve. I do not agree with that. I believe that if there is a change of heart on the part of India, it should not be difficult to find an equitable and an honourable settlement.

Our object is to have peace, and especially with our neighbours. I am very grateful for the assurance you have given that the arms you are now supplying to India will not be used against us. This is very generous of you, but knowing the sort of people you are dealing with, whose history is a continuous tale of broken pledges, I would not ask a friend like you to place yourself in an embarrassing situation. India's conduct over the question of Junagadh, Mangrol, Hyderabad, Kashmir and Goa should be well-known to you. Our belief is that arms now being obtained by India from you for use against China will undoubtedly be used against us at the very first opportunity. However, in the light of the promise that you were good enough to make, namely, that we shall be consulted before you gave any military assistance to India, we did expect to be consulted and also informed as to the types and the quantities of weapons and equipment which are now in the process of being supplied to them. It is regrettable that none of this has been done.

I would also like to draw your attention to the fact that although India today poses as an aggrieved and oppressed party, in reality she has been constantly threatening and intimidating, in varying degrees, small neighbouring countries around her. Let me assure you that in the eyes of many people in free Asia, Indian intentions are suspect and the Indian image as a peace-loving nation has been destroyed.

You have referred, Mr. President, to press comments in Pakistan. While we have endeavoured to restrain expression of extremist views in our newspapers, it is not possible to interfere with the freedom of the press which reflects the real sentiment of the people. It must be realized that public opinion is gravely exercised by the new developments as the result of arms aid to India, more so, as India continues to pose a serious threat to our security. I am afraid it is going to be extremely difficult for my Government to discount public opinion.

With kind regards, Yours sincerely,

Mohammad Ayub Khan“

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/11-1362. Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Drafted by Naas, cleared by Cameron, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and to London for Grant, Bundy, and Gaud.

1 Document 194.

2 See Document 186.

196. Letter From the Ambassador to India (Galbraith) to President Kennedy 196. Letter From the Ambassador to India (Galbraith) to President KennedySource

New Delhi, November 13, 1962.

Dear Mr. President: I have been wanting for the past ten days to give you a more detailed and intimate account of our affairs here. I have been sending rather full dispatches to the Department, some of which you have doubtless seen. But as you will have discovered, few Ambassadors have ever been completely candid in such reporting. There is truth and there is also what one must have believed. I merely try to minimize the difference.

These past three weeks have brought great change here—no doubt the greatest change in public attitudes since World War II. The most treasured of preconceptions have been shattered. The disillusion with the Chinese is of course total. So, save at the top, is that with the Soviets. And the other unaligneds are not very popular. Nehru remains an exception. Even he is now hoping only for friendly neutrality from the Soviets rather than active support. But with him there is another factor. All his life he has sought to avoid being dependent upon the United States and the United Kingdom—most of his personal reluctance to ask (or thank) for aid has been based on this pride. He did not like it because it advertised what hurt his pride. Now nothing is so important to him, more personally than politically, than to maintain the semblance of this independence. His age no longer allows for readjustment. To a point we can, I feel, be generous on this.

The departure of Menon is an enormous gain. I have little doubt that in recent years he was an immediate and efficient channel of communications to the Soviets and possibly even to the Chinese. His departure means, among other things, that we can work with the Indians on sensitive matters—things which I resisted before because of the insecurity involved—although the Indian Government remains a sieve and his men are still around. More important he no longer has the capacity for stirring up action against us or for the Communists. Many people here think that in recent years whenever the Chinese penetrated a little further in Ladakh, Menon arranged some shooting on the East Pakistan border as a diversion. I have no doubt that the march on Goa last year was timed to take peoples minds away from the anti-Chinese syndrome which was developing as the result of last summer's penetrations. It worked. Within a few days last December China disappeared from the headlines and the liberating forces of Menon became the center of attention. The U.N. job was an admirable complement to all this for it made him the defender of Kashmir and gave him a forum for whipping it up against us.

In the United States we no longer think of an individual having this much power. But there is still a role here for a Rasputin. And all of this is apart from Menon's utter incompetence as a Defense Minister and his deeply divisive political influence on the Army.

At one juncture, I feared that Menon might engineer the turnaround and get credit for the appeal to the United States for aid. And it is a measure of his conscienceless gall that he made the effort. I managed to forestall this without any suggestion, even from the Menon kept press, that we had a role in throwing him out. In the absence of your counsel on the matter I might have pressed the point a little harder. But I was also desirous that no one in Washington, yourself included, would think me at all anxious to rush arms to a ministry headed by this man.

The Government is currently in disarray. The Prime Minister is old and tired and angry with events that have treated him so harshly. Chavan, who is coming in as Defence Minister, is young by Indian standards. He is a competent politician and operator. No one need pay any attention to the suggestions that he is left wing—he has merely made his obeisances. Unfortunately he is very inexperienced in all military matters—as are all Indians. T.T. Krishnamachari, who will take over as Minister of Supply, was at one time head of Lever Brothers here and is a man of incredible vanity. He was brought into the Cabinet at Menon's behest but sensed at an early stage that Menon was in trouble. He thereupon broke with him on grounds of principle reinforced by more practical considerations. He tries to live up to his view of himself and about halfway succeeds. So he will be fairly effective. My working relationships with both men are good.

One thing much on my mind these last days has been the American press. We have had a great influx of correspondents plus a large itinerant delegation covering the arms lift. Under Menon the Indian Defence Ministry completely excluded the press from all operational areas—partly so no one would hear the criticisms of Menon. Were they bottled up here, the Indians would get a bad press and so, inter alia, would we. I have now pretty well broken through on this, though I had to go to the Prime Minister himself. There will be many stories on the infirm character of his leadership, but that is not our business. I think Nehru is still playing down our role to protect the sensitivities of the Soviets and perhaps, more especially, to protect his own feelings. I have told him this was something we couldn't take and have pictured the repercussions in the American press. We cannot decently help someone who is afraid to be seen in our company. There will be some damage along these lines, I fear.

The great question is what the Chinese intend. In the beginning I thought that this was essentially a border conflict. The Chinese have a serious claim to the Aksai Chin Plateau in Ladakh. It provides them with a strategic access to Sinkiang and they had been building their road there for two years before the Indians reacted. By getting a good foothold in the east, they could establish a claim for the area they really want. In addition, no doubt, they are motivated by jealousy and dislike plus the feeling that Indians were the world's safest object of animosity. So with their superior ready manpower and equipment they could show the Indians and the Asian countries that in military affairs at least they had superiority. All this could be accomplished by a major border demonstration. I have not entirely discarded the above theory. But last week the trickle of evidence on forces north on the frontier, the concentration in the real danger areas which are the Chumbi Valley and back near the Burma border, the incursions and patrol actions in new places and the drift of Chinese propaganda caused me to conclude that we should assume something more serious. The Indians have consistently underestimated Chinese intentions. In one way or another our estimate influences them. And, of course, we are in less danger if we have to withdraw from a too somber estimate than if we must revise a too sanguine one. In the former instance we shall have at least done some of the right things. My recent estimates have reflected the above considerations. Deep in my own mind I am not persuaded that the Chinese are as ambitious as this implies or that they can be so indifferent to the deterrent effects of our position.

If the Chinese should really come down the mountain in force, there will be more political changes here. Much so-called nonalignment went out the window with Menon. In his pro-Soviet maneuvers and his articulate anti-Americanism he was the counterbalance for five ordinary pro-Western ministers. Popular opinion and our military assistance has worked a further and major impairment. The problem in face of a really serious attack would be how we would react to the prospect of a new, large and extremely expensive ally. I personally hope the Chinese do not force this choice. The Indians are busy worrying about the end of non-alignment. It is we that should be doing the worrying on this.

Generally speaking, I think our affairs here are in good shape. We have managed to appear as a solid and steadfast friend. Even the left press has not seriously pinned on us the charge that we are seeking to entangle or otherwise exploit the situation. On most matters our course has seemed clear. During the Cuban affair I moved ahead but with a fairly good sense of what would be in your mind. The period has not been without interest.

We do have a serious problem next door and this has been much on my mind. The Pakistanis have not taken the attack very seriously and have seen it as the great opportunity to get concessions from the Indians. As I am sure Ayub himself saw, no one could press the Indians in their moment of despair. But instead the Paks were pressed themselves for assurances. And our weapons, in an action not too gracefully cleared with the Paks started coming to India. Their disappointment is understandable. I have worked hard and I think with a certain measure of success here. The Ministry of External Affairs at my behest has asked the press to be very quiet in response to the Pakistan fulminations. I have given strong encouragement to a Congress Party group which is urging reconciliation with Pakistan. I have pressed the Indians to give the Pakistanis information on Indian troop movements and I succeeded last week in getting Nehru to write a long and friendly letter to Ayub on the situation, while their new High Commissioner is proposing the resumption of ministerial talks. Meanwhile McConaughy has been doing noble work in Karachi to calm the Paks and make them see that the threat is to the subcontinent. My sense of the situation is that we should not press the Pakistanis any more in the immediate future. However I should continue all moderating efforts here. Eventually but not too soon the Indians must be asked to propose meaningful negotiations on Kashmir. This should not incidentally raise the question of a plebiscite, an idea in which there is no longer any future. The only hope lies in having a full guarantee of the headwaters of the rivers. Each side should hold on to the mountain territory that it has and there should be some sort of shared responsibility for the Valley. I really don't think that a solution on these lines is impossible. It may be wise incidentally when the time comes to have the British do it as a Commonwealth exercise.

With the great advantage of perspective, I regard the election results as a strong endorsement of the Kennedy Administration, your Cuban policy and the persistence of Mr. Endicott Peabody.

Yours faithfully,

Ken

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/11/62-11/13/62. Confidential. A handwritten note on the source text indicates that it was taken from the President's weekend reading file, dated November 17.

197. Editorial Note 197. Editorial Note

On November 14, 1962, the Governments of the United States and India exchanged diplomatic notes, signed in Washington, which established a formal basis for the military assistance which the United States had been providing to India since November 3. The U.S. note, signed by Assistant Secretary of State Phillips Talbot, indicated that the purpose of the assistance was to lend to the defense of India against “outright Chinese aggression.” The only other conditions attached to the offer were that U.S. representatives in India be permitted to observe the use of the military supplies provided and that any excess supplies be returned when no longer needed for the purposes for which they had been supplied. The Indian note, signed by Ambassador B. K. Nehru, confirmed the agreement outlined in the U.S. note. The texts of the notes are printed in Department of State Bulletin, December 3, 1962, page 838.

198. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy 198. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President KennedySource

Washington, November 16, 1962.

Mr. President:

1. You are having a meeting on the Indian military aid situation with State and Defense at 4:00 p.m., Monday.

2. The immediate subject for decision is the result of our discussion with the UK this past week. A team consisting of Jim Grant from State, Bill Bundy from Defense, and Bill Gaud from AID, has come to an agreed set of recommendations with a similar British group on what we should be prepared to do. These are contained in London 1865, attached at Tab 1.1 In summary, this group recommends that we agree with the British and, to the extent that we can get them to contribute, other Commonwealth countries, to equip a force of about five divisions and their supporting formations. A preliminary guess is that the equipment involved might cost as much as $50 million. The associated supplies, especially ammunition, might be equally or more expensive depending on Indian production capabilities and present Indian stocks, neither of which are well known at the moment.

3. The rationale of the program is that, with such assistance, the Indians would be capable of holding the Chinese where they are now. If the Indians wish to reconquer the Chinese-occupied area, they would have to use half to two-thirds of the forces they now have on their border with Pakistan (see Tab 2).2 The idea is thus to combine a respectable amount of aid to the Indians with a continuation of pressure on them to improve their relations with Pakistan.

4. At Tab 2 is an indication of the dispositions of the Indian forces at two dates, 13 October and 16 November. The latter reflects information given to Galbraith by the Indians. One thing the map does not make clear is that the troops which are on the Kashmir border look to the Indians as back-up for the unit fighting at Ladakh, even though they look to the Paks the way they have always looked to the Paks.

5. At Tab 3 are the recent cables from New Delhi: a 18343 —Galbraith's latest on the opinions of Foreign Secretary Desai. It shows an increase in the realism of Indian assessments.

b 18354 is Nehru's letter to Ayub.

c 18335 relates a conversation Galbraith had with the Prime Minister of Bhutan. It illustrates the problems of the Indian protectorates of Nepal, Bhutan and Sikkim.

d 18266 is the present state of the discussion on non-alignment.

e 1739 from New York—Some indirect evidence on the effect of developments on Indian non-alignment. The effects have even reached Arthur Lall.6

f 17267 is an older one which may be interesting, showing the evolution of India's position in its arguments with China.

6. At Tab 4 is London 1859, which gives the substance of the Macmillan-Ayub exchange.8 No surprise.

7. At Tab 5 is the latest assessment from Karachi.9 McConaughy obviously is somewhat frightened and thinks the situation is out of hand. Phil Talbot and I do not agree with his suggestion that you reply to Ayub's letter immediately and cordially. We think a much better course of action would be for Secretary Rusk to write to Muhammad Ali, Pak Foreign Minister. The occasion can be the transmission of a copy of our agreement with India on military aid. He can use the occasion to repeat our assurances to the Paks. We propose further, that at the same time we make the agreement public—late Saturday—we make a public statement of our commitment to go to Pakistan's aid if it is attacked, as well as our promise that the help we give to India will be used only against the Chinese Communists. The statement would come from State. It would put on the public record what you have already told Ayub privately in writing and orally several times.

8. At Tab 6 is a very interesting report (London 1851)10 from Malcolm MacDonald on the Chinese position on the conflict. MacDonald talked with Chen Yi, the Foreign Secretary, on 29 October, and later with Chou En-lai.

9. The review will raise the deeper issues of our problems and possibilities on the Indian situation. The approach embodied in the US-UKmemorandum is a cautious one. It certainly makes sense as a first step, until events reveal more clearly what Chinese intentions are and how relations within the sub-continent will shift. Still, it is important to take a longer look ahead. Do we want to push the Indians hard enough and give them enough help to make sure that they do not seek a negotiated solution on Chinese terms and lapse back into neutralism? Continuance of the war may serve important U.S. policy objectives: the sharp decline of “positive neutralism” as a foreign policy stance in the unaligned countries, greatly improved relations between India and Pakistan, another setback to Chinese Communist prestige and power with consequences felt throughout Asia. On the other hand, continuance of the war may be increasingly at our expense. Can we and do we wish to bear the costs? Alternatively, it may well be beyond our power to promote a continuance of the war. The direct reaction of the Indians when confronted with the costs of reconquering what they have already lost may lead them to draw back no matter what we do. The effects on Pakistan of our aid to India may continue to be so unfavorable as to become a limiting factor in what we can do. It is neither necessary nor possible to answer these questions now. However, we must certainly begin to consider them and the policy decision we take on the narrower issue which will be before you on Monday is at best an interim one.

CK

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/16/62. Secret.

1 Dated November 14. None of the tabs listed in the source text is printed. All are ibid.

2 The document attached at Tab 2, dated November 16, consists of a 1-page assessment of Indian military dispositions, with 2 supporting maps. There is no indication of origin or drafting information on the document.

3 Dated November 16.

4 Dated November 15. Nehru's letter, concerning the Sino-Indian border war, was dated November 11.

5 Dated November 15.

6 Dated November 12. Arthur Lall was a member of the Indian delegation to the United Nations.

7 Dated November 10.

8 Dated November 14. The exchange of letters between Macmillan and Ayub concerned the Sino-Indian border war.

9 Dated November 16.

10 Dated November 13.

199. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 199. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, November 17, 1962, 7 p.m.

1853. Policy. Pass Defense for OASD/ISA and JCS. London's 1864 to Department.1 The London papers are a valuable guide to policy with which, so far as they go, we are in agreement. Unfortunately issues on which decision will be needed are rapidly carrying us beyond the scope of this guidance. Specifically: (1) The London decisions essentially assume borderline ambitions by the Chinese capable of being contained by five divisions. As noted, if anything more ambitious is attempted (Annex A, paragraph 1)2 a radical reassessment will be necessary.

(2) However the Indians are assuming something much more ambitious by the Chinese. So, on balance, are we here. (Embtel 1727)3 As this is written the Chinese seem to have reacted in something close to division strength in the dangerous Walong area.

(3) Even if the Chinese have no forward ambitions and even though they negotiate a settlement, no Indian Government can soon assume their peaceful intentions. Public opinion has now taken hold on this issue with the greatest firmness. Any Indian Government must be prepared for the contingency, of a long-continuing forward Chinese military policy in NEFA, the border countries, UP, Kashmir and it must assume that this will be combined with flexible claims as to what is Chinese territory.

(4) In light of our past lecturing on the aggressive designs of the ChiComs, we cannot now reverse the field and tell them to confine their preparations as we will confine our help in accordance with the assumption that the Chinese are basically lambs.

(5) It follows that beyond the equipment for five divisions for the next few months the Indians must have a policy of procuring weapons for regaining ground or holding open terrain, basic transport including transport aircraft, plant for arms manufacture, raw materials for the foregoing, and air power.

(6) We must have a policy on assisting this for they are already asking us for help. There are many reasons for taking a deliberate view of this assistance. But we cannot decline it on the grounds that we do not believe the Chinese are a serious threat to India.

(7) The issue is an urgent one for the Indians are now coming forward with requests of very large magnitude. Some of these I have persuaded them to withhold on the legitimate ground that they are not well considered and that first things be put first and the first thing is ready infantry equipment. But this is not substitute for a policy.

I turn now to recommendations.

(1) The Indians must clearly realize, as they are only now dimly realizing, that our decision to help them beyond the ready combat requirements of the next few months involves political and financial issues of the highest order. This help in the magnitude contemplated will not be easy for us to provide.

(2) This means that very senior Indian Minister should go to Washington (and London) to negotiate the arrangements including political understandings.

(3) Our help must be related to a sense-making defense plan which reflects the realities of the military situation, does not commit the Indians to impossible tasks (e.g. the recovery of all the Aksai Chin), involves a realistic view of the weaponry and is related to actual as distinct from our imagined capacity to assist.

(4) There must be a clear understanding that India (not the US) will take up the Pakistan problem. Pakistan in the past has been regarded as an American problem. Now it is serious Indian business. Our ability to help India is circumscribed while tension continues. India has an exposed flank and is handicapped in helping herself. We can help by restraining the Pak appetite but leadership in the task of making the subcontinent secure and unified belongs to India.

(5) Given the foregoing, we should, I believe, help the Indians on a very substantial scale to organize their continuing defenses and build the supporting industry so far as this is clearly within their capacity. We shall, as the London decisions make clear, have to work with them patiently and with understanding. The major responsibility must remain in their hands. But we shall have to be severe on all wasteful nonsense.

(6) We should be as tolerant as our own political climate allows to obeisances to nonalignment. These will probably disappear in the next few weeks or months. The Indians now want, in fact, an intimate and confidential relationship with the United States. Sophisticated concern is already turning to whether we will insist on nonalignment.

(7) We stand on the edge of great opportunity here—reconciliation between India and Pakistan, security for the whole subcontinent, a decisive reverse for communism in its area of its greatest opportunity. We could lose the chance by not helping the Indians defend themselves according to their view of the Chinese danger. We could lose it by rushing in indiscriminately either with help or with unreal conditions. But given patient work and some luck with the Pakistanis and firm bargaining on essentials we can bring it off.

In light of foregoing considerations, which we know to be much in the mind of the British High Commission New Delhi, we strongly urge that London decisions, especially those in Annex A, be not communicated now to the Indian or Pakistan Governments and we have in mind visit of Duncan Sandys. Instead we urge prompt consideration which obviously must be at highest levels reflecting the foregoing considerations and resulting guidance.

Strictly FYI except for reference to Sandys, foregoing conveyed very informally to British Deputy HICOM.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/11-1762. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and Karachi.

1 Telegram 1864, November 14, indicated that the next numbered telegram to Washington would transmit the agreed text of the recommendations of the U.S.-U.K. group established to outline Anglo-American objectives and courses of action arising out of the Sino-Indian conflict. (Ibid., 791.56/11-1462) Telegram 1865 from London, November 14, is summarized in Document 198.

2 The reference is to the agreed set of recommendations contained in telegram 1865 from London.

3 Dated November 10. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/11/62-11/13/62)

200. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 200. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, November 18, 1962, 2:03 p.m.

2140. Eyes Only Personal for Ambassador from Secretary. (Urtel 1853.1 Deeply appreciate your handling present crisis. I am convinced that we are on the front edge of large and unpredictable events affecting many parts of the world and that earlier frames of reference will require radical review by many governments including our own.

I wish to underline fourth numbered recommendation Urtel 1853. India's relation with Pakistan is now a central problem for India affecting its own vital security and national existence. India must understand the limits upon our capacity to influence Karachi. We ourselves cannot prevent a Pakistan-Peiping side deal and a withdrawal of Pakistan from CENTO and SEATO if Pakistan becomes determined, however irrationally and recklessly, to pursue that course. Delhi would not be the first capital to make the mistake of believing that we have unlimited powers of persuasion in every capital other than its own.

If the situation in the subcontinent should take a rapid and adverse turn, India must surely recognize that geography restricts our own capacity to act promptly in the area. Further if Pakistan breaks its Western ties and conspires with Peiping against India it would be crucially important for the American people to know that India has taken every possible step to avoid that result. Otherwise our ability to help India would be severely circumscribed.

I am not arguing Pakistan's case nor condoning her effort to extort maximum advantage from India's danger. I am emphasizing utter seriousness your fourth recommendation and necessity for Indian leadership to pursue their newly discovered realism to a full reassessment relations with Pakistan.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/11-1762. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Rusk, cleared by Talbot, and approved by Rusk. A handwritten note by Rogers on the attached telegram distribution sheet prepared in S/S reads: “Secretary requested specifically that this message not be repeated to London and Karachi.”

1 Document 199.

201. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 201. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, November 18, 1962, 8:46 p.m.

782. It clear that Paks have whipped themselves into near hysterical state and that next few weeks will be very difficult for all of us. In view legacy Indo-Pak relations strong reactions to our aid to India were to be expected. We can tolerate and are prepared for considerable buffeting but obviously wish avoid dramatic reversals of policy. We are presently very concerned by leaderless appearance of GOP. We have impression that GOP at this moment is desperately floundering around, is striking out blindly, and has no idea where it will be next week. The Hindu baiters such as Dehlavi seem to be having field day in absence firm political leadership. We recognize that unstable domestic situation places Ayub in doubly difficult position, even if he were of mind attempt moderate opinion. From Pak domestic viewpoint Chinese attacks and our response could not have come at worse time. At same time it also likely GOP statements and our intelligence “take” to some extent intended by GOP frighten U.S. and force us into certain actions vis-a-vis India. We must, therefore, avoid appearance of over concern and avoid being whiplashed. For example, we must give no encouragement to GOP that we will provide additional military assistance to Pakistan to “balance” aid to India. Full gamut of relations between U.S. and western world and nations of subcontinent is under change. One of our main objectives in next few months will be to do what we can to encourage resolution Indo-Pak differences and we must be careful take no actions with Pakistan which make this task more difficult.

In present situation, we must attempt guide leadership to see through temper tantrums and to recognize Pakistan's basic long-range interests and continuing value of close relations with U.S. and improved relations with India.

We do not underestimate difficulty of your task, but believe our past policies and current actions do give you great deal work with. In discussions with GOP leaders you may wish at your discretion draw on following points: 1. On question of prior consultation we do not believe we need be apologetic. On October 26 you informed Ayub of all actions taken by U.S. to assist India up to that time.1 Ayub's response was at minimum tacit approval of those steps. Secondly, Talbot discussed matter with Ambassador Ahmed October 29 and President sent letter to Ayub October 28.2 Since then we have kept GOP fully informed of details arms aid. As you have informed GOP our assistance is so far relatively small and certainly poses no threat to Pakistan. Impact of our aid to date is clearly of greater psychological impact in Pakistan than of concern militarily. (At same time you will not want to mislead Paks that more substantial aid is not coming. You will receive instructions shortly on this subject.)

2. U.S. understands Pakistan's concern. We have, therefore, specifically taken this concern into account in our agreement with India and have made our assurances public in the November 14 Press Statement. In the Secretary's letter to FonMin3 this assurance is repeated and the Secretary has referred to previous private assurances. (Embassy has copy of Chayes to McGhee memorandum of February 16, 1962,4 summing up our private, treaty, and public assurances and you may wish draw on this paper.)

In our view GOP has been given every assurance for its security. For them to believe otherwise is simply either questioning U.S. integrity or attempting pressure us into inadvisable actions against India. We do not intend play latter game beyond what we have done in Press Statement and Secretary's letter and you may wish firmly and coldly inform argumentative types we do not appreciate former.

3. U.S. policy over years has been assist to extent possible settlement of disputes between India and Pakistan, Kashmir in particular. Alliance relationship per se has not demanded actions but we have, anyways, worked diligently for solutions problems out of conviction peace and stability subcontinent so demanded. Offer of Black mission is one example and GOP is fully aware that its recent efforts in UN would not have gotten off ground without our help and President's personal intercession.

In letter Secretary has affirmed again that we will continue search for ways to be of assistance. As opportunities arise to take new steps we will not hesitate to do so and will be alert for them.

4. In addition diplomatic support we have given, Pakistan alliance with us has been of great value. Our economic assistance very substantial and Paks should realize that this large amount, in view many demands on us, is directly related to our alliance relationship. Our military aid has been substantial and during Ayub's recent visit we made firm commitments respecting this aid. (Aide-Memoire of McNamara-Ayub talks.)5 We intend, despite added demands of Indo-China conflict, meet this commitment to letter. In talking about withdrawing from CENTO and SEATO, Pakistan appears to overlook intricate relation between our bilateral military aid and Pakistan's commitments made under these arrangements. Perhaps they should get the word now that withdrawal from pacts would cause us re-examine basis our military assistance.

Each of the above points can be elaborated at some length and you undoubtedly can think of many others to help Pakistanis see own best self interests.

Finally, it is difficult assess with confidence many Pakistan hints of much closer relations with Chicoms. Likely that in part these reflect Pakistani frustration and in part crude and obvious efforts to cause us concern. You have full range of argumentation re nature Chicoms etc. and there little we can add to your knowledge this subject. In discussions with GOP you might wish point out that Chicoms made careful preparations for confrontation with India by May border agreement with GOP. Chicoms are cleverly playing one against the other and Paks have fallen for gambit. We have instructed Hong Kong keep you fully informed on current developments. Our policy continues to be not to object to legitimate GOP efforts make boundary settlement. However, to help GOP avoid errors, you will wish make clear that U.S. would not understand entente between two and such action would be viewed most seriously here. At time when Chicoms attacking subcontinent we do not expect nation which allied with us against communist expansionism give aid and comfort to Chinese. This would be a way of beginning to establish the dimensions of our tolerance of Pakistan flirtations with the Chinese Communists.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/11-1862. Secret. Drafted by Naas and approved by Talbot and Rusk. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

1 See Document 183.

2 See Document 186.

3 The reference is to a letter from Rusk to Ali transmitted to Karachi in telegram 779, November 18. In the letter, Rusk emphasized that the United States viewed the military assistance provided to India in response to the threat posed by China as essential to the security of the entire subcontinent. The notes exchanged between the United States and India on November 14 had explicitly established that the purpose of the assistance was to meet the challenge of “Chinese aggression.” (See Document 197.)Rusk wrote that he was certain that the military assistance provided to India would not be used in any conflict with Pakistan. But with Pakistani concerns in mind, he reiterated the assurance made when the texts of the November 14 notes were released to the press: “if our assistance to India should be misused and directed against another in aggression, the United States would undertake immediately, in accordance with constitutional authority, appropriate action both within and without the United Nations to thwart such aggression.” (Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/11-1862) The full text of the press statement is printed in Department of State Bulletin, December 3, 1962, pp. 837-838.

4 Not found.

5 See footnote 2, Document 170.

202. Memorandum for the Record 202. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, November 19, 1962, 4:15-5:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

Presidential Meeting on Sino-Indian Conflict

PARTICIPANTS

Dean Rusk

Phillips Talbot

W. Averell Harriman

James P. Grant

Roger Hilsman

William Sullivan

William Gaud

Robert McNamara

Paul Nitze

William P. Bundy

Maj. General A. Goodpaster

John McCone

Huntington Sheldon

D. FitzGerald

Carl Kaysen

R. W. Komer

The meeting began with an intelligence briefing to explain to the President the locale of the recent Chinese gains. Secretary Rusk asked about Chicom logistic capabilities. Mr. McCone felt that the Chicoms could support about 300,000 men in the fighting area (170,000 in combat), assuming no interdiction of their road net, but that this would take about 35,000 trucks out of a total Chicom inventory of 200,000.

While the meeting's purpose had originally been to get approval of the US/UK Memorandum of Understanding1 prepared during the London meetings, Rusk suggested it seemed overtaken by events. The situation was already getting to a point where we and others could no longer act as if it were normal. He agreed that the Commonwealth ought to be moving faster. We were already supporting most of the countries around the Communist Asian periphery, hence there was some advantage to the Commonwealth taking the lead in helping India while we trailed somewhat behind.

McNamara urged that the first move be to find out what the real situation was. If we were to put our prestige and resources at risk, we must find out the score. He proposed sending a small high-level military mission immediately to Delhi. He doubted that the Indians were asking for enough, but felt that we couldn't appraise their plans without detailed knowledge. Hence the JCS should select 10-15 officers to go out to size up the situation. They could be ready in 2-3 days.

Rusk queried whether strategic and technical advice shouldn't come from the UK in the first instance, but McNamara doubted whether this would come soon enough. Rusk acknowledged that the Assam Valley could be in Chicom hands within a week and urged that transport aircraft be sent soonest because they would be needed in any case. We needed to get some C-130s on the way while we were making a more systematic evaluation. Otherwise, the Indians might get kicked out of Assam. Komer argued that doing so would help deter the Chicoms by signaling that we would get involved in a big way if this happened. There was also some discussion of the Indian need for spare parts for their C-119s.

The President indicated that we should ask Macmillan about Commonwealth plans, what they could do about Australian and other wheat to Communist China and what military missions the Commonwealth might be planning to send out (he had Ormsby Gore called over to meet with him and Rusk).

At the President's request, Grant explained the rationale behind the US/UK recommendations, particularly the five-division package. It was impossible to say what share the UK would take. McNamara doubted that the British would be willing to go 50-50 on any such substantial amount. The President agreed that the UK ought to take the lead. This wouldn't last long, but we ought to start them up in front.

There was discussion of whether Sino-Indian negotiations were likely. Rusk said that we suspected Nehru was still hoping for some kind of a deal. We were aware he had proposed one involving a Chinese return to the November 1959 line and an Indian return to the 8 September 1962 line. This might be why Nehru hadn't declared war.

The subject of Pakistani reactions was also discussed. Talbot indicated that there could be a wide swing in Pakistani attitudes if Assam was really threatened.

McNamara again urged getting a high level mission out to Delhi, including State and Intelligence people in order to concert a plan of action with the Indians. We needed a mission on the lines of the Taylor mission to Vietnam. Rusk preferred to see the UK take the lead on this mission, with us participating if desirable, rather than a straight US mission. It was pointed out that the more we got in front the more we would push Moscow toward Peiping.

The President decided that we should: (1) get a mission off to Delhi; (2) send some C-130s; (3) take care of the C-119 spare parts; and (4) push the UK to get the Commonwealth in, and decide what we want to tell Macmillan.

Rusk and Harriman showed the President a proposed press conference statement for Tuesday, indicating language which we had used previously in the Cabot-Wang talks to indicate to Peiping that we meant business. The President decided we ought to review the proposed press conference statement and put the Western response on a broader basis than that of the US alone. We should push the UK to get the Commonwealth involved.

McNamara couldn't understand why the Indians didn't use air. They could certainly tear up the Chicom roads.

There was some discussion of the desirability of using Tibetan guerrillas.

Talbot reminded the President of the “gentleman's agreement” limiting FY 63 aid to India. Gaud explained that in the light of new PL 480 needs we would run afoul of this agreement if we spent more than $25 million on military aid to India. The President preferred not to go to the congressional committee yet; however, he told Talbot to bring Senator Symington up to date.

RWK

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/26/62-11/27/62. Secret. Drafted by Komer on November 27.

1 The text of the U.S.-U.K. memorandum of understanding concerning the Sino-Indian conflict was transmitted in telegram 1865 from London, November 14. It is summarized in Document 198. A copy of the memorandum of understanding is attached to a November 19 memorandum from Rusk to Kennedy, recommending the President's approval of the agreed U.S.-U.K. approach to the conflict, subject to some minor suggested changes in language. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/19/62)

203. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 203. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, November 19, 1962, 20 p.m.

1891. Eyes Only President, Secretary and SecDef. Verbatim Text.

Following is text of message dated today from Prime Minister to President, to be delivered by B.K. Nehru. Copy handed me this evening by M.J. Desai.

Begin Text.

[The letter conveyed in telegram 1891 was the first of two letters sent by Nehru to Kennedy on November 19. The second was delivered to the White House by the Indian Ambassador on the evening of November 19. The text of that letter was transmitted to the Embassy in New Delhi in telegram 2167, November 19. These letters have not been declassified by the Indian Government. In his biography of Nehru, Gopal summarized these two letters as follows:

[”Nehru, apparently without consulting any of his Cabinet colleagues or officials, apart from the Foreign Secretary, M.J. Desai, wrote two letters to Kennedy describing the situation as 'really desperate' and requesting the immediate despatch of a minimum of twelve squadrons of supersonic all-weather fighters and the setting up of radar communications. American personnel would have to man these fighters and installations and protect Indian cities from air attacks by the Chinese till India personnel had been trained. If possible, the United States should also send planes flown by American personnel to assist the Indian Air Force in any battles with the Chinese in Indian air space; but aerial action by Indian elsewhere would be the responsibility of the Indian Air Force. Nehru also asked for two B-47 bomber squadrons to enable India to strike at Chinese bases and air fields, but to learn to fly these planes Indian pilots and technicians would be sent immediately for training in the United States. All such assistance and equipment would be utilized solely against the Chinese.” (Gopal, Jawaharlal Nehru, Vol. 3, pp. 228-229)]

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-1962. Secret; Niact. Received in the Department of State at 4:47 p.m. and relayed to the White House at 5:30 p.m.

204. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 204. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, November 19, 1962, 22:01 p.m.

2167. Eyes Only for Ambassador. The following letter was delivered to the President by the Indian Ambassador this evening, and is transmitted for your information in the event that a copy has not been delivered to Embassy. Department comments will follow in separate telegram.

“New Delhi 19th November 1962.

[This letter has not been declassified by the Indian Government. For a summary, see Document 203.]1

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-1962. Top Secret; Niact; Verbatim Text. Drafted in S by William E. Knepper and approved by Breisky (S/S).

1 Printed from a copy that has no signature.

205. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 205. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, November 19, 1962, 11:06 p.m.

2170. Eyes Only Ambassador. Following first Nehru November 19 communication,1 your messages to President2 and assessment of military events last several days, following decisions taken highest levels: 1) Agreed US-UK program no longer sufficient in changed circumstances. Program approved in principle with recognition that much more must be done.

2) We acutely feel lack of information regarding GOI plans and capacity to meet this new situation. Accordingly, we are sending a small high-level team to arrive New Delhi approximately Friday to assess whole situation along with Indian plans and capability for meeting it and return with action recommendations as soon as possible. They may wish to visit scene of action on frontier. Team will include high ranking military officers both Army and Air with appropriate representation from State and CIA. Arranging best coordination we can with UK directly, but not waiting on them.

3) Immediate reinforcement Kelly team to full strength required carry out expanded program. Request your and his urgent recommendations team level required and job specifications.

4) We are prepared to dispatch twelve or more C-130's at once to assist in any necessary movement of forces and equipment to Assam area or to Ladakh. This would be US operation with planes, crews support. Request your urgent advice whether Indians prepared to use this transport immediately.3 Also earliest estimates men and tonnage involved. Special airlift team being dispatched at once. This provides another opportunity for you to remind Indians about importance of moving troops from Pakistan border. Urgency of situation underlines anomaly of Indian reluctance in this respect.

5) For continuing build-up Indian airlift capacity we also prepared urgently airlift at least critically needed spare parts C-119's. Best procedure appears send maintenance team already named at once to assess need and determine effective measures.

6) This as far as we can see to go on basis of facts now available here. However, supply actions urgently needed and assessed as valid need not be delayed despite lack of clear picture Indian capabilities. View possibility India now ready use tactical air, one airlift requirement may be bombs request of UK. London should raise this and ascertain availability and British air shipment capabilities.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/11-1962. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Kaysen and approved by Talbot and Rusk. Repeated to London and Karachi.

1 See Document 203.

2 Not further identified.

3 The Embassy confirmed the need for the C-130s on November 20, and the Department responded on the same day that the Department of Defense was dispatching 12 C-130 aircraft to India. (Telegrams 1914 from New Delhi and 2191 to New Delhi, both November 20; Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/11-2062)

206. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 206. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, November 20, 1962, 12:50 a.m.

2172. Eyes Only for Ambassador from Secretary. We have just forwarded to you second letter from Nehru today anticipated in your 1889.1 As we read this message it amounts to a request for an active and practically speaking unlimited military partnership between the United States and India to take on Chinese invasion India. This involves for us the most far-reaching political and strategic issues and we are not at all convinced that Indians are prepared to face the situation in the same terms. I recall that more than once in past two years I have expressed to various Indian representatives my concern that their policy would lead to a situation where they would call upon us for assistance when it is too late rather than give their and free world policy any opportunity for preventive effectiveness.

It is not our purpose now to rehash the past but to look at present situation in its fullest reality. The essential question is whether Peiping is now engaged in an all-out assault on India or is pushing its territorial claims up to the extreme limits of Chinese pretentions. Nehru's latest message indicates his assessment that the Chinese are determined to push far beyond disputed areas and that this is in fact a genuine attack on India.

If this is so then it is apparent that India is faced with the necessity of mobilizing every possible resource in its support and that every other question must be subordinated to its own defense and national existence. It seems that, therefore, PriMin must now consider maximum diplomatic, political and military effort to encompass the following:

(1) The enlistment of full Pakistani cooperation at whatever cost in terms of lesser question between the two countries including Kashmir. The United States cannot give maximum military support to India while most of India's forces are engaged against Pakistan over an issue where American interest in self-determination of the peoples directly concerned has caused us since 1954 to be sympathetic to Pakistan's claims. To put it in most brutal terms, India may now face a choice between Pakistani assistance in the defense of India and some kind of satisfaction of Pakistan's interest in the Kashmir question.

(2) We have seen little evidence thus far of India's attempt to mobilize the traditional commitments of the British Commonwealth. We believe the defense of India is in the first instance a Commonwealth problem though there are no formal treaty commitments within that structure. If India considers that it is faced with a war against China, it would be very difficult for the United States to give maximum assistance without the fullest participation of at least the old Commonwealth and without the elimination of such anomalies as normal Commonwealth relations with Peiping and the shipment of large supplies of foodstuffs from Canada and Australia to Red China. India must, we think, insist upon maximum Commonwealth support in its struggle against China. Specifically, any requests for assistance made of us should also be addressed to the British.

(3) A third factor is the United Nations. We can understand that Nehru might have been reluctant to raise question of Chinese aggression in United Nations so long as he had any hope that Russia would not be forced to support Peiping. On the other hand, the full mobilization of world opinion against Red China could bring to bear political, economic and psychological pressures on Peiping which would add strength to the relative ineffectiveness thus far of Indian arms. In any event, full United States support for India would be much easier and more palatable to the American people if there were near unanimity in the United Nations that this was an aggression rejected by the entire world community, and on which India had the widest possible international support.

(4) Further, we have seen little evidence that India has attempted to mobilize the political and practical support of other nations in southern and Southeast Asia also bordering on or near Red China and interested in resistance to Red Chinese expansion. India's heretofore cavalier attitude toward communist penetration Southeast Asia is obviously an obstacle to Asian solidarity in this situation, but a maximum diplomatic effort to trade support for support with these countries is clearly called for.

(5) Latest message from PriMin in effect proposes not only a military alliance between India and the United States but complete commitment by us to a fighting war. We recognized this might be immediate reaction of a Government in a desperate position but it is a proposal which cannot be reconciled with any further pretense of non-alignment. If this is what Nehru has in mind, he should be entirely clear about it before we even consider our own decision.

There are strong reasons why the United States should not appear to be the point of the spear in assisting India in this situation. The most impelling of these is that our role might force Moscow to support Peiping. We shall be considering here whether there is anything we can constructively say to Moscow about China's reckless and provocative action because there is some reason to believe that Moscow is also very much worried about the dangerous possibility. I would emphasize, however, India must mobilize its own diplomatic and political resources, seek the broadest base of support throughout the world and, more particularly, enlist the active interest and participation of the Commonwealth.

Please let us have your comments on the above urgently before we reply to the PriMin's latest letter to the President.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-2062. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by Rusk, cleared by the President, and approved by Talbot.

1 Dated November 19. (Ibid., 691.93/11-1962) [Regarding Nehru's letter, see Documents 203 and 204.]

207. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 207. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, November 20, 1962, 22 p.m.

913. Policy. Department telegram 7791 and 782.2 I had extremely important and useful conversation with Foreign Minister Mohammed Ali this morning after delivering Secretary's letter. Full report follows in next message3 but key points made by Mohammed Ali were: 1. GOP had reached decision adhere to present basic foreign policy orientation, including pacts, and to support U.S. leadership, largely because no alternative to this policy for present. President would so inform National Assembly in camera but Mohammed Ali would be less frank in public. Difficulties expected in making this decision stick in National Assembly but Government working hard organize pro-Government elements. Our recent actions helpful in some respects.

2. Chinese military victories in India over past few days have had some sobering effect and Mohammed Ali did not minimize Pakistan worry over Indian military situation, or worry over recognized ultimate Chinese threat to Pakistan.

3. Chinese victories have encouraged tendency avoid any provocation Chinese Communists now. I surmised that Pakistanis have had in mind for some time some overture to Chinese Communists, probably high level visit, and that plan has not been abandoned.

4. Timely Indian gesture which in some form indicates Kashmir issue negotiable would be very important in strengthening Ayub's hand in fending off extremists and discouraging gesture to Chinese Communists.

Without directly accusing Government of holding such notions, I hit very hard at view that military aid would continue if Pakistanis left regional alliances and warned against accommodation with Chinese Communists. I think Mohammed Ali fully understood my warnings.

I felt somewhat encouraged after talk with Mohammed Ali but do not feel we are by any means out of woods here. Mohammed Ali may not completely or accurately reflect mood of Government and Ayub may not be able to keep control over National Assembly. Nevertheless, no doubt that Chinese victories have caused some sober second thoughts.

I would suggest in conversation with Aziz Ahmed Department stress military situation in India, but my warnings not reiterated for moment. I think it would be preferable if tougher line restricted to our talks here for next few days.

McConaughy

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/11-2062. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Received at 2:37 p.m. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

1 See footnote 3, Document 201.

2 Document 201.

3 Telegram 914 from Karachi, November 21. (Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/11-2162)

208. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 208. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, November 20, 1962, 22:31 p.m.

2196. Eyes Only for the Ambassador. Unless you think it inappropriate, please deliver the following message to Prime Minister Nehru as soon as feasible.

“Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

I was on the point of responding to your two urgent letters1 when we received news of the Chinese statements on a cease-fire.2 I, of course, wish your assessment of whether it makes any change in your situation. I had planned to write you that we are ready to be as responsive as possible to your needs, in association with the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth. We remain prepared to do so.

We had already organized a small group of top U.S. officials, who would arrive in New Delhi Friday,3 to help Ambassador Galbraith in concerting with your government how we can best help. It seems useful to go ahead with this effort as planned and we will do so unless you think it inadvisable.”

FYI: The team is one described in Deptel 2170.4 Full details are being sent separately. You might suggest to Nehru that even under changed circumstances the team would be useful as a tangible gesture of US support.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-2062. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Komer, cleared by Talbot and Rusk, and approved by the President.

1 See Documents 203 and 204.

2 On November 21, the Chinese Government announced that a cease-fire would be observed by Chinese forces along the entire Himalayan front as of midnight on that date. Chinese forces would be withdrawn and checkpoints would be established. Provided the Indian Government took corresponding measures, China was prepared to enter into negotiations with India to seek a resolution of the conflict. (The New York Times, November 21, 1962)

3 The group, headed by Averell Harriman and including Paul Nitze, Carl Kaysen, Roger Hilsman, and General Paul D. Adams, arrived on Thursday, November 22.

4 Document 205.

209. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 209. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, November 21, 1962, 11 a.m.

1973. Eyes Only Secretary. Verbatim Text. Department Telegram 2196.1

M.J. Desai handed me this afternoon copy Prime Minister's response, dated today, to message contained reference telegram.

Begin text:

[This letter has not been declassified by the Indian Government.]

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-2162. Secret; Niact.

1 Document 208.

210. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 210. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, November 23, 1962, 6:09 p.m.

2274. Eyes Only for Harriman and Galbraith from the President. Messages from New Delhi show your watchfulness on the matter but I want to emphasize again that I think it is important that we neither push the Indians forward nor hold them back in the present phase. We do not wish to be responsible either for war or for truce. We should be ready to cooperate with them, subject to obvious limits of our capabilities, in whatever course they choose, but it must be for them to make the choices. Obviously we should not hesitate to give advice against more obvious forms of political or military rashness and our calmness should be a counterpoise to shaken Indian confidence. But we cannot allow them to put off on us the basic responsibilities which must remain Indian.1

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-2362. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy, cleared by the President and Talbot, and approved by Rusk.

1 In telegram 2032, November 24, Galbraith responded: “There are few matters on which I have been so clear as the need to avoid either cheering the Indians on to battle or telling them to make peace, each with its attendant responsibilities for blame.” He noted that Harriman agreed. (Ibid., 691.93/11-2462)

211. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 211. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, November 25, 1962, 10:40 p.m.

2329. Eyes Only for the Ambassador and Harriman. For Harriman from the President. While the ostensible purpose of your stopover in Pakistan is to inform Ayub generally on your Delhi talks, I also regard it as a major opportunity to show Ayub how radically the Sino-Indian confrontation has altered the situation in the subcontinent from our point of view. We have had to look at this situation in terms of Free World security and we regard it as a major test of our alliance ties as well as Ayub's statesmanship whether he does so too.

Up to this time we have been prepared to disregard as much as possible a basic difference in viewpoint between us and the Pakistani as to what our alliance meant. They have always regarded it primarily as a basis for soliciting support of their aims vis-a-vis India. We have regarded it as part of the total free world defense against Bloc aggression, a contingency that Ayub seems to have regarded as remote. Now that it has actually occurred, however, it must take precedence in our thinking. It ought to do so in Pak and Indian thinking too. As and when this sinks in, our task of promoting Pak-Indian reconciliation will grow easier.

Regrettably, Ayub has elected instead to pursue at least initially a tough line toward India and, for obvious reasons, toward us. Though I recognize that he is under some domestic pressure, at a moment like this there are limits on how far we can live with this attitude. Whether the present Sino-Indian crisis ends in a negotiated settlement or continues to boil, the Indians will almost certainly wish to undertake a major modernization of their forces. We shall be pressed to become the chief underwriter and cannot sustain the additional costs implicit in continued Pak-Indian quarrels. These costs have already been great enough.

I also believe that the Sino-Indian confrontation has given us what may be a one-time opportunity to bring about a Pak-Indian reconciliation. Though this opportunity may be fleeting, we still ought to seize it if we can. Success will require movement in both the Pakistani and Indian positions. Yet unless both Pakistan and India look clearly at their fundamental interest in partnership this opportunity may be lost. We cannot expect quick results, but can hope to set in motion a trend which will bring about, with a lot of nursing along from us, a resolution of such issues as Kashmir.

I do not want to push Ayub so hard as to get his back up, yet I think it imperative that he be under no illusion as to where we stand. Frank talk carries risks, but these seem to me less than those entailed in failing to make our position clear. I count on you to do so. Therefore, while you and McConaughy will of course choose the manner of your presentation, please tell Ayub that I have specifically asked you to make the following points to him: (1) Whatever India's past follies, the Chicom attack and India's response to it create a basically new situation. We regard this as far more than a mere border squabble, even if it ends in a temporary settlement. By the Chinese action, the subcontinent has become a new area of major confrontation between the Free World and the Communists. We must take this fact into account in our global policy.

(2) The Indians themselves are at long last fully aware of the Chinese Communist threat and appear to be determined to meet it. This creates a recognized community of interest between India and Pakistan, which India is beginning to acknowledge. It provides a basis for the resolution of Pak-Indian differences which did not previously exist.

(3) We for our part have made clear time and again that our alliance ties with Pakistan were for the express purpose of meeting the Communist threat. Now that India too recognizes this threat and is seeking to cope with it, we intend to provide help to meet that threat.

(4) We regard such aid to India as fully consistent with our ties to Pakistan because there is no blinking the fact that the threat to the subcontinent is a threat to the security and independence of both.

(5) Were Pakistan to move closer to the Chinese at a time when we were assisting India to confront Communist China, it would cut across the deep commitments of the entire free world. We know Ayub has no illusions about the Chicoms, but we would regard such gestures as wholly incompatible with Pakistan's own interests, traditions, and commitments. Pakistan must realize that there are certain limits which should not be overstepped if a fruitful Pak-US relationship can continue. The American people have a million men in uniform outside the United States in defense of the freedom and independence of nations and are taking casualties every week. The esteem and friendship of the American people for Pakistan would melt away if Pakistan elects to draw close to those who are the sworn enemies of freedom.

(6) Indeed we think the opposite course from that which Ayub pursuing publicly is far better calculated to lead to the resolution of Pak-Indian differences which we and Ayub seek. The more forthcoming Pakistan is toward India, the harder it will be for India to avoid movement in its direction. By the same token, the tougher the Pak attitude, the less likely India can risk the humiliation of appearing to knuckle under. Thus the current Pak attitude risks diverting India from primary focus on the Chicom threat, a focus which can only benefit Pakistan in the long run.

(7) The US too will continue to do all it can to bring the two countries together. We have not been pressing Pakistan alone. But we cannot command we can only persuade. This means Ayub as well as Nehru. Nevertheless, we see the current situation as moving both parties toward the point where we can assist in a reasonable compromise involving some give by both parties. Indeed, should Ayub himself be prepared to be forthcoming, we are prepared to tell Nehru that if we give him major military aid he should agree to negotiate at a suitable point on Kashmir. Ayub cannot ask more of us, and we are unable to provide more.

(8) Meanwhile, though we recognize Ayub's public opinion problem, he should bear in mind: (a) that if he lets it get out of hand he may end up losing his room to maneuver; (b) current Pak outbursts make it that much more difficult for India to be forthcoming; (c) the US public and Congress will be adversely affected by what they tend increasingly to regard as irrational Pak outbursts. In fact you might cite the 23 Nov. Washington Post interview in which Eisenhower, whom the Paks regard as a friend, is reported as favoring all-out military aid to India, but warns that any US commitment must be carried through until the Chinese are decisively beaten back.

(9) As to military aid, we are fulfilling our commitments to Pakistan and we intend to help India if it wants our help. Both steps are essential to the security of the subcontinent. We have conveyed adequate security reassurances to both India and Pakistan. We've never committed ourselves to any particular military balance between the two, nor can we do so.

(10) In sum, we intend to stand by our commitments to Pakistan and to protect its integrity. I regard this as more than justifying Pakistan's reciprocal alliance obligations to us. In return we ask Ayub to examine dispassionately the great opportunity he and Nehru have to resolve Pak-Indian difference in the cause of solidarity against the Chicom threat. We will press this case on both powers and be guided largely by their responses.

In requesting you to press Ayub along the above lines, I am proceeding on the assumption that in the last analysis he will go along with us. This is foreshadowed by Mohammed Ali's statement (Karachi 913)1 that Pakistan would not sacrifice its alliance with us because it had no sound alternative course. So I am convinced that with the right combination of patience and firmness we can bring Ayub to take a reasonable course in his own interest.

Your mission will be an unqualified success if we can get the following from Ayub: (1) recognition that he must start re-educating his public before things drift too far; (2) indications of his willingness to respond to Indian overtures, so that we can encourage Nehru to make them; (3) minimizing of attacks on the US, which only redound to Pak disadvantage; and (4) cutting off his flirtation with Peiping on matters other than their own border problem. In return we can assure Ayub that we will take full account of Pak interests in our dealings with India.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/11-2562. Secret; Niact; Eyes Only. Repeated to Karachi and London eyes only for the Ambassadors. A note on the source text indicates that the approved text of the telegram was supplied to the Department of State for transmission by the White House. Komer, Talbot, Rusk, and the President are listed as having cleared it. White House telegram CAP 5551-62, November 25, from Komer to the President at Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, transmitted the text to the President for approval. Komer noted that the telegram was drafted on instructions from Bundy, who had cleared an earlier draft. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 11/24/62-11/25/62)

1 Document 207.

212. Memorandum of Conversation 212. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Rawalpindi, November 28, 1962.

PARTICIPANTS

H.E. Mohammad Ayub Khan, President of Pakistan

H.E. Duncan Sandys, U.K. Minister for Commonwealth Relations

W. Averell Harriman, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

On arrival in Rawalpindi (November 28, 5:00 p.m.) I was informed by Ambassador McConaughy that President Ayub wanted me to dine with him and Duncan Sandys alone and that Sandys wanted to see me half an hour before dinner in order to bring me up to date on what transpired. Ambassador McConaughy told me that Sandys had informed President Ayub of Nehru's willingness to start discussions regarding Kashmir without preconditions on any level; Sandys was proposing that first a preliminary meeting be held between Ayub and Nehru at New Delhi, since it was Ayub's turn to go to the Indian capital. President Ayub wanted to talk to me before making up his mind.

In my discussion with Sandys before dinner, he argued for a President-Prime Minister meeting, and I told him that I would think it wise to hold such a meeting only if the communique to be issued at the end of the meeting be agreed to in advance. Without such an agreement it would be dangerous since Ayub and Nehru found it difficult to negotiate due to the difference in the personalities of the two men. Sandys bought this idea. Sandys and I then drove to President Ayub's house and had a long talk with him before going into dinner. Sandys produced a draft communique announcing a meeting between the President and the Prime Minister in New Delhi, including a sentence to the effect that the objective of the meeting would be to decide on methods and procedure to settle the differences between their two countries. I then outlined my thought of an agreement in advance on the final communique to be issued at the close of the meeting. After some discussion, Ayub said if we are to agree upon a communique at the end of the discussions, why have a meeting at all—why not agree now on that communique by correspondence between himself and Nehru? I readily accepted this and so did Sandys. Taking the first sentence of Sandys' paper, Ayub dictated, with some discussion of each sentence, the following communique to be issued:

The President of Pakistan and the Prime Minister of India have agreed that renewed effort should be made without delay to resolve the Kashmir problem so as to enable their two countries to live side by side free from anxiety.

In consequence, they have decided to open negotiations at an early date with the object of reaching an honorable and equitable settlement.

The negotiations will be conducted initially at the ministerial level. At the appropriate stage direct talks will be held between Mr. Nehru and President Ayub.

Sandys agreed to take this draft to Nehru, attempt to get his approval and signature, and bring it back to Rawalpindi for President Ayub's signature. We all hoped that it might be possible to issue the communique on Friday morning.1

While the draft communique was being retyped, we had a discussion ranging over a wide area. In answer to Ayub's questions, Sandys and I expressed our views of the climate of opinion in India on the possibility of reaching a settlement on Kashmir. Sandys expressed himself somewhat more optimistically than I did. I explained that I had been struck by the unity of purpose which had developed in India in recognizing the long-range danger of Chinese Communist aggression. Domestic difficulties were being put aside by the people all over the country. In the villages people were enlisting, contributing funds, and asking what they could do to help in this national emergency. I explained I had found that everyone with whom I had talked, unanimously spoke of the emergency in long-range terms. It was therefore natural that the minds of many were turned towards the importance of settling differences with Pakistan so that their entire energy could be directed towards the Communist menace. I told President Ayub that I thought some further time would be needed to get all the Ministers, as well as public opinion, in a mood to make a reasonable settlement but that I felt the time was running in the right direction and that it was essential to start negotiations which in themselves would focus public opinion on the issue.

Ayub insisted that Kashmir be named as the problem. He rejected the idea of a vaguer reference to “differences between the two countries.” Both Sandys and I made it plain that it would be impossible to have a plebiscite, that the Vale as such could not be transferred to Pakistan, but that there was an understanding in India that they had to make certain concessions beyond the present cease-fire line. We both told him we had not discussed details and did not know how far the India Government was ready to go at the present time. Ayub accepted this situation and recognized that the negotiations on Kashmir might last a considerable time, but under the formula it was proposed in the communique there was considerable flexibility of continuing discussions even though the first talks might not reach a satisfactory conclusion.

We discussed Chinese intentions. Ayub said he believed that their intentions were only to insure control of the Sinkiang road and a certain part of Ladakh. I pointed out that this might be their immediate objective but that they did not have to attack in the NEFA area in order to achieve this objective. I underlined the opinion of all the Indians I had talked to that Red China was determined to destroy India's independence and way of life. Ayub did not contradict this and talked as if he recognized the long-range menace of Red China to the subcontinent. There was no suggestion of a non-aggression pact between Pakistan and Red China.

We discussed Khrushchev's motives in Cuba. President Ayub expressed great admiration for the manner in which President Kennedy handled the Cuban question.

President Ayub said he believed the differences between Moscow and Peiping were real but that if Red China got into military difficulties, the Soviet Union would come to her assistance. There seemed to be no intimation that President Ayub thought that Pakistan could make a special deal and thus avoid the dangers of either Soviet or Chinese Communist aggressive intentions.

We discussed at some length the relationship between Nehru and Krishna Menon with general agreement that Krishna Menon had spoken for Nehru. I believe that Sandys and I convinced Ayub that Krishna Menon was out for good, that Nehru did not have, any longer, the unchallenged authority to bring him back.

Sandys and I touched on the military situation in India but did not go into details as I explained that General Adams was here to brief President Ayub the next morning, although we did give some indication of the size of British and American assistance so far. At dinner President Ayub reverted to the subject of our military assistance, turning to me and saying, “Now tell me about this assistance you are giving to India.” I gave him the general order of dimensions emphasizing that the loss of the equipment by the Fourth Division alone was far in excess in anything we had delivered or had agreed to deliver so far. I pointed out, however, that India had plans for long-range military build-up which the Government was now determined to undertake in order that they would not be helpless against Communist attack in the future. We left it that we would discuss this subject in more detail the next day. In answer to my question Ayub told me of the commencement of the de-salinization program. He expressed hopes that it would be successful, although it would take a long time. He talked about his visit to the Hunza area and he expressed the hope that he could come to an agreement with Peiping over the boundary but would insist on retaining the Hunza grazing areas.

At one point, touching on Khrushchev's desire to avoid nuclear war, he said, “Yes, I know your views. I read your book which you had sent to me.” He did not, however, take issue with this statement and agreed that at the present time Red China was more reckless. Cuba had been proof of Khrushchev's brinkmanship methods, leaving open always an opportunity to withdraw.

He spoke warmly of President Kennedy and with satisfaction of his visit to Washington. He pointed to a framed photograph on the wall.

Dehlavi was present throughout the evening but rarely injected himself in the discussion except at one point he mentioned that they had received an offer from Turkey to undertake mediation on Kashmir. Sandys pointed out that a Turkish offer would not go very well in New Delhi. President Ayub discussed at some length his difficulties with Nehru. He mentioned that when a subject came up which Nehru did not wish to discuss, he simply sat silent, which President Ayub said was most disconcerting. President Ayub asked about the Soviet MIGS. Sandys said that the Soviet Union had declined to furnish them. I said that my information maintained that they had postponed delivery, attempting to straddle the relationship (their “friend” India and their “ally” China).

President Ayub was cordial throughout the evening, relaxed, showed no strain or scars from the debate in the Assembly in the statements of the opposition.

I did not raise any of the other subjects I have in mind discussing, as I felt it was desirable to concentrate on the commencement of negotiations over Kashmir. He may well become more perturbed when we get into some of the questions about which he has been critical of U.S. policy and actions.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/11-2862. Secret. Drafted by Harriman. The meeting was held at President Ayub's residence.

1 Sandys returned to New Delhi on November 29 to discuss the text of the proposed joint statement with Nehru. Nehru accepted the statement, conditional upon one substantive change. He requested that the first paragraph be amended: change “to resolve the Kashmir problem” to read “to resolve the outstanding differences between their two countries on Kashmir and other matters.” (Telegram 2158 from New Delhi, November 29; ibid., 690D.91/11-2962) With the alteration of “other matters” to read “other related matters,” Ayub accepted the proposed change and the joint communique was released on Friday, November 30. (Telegram 964 from Karachi, November 29; ibid.)

213. Memorandum of Conversation 213. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Rawalpindi, November 29, 1962.

PARTICIPANTS

H.E. Mohammad Ayub Khan, President of Pakistan

The Honorable Averell Harriman, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

I called on President Ayub alone Thursday afternoon, November 29, at 6:00 p.m. at his Residence. He asked if I objected to his bringing in his secretary (namely Dehlavi, the Foreign Secretary).

I replied that I did since I wanted to talk personally.

I started in by asking him whether he was concerned over his political position now that he had instituted the constitutional procedures. He replied that he was not. He could count on over 80 votes out of 156 membership in the Assembly. He could not act as freely as before, and it would take him longer to get things done. He commented that this was in the direction of democratic processes that we believe in. We must not expect too rapid development of democracy as in the East people didn't understand it. In reply to my question he said the opposition was largely self-serving politicians. I told him that the President and Secretary of State wanted to do all we could to help strengthen his position and asked what we might do.

He replied three things: (1) Use our influence to get a Kashmir settlement.

(2) Don't press him for disengagement with India in the meantime.

(3) Go slow on urging joint defense of subcontinent. This would come automatically with the Kashmir settlement.

In answer to my question on what I might say helpfully to the press, he suggested I say “Circumstances force us to give military aid to India but emphasize that Pakistan is our close friend and ally. We realize Kashmir is Pakistan's major problem.” I suggested that I might add that since the attack of Red China more and more people in India were beginning to realize the necessity of a Kashmir settlement. It was interesting that he suggested that I use the words “under the changed circumstances more and more people,” etc. He obviously did not want me to refer to Red Chinese aggression.

I underlined the damage that the talk about non-aggression pact was to Pakistan's good will in the U.S. He said to pay no attention to such talk, it was unthinkable for him to do such a thing. (Foreign Minister Mohammad Ali confirmed this when I saw him on Friday.)

I still maintained it was dangerous to permit such speculation. Such talk could irreparably damage confidence in Pakistan's responsibility as an ally. He and his country were now considered one of staunchest and steadfast friends. This was an asset not lightly to be thrown away. I also referred to the anti-American press and Assembly speeches. He belittled these, said he had to allow free discussion, and referred to our freedom of press. I urged him not to let it get out of hand as he might become a prisoner of the public opinion that was being developed.

At that moment (6:35 p.m.) a message was brought in from the British High Commissioner, Sir Morrice James, that Nehru had accepted the word “related” between “other … matters.” I said that I thought President Ayub had been wise in holding out for “related” matters. This was a first test of Nehru's sincerity in starting discussions.

James came in and there were mutual congratulations. I commented that this was a good start but only a start. Ayub replied that he understood that but was counting on our help in getting a fair settlement. He said he understood that any fair settlement would be unpopular in both countries.

After James left, I asked Ayub if there was any particular subject in connection with U.S. aid that he wanted me to look into when I got back to Washington. He thought for a minute and said he couldn't think of anything, although some of our people were unnecessarily suspicious and slow in taking action. He said he wanted me to see his Planning Commissioner, Said Hassan, when I got to Karachi. In taking my leave he asked me to give the President his warmest regards. He expressed the highest admiration for the manner in which the President had handled the Cuban crisis.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/11-2962. Secret. Drafted by Harriman on January 8, 1963.

214. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 214. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, November 30, 1962, 5 p.m.

2178. Harriman talks with Nehru.

Harriman met Prime Minister Nehru four times; courtesy call shortly after arrival November 22; November 23 with Ambassador, Nitze, Kaysen and M.J. Desai present; November 25 alone and November 28 with Ambassador. At November 23 meeting in response Harriman question Nehru said ChiCom primary purpose to humiliate India. Nehru then reviewed history of border dispute, recalling Chou En-lai December 1956 statement to Nehru he would accept McMahon line de facto and Chou's later denial of statement; Chou's 1956 offer trade NEFA status quo for ChiCom Ladakh claims which Nehru rejected; unproductive talks by officials following Nehru's rejection Chou's offer. Nehru observed that Aksai Chin and road valuable to ChiComs but rest Ladakh had no value. Harriman asked whether India had ever made offer to ChiComs on that corner Ladakh. Nehru said no, explained his offer of mutual withdrawal to line claimed by other side after which India prepared let ChiComs use road for civil purposes; said this offer repeated May 1962. Nehru emphasized India in undisputed possession NEFA for 50 years whatever ChiComs said about legal basis McMahon line. ChiCom attack in NEFA obviously required long preparation. Nehru several times said ChiCom intention was to deliver hard blow and make it [an?] agreement, then use time prepare for next blow and repeat pattern. Thus October 20 attack followed by October 24 offer, November 15 attack followed by November 21 cease fire. Nehru said India sure ChiComs would look forward to prolongation of truce for while.

Harriman asked whether ChiComs would carry discussions through if initiated now or break off. Nehru replied ChiComs would carry through if they could get agreement favorable them. Harriman asked what Nehru intended do in immediate future. Nehru replied cease-fire now in effect and he assumed ChiComs will withdraw December 1. It Nehru's understanding India could not go into territory vacated by ChiComs. M.J. Desai intervened say India could keep troops up to 20 kilometers south McMahon line and send administrative and police personnel up to line. Ambassador asked whether there had been any actual withdrawals yet. Nehru said there had; Desai said only in Ladakh but in NEFA ChiComs only had said they prepared withdraw. Harriman asked what would happen December 1. Nehru said ChiComs would withdraw and wait for India act. Harriman asked what would happen if India did nothing to which Nehru replied ChiComs would still withdraw. Nehru added it would be foolish for India march forward. Harriman asked whether Nehru inclined change his position on ChiCom offer expressed in his letter of November 14. Nehru said he would not accept ChiCom offer; he must say something but offer had previously been rejected. Ambassador asked about other possibilities, noting that ChiComs had best of propaganda in Afro-Asian countries and suggesting India might call for neutral observers with or without involving UN. Further discussion ChiCom proposal followed and Harriman asked whether cease-fire would last indefinitely if India made no response ChiCom offer. Nehrureplied that ChiComs would probably advance further after some interval. Nehru mentioned difficult situation created by Brahmaputra river strike in East Pakistan and its effects on tea exports.

Harriman asked whether Nehru had decided give answer to ChiComs and if so what would he say. Nehru said he obviously had to answer. In three or four days he would say something and raise various objections. Harriman and Ambassador referred to public presentation Indian case and importance of making reasonable counter offer to put onus on ChiComs. At moment ChiComs look reasonable and this advantage had to be taken away from them. Desai reviewed ChiCom offer in Ladakh and indicated why he thought it unacceptable. Nitze gave his preliminary view that it would take at least until end of next year for Indians to get into good military position.

Second Harriman meeting with Nehru alone November 25 was for primary purpose discussing India-Pak relations and possibility of Kashmir settlement. Harriman explained there two aspects: 1) immediate problem of calming Ayub and Paks from their emotional binge against India and US and pro-China; 2) long-run problem of defense of subcontinent; said unless tensions relieved US position untenable if it was asked give aid both Pakistan and India with part of aid being used for defense against the other. In response first point Nehru said he could not make further gesture towards Ayub. He had written letter he considered cordial and had had no reply. In addition, India had been humiliated by ChiCom attack and public opinion would not stand for further humiliation in making concessions to Pakistan. When pressed on this point Nehru went into considerable detail on history negotiations with Pakistan over Kashmir and constant failure reach agreement on any basis acceptable to India. If GOI were now to make concessions public would not stand for it. In fact it might touch off violent communal rioting endangering lives of 40 million Indian Muslims. Harriman said number of Nehru's colleagues indicated they thought time right for settlement. Discussion at some length followed on possible basis for settlement. Nehru rejected giving half to Pakistan or independent status for Kashmir but agreed some arrangements such as those proposed by M.J. Desai and Ambassador Galbraith might be acceptable. Harriman pressed Nehru on immediate importance relieving tensions and suggested discussions might begin between two governments. At first Nehru rejected this on grounds that if discussions failed it would make situation even worse. He finally agreed that if Ayub were willing he would join in starting negotiations preferably on Ministerial level.

Nehru indicated that present not best time for settlement from standpoint Indian opinion but agreed that more favorable climate might develop. This climate might be encouraged if Ayub and his colleagues would make some friendly gesture towards India to offset torrent of abuse which had poured forth since ChiCom aggression. Harriman asked Nehru think over situation and expressed hope Nehru could arm him with some proposal before his departure for Pakistan on November 28.

Harriman raised subject Nehru's request to President for air assistance. Nehru said he not pressing matter now as he did not believe ChiComs would attack at least for some months. He thought ChiComs wanted make deal and cited in support this view that ChiComs pressing Afro-Asian bloc to bring pressure on India. Harriman said our military were discussing air assistance request with British and Indian Air Force. If anything to be provided Commonwealth countries should come in first. Harriman explained subject being discussed without commitment.

Harriman told Nehru that Duncan Sandys had been informed by Morarji Desai that Soviets had definitely declined supply MIGs. Nehru replied that Desai could not have had latest information and what he had told Sandys must have been based on earlier talk by Indian Ambassador Moscow with a Soviet Deputy Commissar of Foreign Affairs. Recently Khrushchev assured Indian Ambassador that MIG factory would be delivered in couple of years and in meantime the few MIGs under discussion would be delivered in ample time for training purposes. Nehru gave impression he trying minimize importance of matter. Meeting lasted little less than hour. At parting Nehru thanked Harriman again for US aid and promptness of US response to India's request.

At final meeting with Nehru November 28 Harriman and Ambassador stressed to Nehru Ayub's domestic difficulties and urged it in India's interest work out settlement with Paks. Also pointed out to Nehru necessity of devising formula that would help Ayub domestically and strengthen him against his critics there. Nehru said he amenable talks but indicated he had very limited concept in mind such as adjustment cease fire line. Ambassador said this not enough. By end of talks Nehru agreed he willing enter talks with open mind and without pre-conditions. Harriman impression of last meeting was that Nehru had become clearer minded and more down to earth than he had been at earlier meetings.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 120.1591/11-3062. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Karachi, Hong Kong, London, and Moscow.

215. Memorandum of Meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council 215. Memorandum of Meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, December 3, 1962, 10 a.m.

All present plus Stevenson and Governor Harriman and several members of his mission.

Harriman reviewed in some detail the report of his mission as covered in the written report of 34 pages, undated (issued Dec. 3).1 He made a firm recommendation that we support the initial phase of the Indian requirements which were covered in the London meeting, and that careful study be given to phase two which involves the re-equipping of three divisions and setting up three additional divisions so the Indians would have a total of 16 divisions, 15 regular plus one armored division.

Harriman reviewed the Pakistan-Indian problem in detail, indicating some hope, though quite remote, of a settlement.

With reference to the Soviet position and a question from the President, Harriman advised that apparently the MIG deal was off though Nehru had stated it had merely been postponed. Nehru seemed intent on maintaining a relationship with the Soviets. There were no indications that the Soviets have intervened to stop the Chinese Communists; on the other hand Mr. Harriman reached the conclusion that the ChiComs had only limited objectives which they had accomplished and that they did not at this time intend to attempt conquest of the Assam Plain. It is quite possible their objectives might be extended in the future but only after further preparation on their part.

With respect to the London agreement,2 it appears there is no firm understanding of how the costs of the initial phase are to be divided, but the agreement calls for each side to supply the equipment which it is best equipped to supply. The British have agreed on 10 million pounds and may add another 5 million pounds. The Canadians and Australians have indicated modest help. McNamara protested the arrangement, stating that it might require between 120 and 150 million dollars from the United States. The President expressed the belief that we should split on a 50-50 basis with the Commonwealth. A subcommittee was appointed to work out details.

[Here follows discussion unrelated to South Asia.]

John A. McCone3

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, McCone Files, Job 80 B 01285A, Box 6, DCI Meetings with the President, 1 July 1962-3 December 1962. Top Secret. Drafted by McCone.

1 A copy of Harriman's report is in Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Subcommittee on South Asia. The conclusions of the report are summarized in Document 220.

2 Reference is to the agreement transmitted in telegram 1865 from London, November 14, which is summarized in Document 198.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

216. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 216. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, December 5, 1962, 8:40 p.m.

2988. Eyes Only Ambassador Bruce. For your information, the following message from President has been sent to Prime Minister via other channels.

“Dear Prime Minister:

You will by now have heard from your mission to India and Pakistan, as I have from mine. The success of their endeavors was far beyond my expectations. Duncan Sandys' effort in getting Nehru and Ayub to make public a statement of their desire to negotiate the Kashmir issue was a fine stroke. Having done so much, I think we must do more to follow up on our initial successes. As leader of the Commonwealth, I think you may well be in a position to provide the continuing push on Nehru and Ayub that will be required to keep the negotiations going with any prospect of a successful conclusion. I see advantages in having someone at a high level specially concerned with this task who can move freely between Delhi and Karachi in a way that your high commissioners and my ambassadors cannot, and yet is not in any formal way a mediator. I would appreciate your thoughts on the possibility of your finding a suitable person to assign to the task.

The time has come when we have to give some thought to putting our military assistance arrangements with India on a more formal basis. Our own thinking runs somewhat along the following lines. We are still in the emergency phase which the original agreement that your people and mine negotiated in London on Nov. 14 was intended to cover. While the character of emergency has changed, I think it is still desirable to build up the Indian forces to the extent possible within the next two or three months. After that, we will enter a phase of longer-run assistance where we must consider carefully the political implications of what we do. Before we embark on this program, we must get clear in our minds both a judgment of the Indian military requirements and a view of the relation between our assistance and the advance of India and Pakistan toward a settlement of the Kashmir dispute. A more exact judgment on these matters must await a detailed examination of Indian army requirements and plans which our military people brought home. As far as the first, or emergency phase, goes I have come to the conclusion that we should stand ready to offer as much as $60 million worth of assistance, including what we have already shipped. I hope that you and the Commonwealth countries will be prepared to operate with a similar ceiling, and that we can act so as to share the burden roughly equally between us.

A final problem to which I think we must give the closest attention is the question of Indian air defense. It is clear that the Indians are extremely fearful of the possibility of Chinese air attack on their cities. This fear has inhibited them from using their own air force in the tactical support of their armies. My military men estimate that the removal of this inhibition would contribute greatly to the Indian ability to resist a renewed Chinese attack. In view of the great expense and the long interval of the time required to provide the Indians with their own air defense capability, as well as the possible repercussions in Pakistan, it seems to me that we would do well to consider the extent to which we could agree to provide a certain amount of air defense operated by our own forces should the Indians need it. I would suggest that we undertake to provide the radar and other ground equipment necessary while you and some of the Commonwealth countries accept the commitment to send an appropriate number of fighter squadrons to India should the need arise. This is obviously a matter which will require some thought and one which we will wish to discuss when we meet.

Sincerely,

John F. Kennedy“

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 204, Kennedy Correspondence with Macmillan, 1962-63. Secret. Drafted in S/S by Benjamin Weiner, cleared by Bromley Smith, and approved by Weiner.

217. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 217. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, December 5, 1962, 8:58 p.m.

866. Ambassador requested deliver following letter to Ayub from the President at earliest opportunity:

“Dear Mr. President:

“Governor Harriman has told me in great detail of his talks with you and some of your Ministers. I want to thank you for the cordiality with which you received him and the members of his mission to Pakistan and India last week and for the personal message you asked him to give me.

“I am gratified that a start will be made on Kashmir, and I want to congratulate you on the statesmanlike approach you have taken. There is understanding here, of course, that a quick and easy solution to the problem is not possible. As you indicated to Governor Harriman, a settlement of the Kashmir issue will cause dissatisfaction among many in India and Pakistan. Yet you have shown yourself prepared to go ahead with determination to reach a settlement. The coming months will be a test of the patience, perseverance and good will of both countries. I welcome your decision most warmly. We stand prepared to give appropriate support and assistance in the search for a solution.

“Governor Harriman has told me of your appreciation of the threat that Chinese Communist aggression against India poses to Pakistan and, with the settlement of Kashmir, of the long term need of a combined plan for the defense of the subcontinent. Your discernment in this matter, going beyond the passions of the moment, is of the highest importance for your country and the whole free world. Governor Harriman has also told me that you understand the need for the United States and the United Kingdom to give military assistance to India to the extent necessary to make it possible for India to contain and defeat a renewed Chinese attack. This is the purpose for which we have been giving emergency military aid to India, and will guide us in consideration of longer-term programs. We shall keep in touch with you about further developments in our military aid to India.1

“This is a time not only of challenge but also of hope.

“With warm personal regards,

“Sincerely, John F. Kennedy“

In accordance with usual practice, this letter is not for publication.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790D.11/12-562. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Cameron; cleared by Talbot, Harriman, Rusk, and with the White House; and approved by Cameron. Repeated to New Delhi.

1 McConaughy delivered Kennedy's letter to Ayub on December 8. At the same time, he informed Ayub that the United States had provided some 5,000 tons of emergency military aid to India. Ayub indicated that this shipment could be taken in stride, but he expressed strong concern about the implications of a major build-up of India's military capability. McConaughy described Ayub as “open-minded and compromising” in his approach to the impending negotiations for a settlement to the Kashmir dispute, but concerned about the potential impact if the negotiations failed. (Telegram 1026 from Karachi, December 9; ibid., 791.56/12-962)

218. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 218. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, December 6, 1962, 11:08 p.m.

2583. President wishes you deliver promptly following letter from him to Prime Minister Nehru:

“Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

Averell Harriman has told me of his good talks with you and your associates. I am grateful to you for the cordiality with which you received him and for sharing with him so completely your thoughts on the problems facing India and the subcontinent. Governor Harriman was particularly struck by the vigor and resolution of your country's response to the long-term Chinese Communist threat. He told me of the courage your people are showing under your leadership and of the high morale of the Indian armed forces.

We are now actively considering what we can do to meet your requirements for military equipment and supplies. We are, of course, consulting with the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth, and I plan to review these matters with Prime Minister Macmillan when I see him in the Bahamas. Our object is to arrive at a general plan for handling your needs quickly from the best source of supply. Our people will soon be in touch with yours on this subject.

I want you to know how pleased I am by the statement you and President Ayub issued concerning your intentions to move forward at an early date towards a solution of the difficult Kashmir problem. We appreciate how difficult it is for you at this moment, when the memory of the recent Chinese attack combines with the prospect of a further one, to turn your attention to the old and troublesome problem of Kashmir. Yet an effective defense against the Chinese threat to India depends on your ability to concentrate your full resources on meeting their aggression. Further, since the threat extends to the whole subcontinent, ultimately the efforts of the whole subcontinent will be necessary to meet it. A full commitment of your own resources and unity of effort against the Chinese can be reached if the issues which divide India and Pakistan, the most important of which is Kashmir, are settled.

I think I understand the depth and strength of feeling in both India and Pakistan about Kashmir. A solution will not be easy and the necessary concessions by each will be unpopular with many on both sides. I am confident, however, that with good will and determination one can be reached which will free the energies of the subcontinent for defense against aggression from the north. As you move down the road, you know you carry with you my understanding, sympathy and friendship.1

Sincerely, John F. Kennedy“

In accordance with usual practice, this letter is not for publication.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-662. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Cameron; cleared with BNA and by Harriman, Rusk, and Bromley Smith; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi and London.

1 Galbraith delivered Kennedy's letter to Nehru on December 9. After reading the letter, Nehru considered the difficulties standing in the way of a solution to the Kashmir dispute. To give up the valley to Pakistan, or to countenance its internationalization, posed political and strategic problems for India which, he felt, rendered such solutions impossible. Galbraith saw little prospect for negotiations to settle the dispute. (Telegram 2305 from New Delhi, December 10; ibid., 690D.91/12-1062)

219. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 219. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, December 8, 1962, 1:41 p.m.

2599. Most pressing immediate needs on Kashmir are to maintain momentum generated as result Sandys-Harriman initiative, and to keep responsibility firmly fixed on India and Pakistan for working out solution. Because of Commonwealth ties, and less close British identification with previous efforts to move this problem towards solution, we believe British should be kept in forefront of this effort. Contents of this message have been discussed with British Embassy here and we envisage close cooperation this subject between our Embassies New Delhi and Karachi with respective UK High Commissions. Embassy London should discuss contents this message with appropriate British officials.

Our general approach is that British and ourselves should identify in both India and Pakistan those points at which effective pressure can be brought to impress both governments that it is in interest both countries strive for agreement despite possible political costs. Prospects for settlement will be improved if each side enters talks with eyes open; if each side realizes from outset that it must make substantial concessions which will be unpopular with many in both countries.

In various approaches to GOI and GOP we hope we can get over idea that neither party should tie itself to any particular plan for settlement. To do so would limit possibility compromise which will be essential. Also restriction scope discussions would lessen chances for agreement. For time being we believe thrust of your approaches should be to encourage parties come up with ideas about possible solution. If they want to discuss them with us and British so much the better. In any case we would expect both parties to be candid with us about progress of discussions.

For New Delhi: In India both we and British should make it clear that it untenable for us to continue for long give extensive military assistance to India while it expending efforts on quarrel with Pakistan. Further, we have extended aid to India so far at considerable cost our relations with Pakistan. Both these factors constitute major obstacle in way our obtaining approval for future aid of magnitude desired by GOI. Both U.S. and India benefit from U.S. having both countries on subcontinent as friends rather than just one.

As US contribution this effort Embassy Delhi is authorized at its discretion to bring these and other arguments for early constructive negotiations on Kashmir to attention of GOI in following ways after appropriate consultation UK High Commission: 1) Direct to Prime Minister. Sandys and Harriman have already covered ground well, and President's letter1 has added emphasis and authority. You should continue remind Nehru at suitable occasions.

2) To political leaders below Nehru. We have in mind greater diffusion of power demonstrated by forced dismissal of Menon. Embassy at its discretion should ensure that relationship between US capacity to aid India and resolution Kashmir dispute is widely understood among key political leaders both at center (e.g. Morarji Desai, Lal Bahadur Shastri, S.K. Patil, Y.B. Chavan, A.K. Sen) and in states (e.g. Kamaraj Nadar, P.C. Sen, Sanjiva Reddy, C.B. Gupta). Embassy might point out that since GOI cannot make necessary compromise without assurance political support, responsibility for giving that support rests with political leaders who may not feel directly concerned. It is for this reason that US has made effort make known its views among wide circle leaders in hope India will be able reach conclusion which we believe much in its interest.

We of course leave to Embassy determination to whom to make approach and in what manner. While we believe maintenance momentum Kashmir initiative requires early efforts in Delhi, more delicate approaches to out-of-Delhi leaders might be deferred until trips by Ambassador, other Embassy officers, and Congens offer suitable opportunities.

3) At its discretion Embassy might encourage President Radhakrishnan urge Nehru be prepared make concessions necessary for agreement. As Embassy suggested during Harriman visit, Radhakrishnan might make pitch this Nehru's last great opportunity make major contribution Indian foreign policy.

4) Similar missionary work should be carried out among senior officers of Indian military establishment where direct relationship between US capacity extend military aid and Kashmir settlement should be easy to explain.

For Karachi: While need in Delhi is for GOI willingness make concession greater than it has previously been willing consider, need in Karachi is for GOP receptiveness to solution which likely fall considerably short of achieving Pak objectives. Ayub's statement that settlement likely unpopular both sides indicates he is aware of this. In Pakistan we should point out this is probably most opportune time since independence for Pakistan obtain settlement from India. In future India may become less disposed to compromise. Paks should take advantage of opportunity of the moment; to ask too high a price might dissipate chance. By pressing Delhi to come to negotiating table on Kashmir, US is fulfilling promise to make new effort bring solution. This is most opportune moment and we may not again be able to help.

As you believe it necessary and helpful, Embassy Karachi is authorized to discuss Kashmir negotiations along these lines with Ayub and other GOP civilian and military officials. You should coordinate as appropriate with UK High Commission. We do not believe approach in depth suggested for India would be appropriate in Pakistan both because authority to make decisions is limited to much smaller circle and because first and most important requirement for coming negotiations is Indian willingness make concessions.

Since we believe present circumstances offer best prospect for Kashmir solution in recent years, we are prepared to undergo some risk to bring it about. It is not our desire seriously to weaken either Nehru or Ayub and we count on both Embassies to warn us if this likely happen. By way of contingency planning, we are suggesting to British desirability of having high-level representative, preferably a Britisher, available to go to subcontinent for discussions on Kashmir for purpose providing informal link between two capitals if this should become necessary to save talks. As ministerial talks develop we shall keep you closely informed of our thinking and would welcome your ideas.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-862. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Schneider and Cameron; cleared with BNA, IO, and FE, and by Ludlow in NEA in substance; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi, London, and USUN.

1 See Document 218.

220. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic Posts 220. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic PostsSource

Washington, December 8, 1962, 5:44 p.m.

1066. Following is summary of conclusions of Harriman Mission to India: 1. India now recognizes Red China as its principal and long-term enemy, but is less clear about long-term threat of Soviet communism as imperialistic force.

2. Majority of Pakistanis consider India primary enemy of Pakistan. Notable exceptions are Ayub and some of immediate entourage who recognize communist north the long-term threat.

3. Dramatic reaction in Pakistan to US military assistance to India has at least in part been encouraged by Pakistan's leaders, including Ayub, as device for bringing pressure on US and in attempt achieve certain internal political objectives.

4. Only settlement Kashmir can change attitude of Pakistan towards India. There is some movement at least on Indian side towards easing tensions between two countries. Ayub appears believe there is unusual opportunity reach accommodation on Kashmir which, though unpopular with Pakistanis, will be acceptable. Ministerial talks must be encouraged by US and UK. We should continue press both governments persistently to move towards each other even if there some resentment this by both.

5. Indian leadership undergoing changes which should be encouraged. Malevolent influence Krishna Menon officially removed and Nehru's overpowering stature and freedom of action has been diminished to a point which permits rise of younger, more dynamic, generally more pragmatic leadership to top.

6. India is now determined to build and maintain larger military establishment. This determination, and degree of our association with it, are already producing increasing strains on subcontinent. Settlement with Pakistan could produce significant strengthening subcontinent against Communist China.

7. Indian Armed Fores suffered severely under Krishna Menon. Indian Army has shaken up senior commands and is restoring leadership competence. Caliber of fighting men continues good and morale not seriously impaired. Army's plans for build-up appear soundly conceived and within its capacity execute with outside help. The Air Force effective at operational level, still has weaknesses at top. Effectiveness its plan for expansion requires considerable study by US and UK.

8. While India will not accept Chinese “cease-fire” plan, it will probably minimize provocation for resumption hostilities in near future. There is no guarantee Chinese will not initiate new fighting and we must be prepared for surprise Chinese attacks at times and places of their own choosing.

9. In case of further Chinese attacks, Indians should be in position use tactical air. This will require major political decision by GOI and may involve certain contingent arrangements for supplemental US and preferably Commonwealth air activity.

10. It doubtful India can rapidly expand defense production beyond simpler ordnance items. We will need more study before we can decide on degree to which India's intermediate requirements can be met from own resources. We should discourage India from attempting production of sophisticated military equipment and encourage concentration on feasible ordnance items.

11. India's diplomatic and propaganda efforts have been inept. Senior officials realize this and are correcting shortcomings. US and UK should discreetly assist.

12. India's “non-alignment” policy will undergo considerable substantive reinterpretation in manner favorable our interests. However, we should not seek formal association of India with US or West in general. Formal Western guaranty would tend diminish extent Indian effort and force a break with Soviet Union, bringing Soviet Union closer to Red China. However, there is great value in strengthening Commonwealth association both India and Pakistan.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 120.1591/12-862. Secret. Drafted by Schneider, cleared in substance with FE, and approved by Talbot. Sent to Kabul, Kathmandu, Colombo, Karachi, New Delhi, Moscow, Rangoon, London, Paris, Hong Kong, Djakarta, Phnom Penh, Cairo, and Accra.

221. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 221. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, December 8, 1962, 5:44 p.m.

2601. Following presentation Harriman report, Executive Committee of National Security Council established Subcommittee to prepare specific military and political recommendations for the President's consideration. Members are William Bundy, DOD; Gaud, AID; General Johnson, JCS; Komer, White House, and Talbot, Chairman.

Subcommittee recommendations so far to NSC Executive include:1 1. NSC should approve continuing program US assistance to India during emergency phase over next 2-3 months within a ceiling of $60 million, exclusive of air defense, but including $22.8 million committed to date.

2. US target should be to have total cost emergency phase (ceiling of $120 million) shared on as close to a 50-50 basis as possible with UK and Commonwealth together with other nations.

3. With modifications of scope of required assistance during emergency phase, London agreement remains valid.

4. US-UK air defense package, under which US would provide radar and UK and Commonwealth would provide manned aircraft, explored, with recommendations to be made later.

Now working on variety of problems which we plan discuss with Ambassadors Galbraith and McConaughy next week. They include: status of Kelly team and ancillary groups in India (privileges, immunities, services, communications and command channels, cost sharing); financial agreement with GOI; coordination of supply and cost sharing with British; increased contribution from Commonwealth and other countries; funding military assistance; and Congressional consultation.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/12-862. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Schneider, cleared in substance by Komer, and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to London.

1 A copy of the December 6 memorandum from the Subcommittee on South Asia to the NSC, which details the recommendations summarized in this telegram, is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 209.

222. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy 222. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President KennedySource

New Delhi, December 8, 1962.

* [Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 11/20/62-12/14/62. No classification marking. Galbraith transmitted the text of this letter to Washington in telegram 2303 from New Delhi, December 9. At the request of the Indian Foreign Ministry, he brought the letter with him when he returned to Washington on December 10 for consultations and home leave, and gave it to Ambassador Nehru for delivery to President Kennedy. (Department of State, Central Files, 791.5622/12-962) This letter has not been declassified by the Indian Government.]

223. National Security Action Memorandum No. 209 223. National Security Action Memorandum No. 209Source

Washington, December 10, 1962.

MEMORANDUM FORThe Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Administrator, AID

SUBJECT

Actions on South Asia

I generally approve the courses of action proposed by the NSC Subcommittee on South Asia in their memorandum to me of 6 December.1

In particular I approve a military aid program for the present emergency phase of up to $60 million, on the assumption that the UK and Commonwealth will provide a like amount. If they prove unwilling to do so, I will reconsider whether to continue with our program in any case.

I would like the subcommittee to submit as soon as feasible its recommendations on the proposed air defense package, a plan of action to encourage a Kashmir settlement, and its preliminary thinking on assistance to India during the intermediate build-up phase.

John F. Kennedy

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Memoranda, NSAM 209. Secret. Signed by President Kennedy. Copies were sent to the Director of Central Intelligence and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget.

1 An apparent reference to the memorandum also sent to the NSC on the same date; see footnote 1, Document 221.

224. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Paris 224. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at ParisSource

Washington, December 13, 1962, 9:56 p.m.

Tosec 28. Eyes Only for the Secretary. For your information, following is text of message from Prime Minister Macmillan to President Kennedy dated December 13:

“Dear Friend,

I am sending you these further thoughts about the Indian problem. Although I doubt whether we could reach any conclusion until we meet. I am very glad to hear that Harriman is going to be available on Thursday, December 20. Since Sandys is in the area I have asked him to be available also that afternoon.

My first thoughts about the military problem are as follows:

Some five or six divisions are likely to be used against the Chinese in the mountains. All these forces should be equipped not on the scale of continental armies with tanks and armoured cars and all the rest of it for fighting in the plain, but as mountain troops. Some two brigades have lost all their equipment and the rest of three divisions were badly mauled. The initial task is to re-equip these and supplement the equipment of the rest of the force.

The experts are working on this, but I doubt if it will cost as much as a hundred and twenty million dollars. I agree with your suggestion that the bill during the 'emergency' stage should be shared between the United States and Commonwealth countries. Secondly, what sort of army should the Indians have to fill the major role of defending themselves against an all-out Chinese invasion? It is clear to me that any sensible defense, on whatever scale may be agreed, can only be effective if it is organized as a joint Pakistani-Indian plan to defend the subcontinent as a whole. This would be far more effective, less wasteful of troops, and would avoid our chief difficulty which is how to help the Indians without correspondingly upsetting the Pakistanis who are loyal friends and members of the CENTO and SEATO pacts. Therefore, this involves the political problem of an agreement about Kashmir. Thirdly, even if you do get a defence system for the sub-continent as a whole, I do not myself believe that the kind of army which these two countries can sustain would be capable of defending themselves by themselves against any massive attack. If they were complete dictatorships they might try to do it by an absolute priority of guns over butter but their populations and the economies of the countries could hardly do it. Under any democratic system it would be impossible.

This leads me therefore to conclude that what we must aim at is getting first the two parties to agree on the joint defence of the sub-continent as a whole and then perhaps to get them into one of the regional military pacts. This would mean that the Chinese, like the Russians, would hesitate before making a massive attack for they would never be sure that they would not draw down upon themselves the nuclear reply.

Now comes the difficult question—how can we get political agreement between India and Pakistan? In any agreement Pakistan must obviously keep the part of Kashmir she at present occupies (with perhaps some adjustments) and the Indians must keep Jammu and Ladakh. The problem centres on the vale of Kashmir. A plebiscite will never be accepted by the Indians. It is just possible that they might agree to the vale of Kashmir becoming an autonomous state guaranteed by both India and Pakistan.

Now comes the question of how we are to encourage Nehru and Ayub to reach agreement. I have thought over your suggestion of appointing a high-level go-between; but I think this presents difficulties. A suitable individual would be hard to find, and his appointment would be interpreted as an attempt by us to act as mediators which would certainly be resented in Delhi. I doubt therefore whether he would be able to exercise effective influence.

It is the Indians who must make the first move. If they show a disposition to compromise, we can bring pressure on the Pakistanis to abate their extreme demands.

It occurs to me that the best way of keeping up the pressure would be to arrange for a series of visits to both countries by American and British personalities during the next few weeks and months. Without getting too directly involved they could encourage Indian and Pakistani ministers to settle their differences. Perhaps you would consider this idea.

We have one important card in our hands, namely India's independence [dependence] on the West for military aid. But if we overplay the hand we could easily destroy the favourable atmosphere which recent events have created. It will obviously be unwise for us (whether through special envoys or through our regular diplomatic representatives) to threaten the Indians with the withdrawal of military aid if they fail to reach agreement with Pakistan. On the other hand, visiting ministers, who are not directly concerned, Generals or prominent personalities outside our governments could without the same danger more easily adopt the role of the candid friend.

Lastly there is the question of air defence. I think there is much to be said for your proposal to provide the Indians with radar and other ground equipment, presumably to train Indians to use it. You and we might from time to time fly in squadrons of fighters to show our ability to come to India's aid should we decide to do so. But I do not think we should enter into any formal or moral obligation to participate in an Indian war with China. If we did, we should be giving India a greater measure of protection than we have been willing to do for our Allies in CENTO and SEATO. If, of course, India and Pakistan decide to form together a joint defence system for the whole subcontinent, we could bring them under the general western umbrella to the same extent as the CENTO and SEATO powers. All this raises far-reaching issues which we must discuss together. In the meantime, I thought you might like to have our preliminary thoughts.

With warm regard

Harold Macmillan”

Ball

* Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 204, Macmillan Correspondence with Kennedy, 1962. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted in S/S by Johnson and approved by Bromley Smith. Rusk was in Paris December 11-16 for the NATO Ministerial Meeting.

225. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 225. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, December 14, 1962.

JCSM-996 – 62

SUBJECT

Air Defense for India (U)

1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have conducted a separate review of the air defense problem in India in conjunction with their review of the report of the Special Presidential Mission to India (Harriman Report).1

2. Based on the discussion of the various alternatives, as set forth in the Appendix hereto,2 the Joint Chiefs of Staff conclude that: a. The United Kingdom should assume over-all responsibility for implementing the air defense program for India, with materiel and training assistance from other Commonwealth countries and the United States.

b. US interests in the Indian situation require that a degree of material assistance be rendered to meet Indian demands for air defense support.

c. Providing a completely self-sufficient air defense capability to the Indian armed forces is militarily, politically, and economically unsound.

d. At this time, the US air defense commitment in the mid-range period (to end of Calendar Year 1963) should be limited to provision of three fixed radars in the Bihar-Assam area, and, on a longer term basis, three mobile radars and retrofit of three squadrons of Indian aircraft with Sidewinder missiles.

e. The United Kingdom, Canadian, and Australian commitment should provide for command and control communications, and fighter modernization (including air-to-air missiles) for 3 fighter squadrons, together with training support and operational assistance.

f. A US-UK team of air defense specialists should be sent to India to refine requirements within this commitment and prepare plans for siting equipment.

g. In recognition of the inadequacies of the foregoing measures, the United States at this time should approach the United Kingdom with the recommendation that the UK and Commonwealth Nations assure the Government of India that they will provide interim air defense forces to India in the event of renewed Chinese aggression if so requested. The position of the US on this matter should be that this Government will entertain requests from the Government of India for air defense forces in the event of renewed Chinese aggression, but that the US Government reserves the right of decision in this regard dependent upon the situation existing at the time of request.

h. Support for the Indian forces should be contingent upon Indian agreement that any Soviet military assistance will be limited to materiel and technical training in the use and maintenance of such Soviet materiel.

3. It is recommended that the Secretary of Defense:3 a. Approve the foregoing conclusions.

b. Request the Secretary of State to initiate discussions on this basis with the Commonwealth nations involved.

c. Also request the Secretary of State to: (1) Inform the Government of India of US views and intentions with respect to air defense assistance.

(2) Obtain approval for a team of air defense specialists to visit India to work with the Indian armed forces in refining requirements in planning the utilization of US-furnished equipment.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
George W. Anderson4 Acting Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

* Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Subcommittee on South Asia. Top Secret.

1 See footnote 1, Document 215.

2 Not printed.

3 The source text does not indicate McNamara's response to these recommendations.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates that Anderson signed the original.

226. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 226. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, December 16, 1962.

The attached report of your Sino-Indian Subcommittee1 highlights four main issues requiring US decision and then discussion at Nassau: (1) How hard should we press the Commonwealth to stay out ahead in help to India? Aside from firming up agreement to a 50-50 division in the emergency phase, should we plan to limit our aid in general to what they will match?

(2) Should the US, UK, or both make an air defense commitment to India and provide some form of air defense package for the near and longer term?

(3) What Kashmir strategy should the US/UK pursue? Who should have the laboring oar?

(4) Should we head off any premature UK effort to bring India into alliance status or to raise a fuss over India's taking MIGs?

Our approach to all these tends naturally to caution. The JCS worry over any redeployment of US forces at the expense of existing commitments. DOD seems to look askance at large new MAP outlays, which might involve diversions from other MAP clients and be difficult in any case to justify to Congress. Some in State are concerned lest we get drawn into a major Sino-Indian war. Others fear that our Pak interests will suffer unless we gear our help to progress on Kashmir. Such reservations largely underly our desire to push the UK out in front. But, judging from Macmillan's letter,2 the British attitude is similarly cautious; indeed they show less sense of urgency than we.

Against such concerns that we will overcommit ourselves or waste our substance must be weighed the sheer magnitude of the opportunity handed us by Peiping. If we exploit it fully we may not only bring about a Kashmir settlement and Pak-Indian reconciliation, but induce an aroused and strengthened India to join us in the containment of Red China.

But in deciding how best to promote this grand design, one fundamental must be kept in mind. It was a Chinese blunder which gave us the opportunity and it is only a continued active Chicom threat which will compel Ayub and Nehru to compromise on Kashmir in the interest of meeting the larger threat.

Thus it is as much in our strategic interest to keep up a high degree of Sino-Indian friction as it is to prevent it from spilling over into large scale war. While, in the last analysis, our ability to do so may be marginal as compared to what Peiping and Delhi themselves decide, to the extent that we can reassure India of US/UK support and backing, we stiffen Indian determination not to settle too cheaply.

Yet the cease-fire and Chinese withdrawals have already led to a hiatus period. Peiping, having achieved its objectives and doubtless fearful of over-extending itself, is skillfully disengaging. It has thrown on India the onus of re-opening hostilities, which it knows India is incapable of doing at this point.

While hostilities may yet flare up again, the more likely outcome seems to be a gradual petering out of the Sino-Indian affair. While Sino-Indian relations will never be the same, and Indian public opinion will bar any negotiated settlement, the trend may be toward de facto acceptance of the Chinese terms, particularly if the latter are wise enough to carry out their proposed withdrawals.

Certain US/UK actions might well contribute to this trend: (1) if we push the Kashmir issue out too far in front of the Sino-Indian dispute, thus diverting Indian focus and reviving old Pak-Indian animosities; (2) if the US/UK seem to be holding back unduly on further support, thus rousing Indian suspicions that we are either reluctant to assume major commitments or unwilling to do so until Kashmir is settled.

In short, against the risks of overcommitment are those of loss of momentum—which might contribute to a premature damping down of the Sino-Indian dispute. My comments on the issues before you are framed in this light.

Pushing the Commonwealth to the forefront. The major advantages in getting our cousins to share as much of the burden as possible hardly need enumeration. But, aside from Galbraith's worry lest the British gain kudos with the Indians we want for ourselves, it is open to serious question whether we should (in our desire to keep the UK to the fore) confine ourselves to moving no faster than they. Macmillan's latest note suggests that the UK will be most cautious about committing itself to anything with a large price tag, or about backing India in a Sino-Indian war. It also suggests, despite his reminder that we shouldn't overplay our hand, that the British have in mind setting several conditions—a Kashmir settlement, joint Pak-Indian defense, and Indian membership in our alliance system—as the price for extensive US/UK aid or defense commitments.

Despite its obvious anxiety to keep up its end, moreover, the UK is no doubt concerned lest if the bill gets too large it will strain UK resources and eventually force the UK to settle for a secondary role to us.

The Air Defense Package. Nehru's two letters3 citing India's air defense needs require some sort of response. This problem breaks down into two parts: (1) how to meet India's immediate needs in event of early resumption of hostilities—which would require use of US/UK forces; and (2) the longer term need to develop some Indian air defense capability.

The JCS proposals4 add up to making both a Commonwealth responsibility, with our role confined to providing chiefly three (and then three more) radars, to be Indian-manned. This program, which would require two years to complete, would not meet the immediate need. But neither Macmillan nor the JCS want to get involved in any interim commitment to shore up India's air defense with US/UK forces. Nor, as Macmillan suggests, would the JCS division of the longer run effort be acceptable to the UK. We suspect that the financing problem plays a large part in their reluctance.

Against the risks involved in air defense commitments we must balance the cost of turning down or stalling on Nehru's request. To do so might well rouse Indian suspicions that the West was either unwilling to support India if the conflict escalated or insisted on a high price. In either case, the net effect might be to sap India's confidence in Western support of its position vis-a-vis China. If our interests are best served by continuation of the Sino-Indian dispute, we want if possible to avoid such a development.

Indeed, I believe that the Indians (and probably also the Chinese) already assume from our posture that we are prepared to come to India's help. Our failure to do so would, as Galbraith suggests, be a grave blow to Indian morale. But we will be unable to do so effectively unless prior preparations are made.

Moreover, we must take into account the possibility that our failure to provide air defense support, should it become known, might encourage Peiping to escalate, whereas evidence of such support would greatly deter them from doing so. I fear, therefore, that not providing such support may create greater risks of escalation (and subsequent US/UK involvement) than the opposite course.

As to the US/UK division of effort, I cannot see the UK committing fighter squadrons unless the US does the same. The UK simply will not risk involvement in a Sino-Indian war without the US by its side.

Kashmir Tactics. It is painfully apparent that neither Paks nor Indians are yet ready for compromise. So for either side (or the US/UK) to press too hard at this juncture might scuttle the talks before they really get underway. Nor do we want to divert Indian anger from China to Pakistan.

These concerns suggest that our immediate objective must be, not to promote any particular solution, but to insure that the talks don't break down. We can even insist on this minimum as a condition for our support, without outraging Nehru. Ergo: (1) We should press Ayub and Nehru to avoid above all the pitfall of a breakdown in the talks, arguing that this could dissipate the last chance for an amicable solution and would inevitably color US/UK support of both countries. You could send letters to both parties along these lines.

(2) Perhaps the best result obtainable would be if the talks ended with a communique expressing: (a) recognition of both parties that an early settlement is imperative; (b) determination to keep talking until one is reached; (c) explicit recognition that any settlement will involve a compromise in some respects unsatisfactory to both parties; (d) intent to create continuing organs of consultation, i.e. technical committees; and (e) agreeing on certain interim steps toward a solution. Galbraith and McConaughy should press this theme.

(3) State's idea of technical committees is good but, by itself, does not entail sufficient momentum toward a solution to satisfy public opinion, especially in Pakistan. So we should examine what “interim steps” might be feasible in addition. I have in mind mutual withdrawals from the cease-fire line, trade concessions, etc. To the extent that such moves had a joint character, they might (though billed as interim expedients) actually start a trend toward an European-type solution by getting people used to it.

The above comments add up to suggesting a more costly and more risky strategy than currently favored by many, but one more commensurate with the stakes. As to cost, there are few places in the Afro-Asian world where we could more profitably employ our aid—let's divert MAP from elsewhere if necessary. As to risks, it is now more and more apparent that Peiping never contemplated a major attack on India. To me, it is all the more unlikely to let the affair escalate if India has visible US/UK support.5

R. W. Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 12/16/62. Secret.

1 The undated attached report from the Subcommittee on South Asia to the NSC put forward recommended positions to be taken by President Kennedy in the talks with Prime Minister Macmillan that were scheduled to begin in Nassau on December 18.

2 See Document 224.

3 See Document 222.

4 See Document 225.

5 An agenda prepared for the December 17 meeting of the Executive Committee of the NSC lists South Asia as one of four topics slated for discussion. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Executive Committee Meetings, Vol. III, 12/6/62-12/17/62) A memorandum of the conversation at the meeting, prepared by Bromley Smith, indicates that only two of the scheduled items, Cuba and Congo, were actually discussed. (Ibid.)

227. Memorandum of Conversation 227. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, December 17, 1962.

SUBJECT

Conversation between the President and the Ambassador of India

PARTICIPANTS

The President

His Excellency Braj Kumar Nehru, Ambassador of India

Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

Ambassador Nehru apologized for requesting an appointment on what he knew was one of the President's busiest days. His Government, however, wished to present some views on the Kashmir problem to the President before the Nassau Conference. The Indian High Commissioner in London was under instructions to make a similar approach to Prime Minister Macmillan.

The Ambassador said that his Government wanted the President to be aware that Pakistan is undermining the prospects of fruitful talks on Kashmir by a steady stream of abusive statements about India emanating from public officials and the press. He said his Government fears that Pakistanis are doing this only because they believe that they have the United States in a position in which it will not give military assistance to India unless India satisfies Pakistan's claims in Kashmir. The Government of India supposes that the United States has not made such a commitment to Pakistan, and believes it would be helpful if the point could be clarified with the Pakistanis. Otherwise the Pakistanis are likely to enter the Kashmir talks thinking they can hold India to ransom. His Government also hopes that the President will realize that the Kashmir problem and other difficulties between India and Pakistan have deep roots and are extremely difficult to solve. The Government of India is prepared to go into these talks in good faith, but the Prime Minister hopes that the President will realize progress may be slow and unspectacular, even if the Pakistanis show more willingness to cooperate than they have done until now.

The President said he would like to make a personal response and then an official response. Speaking personally, he said, he felt the Prime Minister had erred in making a statement in Parliament which would give the Pakistanis a handle to charge that India was not serious about the Kashmir talks. The Pakistanis are not only attacking India, they are also trying to get at the United States. Indeed, the next few months are likely to be a period of continuous effort by Pakistan and by Pakistan's friends in this country to put pressure on him, the President. In this situation he would hope the Prime Minister could ignore the abusive and other unfortunate remarks being made. The best posture would be to enter seriously in the discussions and show the world that India is determined to reach some sort of settlement.

The President observed that the coming period will require the most subtle and skillful policy on the part of India. On the one hand, he supposed that no Indian politician could involve his country in negotiations with Pakistan if Indian opinion came to believe that the West was forcing India to give up Kashmir as a price for helping it to save Ladakh or even NEFA. On the other hand, some progress would be very important. India wants us to understand its problems, and we try to do so. At the same time, the President hoped that India could understand our problems here. Whether we like it or not, the question of Kashmir is inescapably linked to what we can do to assist India militarily. He was sure the Ambassador would understand this and could communicate it to his Government.

The President concluded by observing that we get a lot of abuse, as India feels it does. The problem is how to ignore it and get on with the job that has to be done. He hoped that the Prime Minister would see his way clear to a constructive settlement, because Ayub is the only man in Pakistan who can carry off a settlement that involves heavy compromise of Pakistani claims and it may be that Nehru is the one man who could do the same in India.

* Source: Department of State, NEA/INC Files: Lot 66 D 415, Kashmir, May-December 1962 (Miscellaneous Papers). Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text, but it was apparently drafted by Talbot. According to the President's Appointment Book, the conversation took place in the White House. (Kennedy Library)

228. Letter From President Ayub to President Kennedy 228. Letter From President Ayub to President KennedySource

Karachi, December 17, 1962.

Dear Mr. President, Thank you for your message dated December 5, 1962,1 which was delivered to me by Ambassador McConaughy.

I appreciate very much that you and your Government have taken a firm and positive decision to take appropriate steps to support and assist towards a satisfactory settlement of the Kashmir dispute. As Governor Harriman must have told you, I for my part, found no difficulty in taking the decision which led to the issue of the Joint Communique. We are now getting ready to meet the Indian delegation on the 26th instant in Rawalpindi and sincerely hope that realistic discussions for the honourable and equitable settlement of the Kashmir question will take place. All this will depend on how sincere Mr. Nehru is for reaching such a settlement.

It is most unfortunate that he should have thought it fit to make his statement in the Lok Sabha, on the day following the publication of the Joint Communique, which came as a surprise to everybody and raised doubts in our minds. Governor Harriman must have been as surprised as Duncan Sandys was to read this statement by Mr. Nehru.

Governor Harriman must have conveyed to you my view that a just and equitable settlement of Kashmir is the key to disengagement between India and Pakistan. I told him that U.S. Government should put all possible pressure on India either by refusing to give aid until a settlement on Kashmir is reached, or deciding to give it in small and negligible quantities until India is obliged to see reason in this regard. I am saying this as otherwise the effectiveness of the American aid to India would be lost.

You must be aware, Mr. President, that there is considerable alarm in this country in regard to the arms aid that has been sent to India. Should the volume of aid to India increase without settlement with us, it would result in serious disadvantages to us and is bound to cause greater alarm and criticism in Pakistan.

In the course of my talk with Governor Harriman, Ambassador McConaughy, General Adams and other members of the Harriman Mission, I pointed out to General Adams that it seemed that what India was after was to build up two Armies, one of which would be concentrated against Pakistan and the other could also be deployed against us when they should want to do so. Surely this can't be the objective of the American policy. In this connection, I arranged briefing by our General Staff to Governor Harriman's team. It comes out very clearly that the present strength of the Indian Army is enough to contain the Chinese and contain us should they insist on pursuing this negative course.

I also told him that in the face of India's performance during their engagement with the Chinese, Indian leadership in the field gave a very poor account of itself. I, therefore, advised that the Indians should be encouraged to reach a negotiated and a peaceful settlement with the Chinese and discouraged from launching on a military adventure to 'evict' the Chinese. Such an attempt might lead to a major conflict which it should be the duty of all of us to avert. It might easily spark off a conflagration, not only on this sub-continent but engulf the whole of Asia and even pose a threat to world peace. The Indians have shown that they have become trigger-happy and they should be firmly discouraged from any ideas they might have to launch an attack for the eviction of the Chinese. I believe the British share this view to some extent.

I also pointed out to General Adams that their target of equipping 15 or 16 divisions for action against the Chinese in those mountainous regions did not make any military sense, as more than a very small number of divisions cannot be deployed in those regions. It would, therefore, appear as if what the Indians were interested in was to continue to maintain the bulk of their forces, equipped with modern arms and in greater strength, against Pakistan. That is why I have been urging that until the Kashmir question is satisfactorily resolved, there can be no disengagement between India and Pakistan in order that we may both live free from anxiety from each other. It is, therefore, most important that your efforts should be directed to the early settlement of the Kashmir question and I would strongly urge that any further supply of arms to India is made contingent on this settlement. I am fully convinced that the Indian in his present circumstances is in a mood to listen, provided a forceful and a positive effort is made in the direction to persuade him.

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, for kindly saying that you will keep in touch with us about any further developments in your military aid to India.

I entirely agree with you that this is a great opportunity which circumstances have brought about for a satisfactory solution of Kashmir and that, if resolutely tackled, there is every hope of success. In this I look forward to your personal and your Government's fullest cooperation and help.

With my kindest regards,

Yours very sincerely,

M.A. Kahn

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-2262. No classification marking. Forwarded from the Department of State to McGeorge Bundy at the White House on December 22 under cover of a memorandum from Brubeck. The covering memorandum indicated that this letter, and an accompanying December 17 letter dealing with the Tarbela Dam project were delivered to Rusk on December 20 by Amjad Ali, a special emissary of Ayub. Both letters are ibid.

1 See Document 217.

229. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State 229. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of StateSource

Kabul, December 19, 1962, 7 p.m.

261. Embtel 255 to Department1 repeated Karachi 95 Tehran 96. I called on Prime Minister Daud at his request December 19 for what proved to be 2-hour exposition RGA view on economic transit, continuing need for USG assistance, inability compromise further on Pakistan-Afghanistan impasse and full recognition what this might mean in terms Afghanistan's economic development and political alignment. Daud was accompanied by Deputy Minister Planning Abdul Hai Aziz, who interpreted, Director General Political Affairs Foreign Ministry Etemadi and acting Director General Economic Affairs Foreign Ministry Rafiq. Brewer accompanied me.

Prime Minister began by referring my talk with Foreign Minister Naim December 8, expressing appreciation continued USG assistance Afghanistan economic development. Daud noted Afghanistan currently in peculiar position regarding its twin needs pushing forward with economic development and maintaining its neutrality and non-alignment. Afghanistans had “kinship” with west and sympathized western “ideology.” RGA had always attached importance western aid as evidenced by fact USG had been requested participate in second 5-year plan even before plan prepared. RGA earnestly desired continued flow US help.

Daud continued that unfortunately situation between Afghanistan and its neighbors appeared be slowing down USG assistance. Although never explicitly stated, it appeared increasingly clear to RGA that condition attached to USG aid in form of insistence on better Afghanistan relations with its neighbors. Despite almost daily talks with AID/A officials in recent weeks RGA felt no clear agreements yet reached about future assistance on project basis. Questions economic transit and transportation costs were inevitably introduced and Afghanistanis were led to understand there some sort of precondition to further significant USGassistance. Daud noted in my talk with Naim this had been my most important point.

Admitting some differences exist between costs Iranian and Pakistan routes, Daud said further study by RGA and return Afghanistan Mission headed by Rafiq from Tehran has resulted in additional information making clear cost differences between two routes not of magnitude estimated by USG. There were basic differences in transit costs between goods moving Khorramshahr-Kandahar for USG and for RGA. On basis recent talks Rafiq Mission with Iranians, Daud felt higher USG transit costs could be substantially reduced. For example gasoline was cheaper shipped through Iran while diesel more expensive.

At this point Daud called in Rafiq to give detailed analysis comparative cost figures Iranian and Pakistan routes (details by pouch). Rafiq's main points were that USG had been overcharged on rail freight Khorramshahr-Meshed and on trucking costs Herat-Kandahar. Among other things Rafiq asserted RGA prepared clear and handle all USAID shipments through Iran at one-fifth cost commercial agents now charging. Rafiq cited figures to support conclusion average cost gasoline and diesel needed for our projects approximately $66.38 per ton via Chaman as against $66.34 via Meshed.

Prime Minister then continued that he hoped statistical presentation, and prospective further reduction in cost diesel RGA buying from Iran, indicative what might be done on Iranian route. He then proposed RGA and USG cooperate on experimental shipment 500 to 1000 tons consigned Afghanistan trade agent Khorramshahr for clearing and forwarding. Indicated shipment be composed one half PL-480 wheat and one half materials for aid projects in order make possible refinement current figures re Iranian route by category and type.

Prime Minister next turned to question future US assistance, reiterating RGA inability pin down extent future support on any given project. I recalled had previously told both Prime Minister and Foreign Minister I would not condone any real complaint regarding substantive lethargy or bureaucratic inaction in aid program. Aziz interjected there were no complaints but simply did not seem possible agree on any project. I noted unresolved problems in many fields such as Kabul University. Aziz replied these difficulties should not cause delays in agreeing future projects. He said RGA currently preparing budget for next Afghanistan fiscal year and needed know on what projects USG would assist. Brewer noted AID/A for its part had to know what projects RGA proposed support with local currency in order determine which ones should be given USG help. Aziz indicated commodity import program could be instituted which would solve local currency problem once USG support for specific projects made clear.

I assured Prime Minister our intention break any bottlenecks that might exist in AID/A operations and noted had been seeing members his Cabinet myself in effort iron out difficulties. Iranian route figures were subject debate in which I was no position participate. Our own statistics were based on our experience where we perhaps had not gotten same favorable treatment in all instances as Afghanistanis. Question possible RGA handling future aid shipments via Iran could certainly be examined and perhaps Afghan-Iran-US meeting might help settle question. However much such discussions and experience might help in future, fact was we had major problem now.

Aziz asked pointedly whether Daud's suggestion re experimental shipment would be referred Washington. Assuring him this would be done, I said wished make several observations on general problem we currently face. I then outlined difficulty maintaining momentum on such major project as K-K road. Recalled I had told Prime Minister last May this situation would develop unless border opened and said that our extraordinary costs now so high that we didn't see how work on road could continue beyond end December. This why USG asked whether there might be some way reopen border temporarily for 30-60 days for this road project. While said would naturally report what Prime Minister had already told me, it would create wonderful psychological atmosphere Washington if I were able also report Prime Minister prepared meet our problem on road through periodic border openings. I also noted such action helpful in preventing transit rights across Pakistan atrophying through disuse.

Expressing appreciation my remarks, Prime Minister said his earlier comments could have been given me by Naim and he would now come to real reason he had asked see me, namely political aspects this problem. Without dwelling on details Pakistan-Afghanistan relations, he asserted RGA had gone to limit of what was admissible in Foreign Minister Naim's talks New York with GOI and GOP Foreign Ministers. As result experience subsequent weeks, RGA had concluded not that GOP reluctant solve problem but that Ayub personally unwilling see it solved. Otherwise tentative agreement reached by responsible Foreign Minister with his Iranian and Afghanistan colleagues would have had some result. Re loss Pakistan transit right through disuse, Daud asserted it hard imagine international law principle under which unilateral action one man could erase right which had existed for over thousand years.

Emphasizing he wished me report what he was about to say faithfully to Washington, Daud then said he wished make following points in order avoid slightest misunderstanding between our two governments re various aspects over-all problem: 1. Afghanistan appreciated past USG help and needed it in future.

2. Afghanistan believed its best interests served by following policy neutrality which included sympathy for western “ideology.”

3. Notwithstanding points one and two and fully recognizing transit difficulties confronting USG aid shipments, RGA was not ready sacrifice or place in jeopardy future of Pushtunistan question by making any concessions.

4. For Afghanistan this remained “question of honor and life. If on this issue we will now be forced to sacrifice our economic development and much else besides we are prepared to do so.”

5. It neither wish nor interest Afghanistan that this occur. RGA does not wish sacrifice neutrality nor be forced towards one side. However American friends should know RGA unprepared move one inch from position which has been reached in this case regardless consequences.

Daud stressed only point he really wished make to me was that there should be no doubt this RGA attitude on part USG. While further USG assistance would be appreciated, if projects must be suspended or abandoned this would be accepted. Whole question had been subject review by RGA after my discussion with Naim December 8 and Daud said he was giving me considered conclusion Afghan Government this matter.

I replied that I appreciated his frankness and would see that Washington was left in no doubt of RGA position. To help explain Afghan attitude, I asked whether he could clarify reasons why movement American freight across Pakistan seemingly had to be connected with Pakistan-Afghan political problem. Also, while I knew RGA position in general on issue, said would appreciate his personal statement as to what his objective was on Pushtunistan problem.

To first question, Prime Minister responded RGA had sought negotiate on Pushtunistan question. However, when GOP took unilateral action with clear purpose using transit issue as tool political pressure RGA had felt it could not submit under duress to suppression national aspirations Pushtun people. Daud stressed it would not be possible permit USG use Pakistan route while denying same access Afghan Government and people. Prime Minister felt Pakistan press was making it increasingly clear GOP using transit issue strangle Afghanistan and this RGA would never accept.

Turning to RGA objectives on Pushtunistan, Prime Minister recalled historic, racial and cultural ties between Afghan and Pushtun peoples. RGA felt Pushtuns would not wish be part Pakistan. Obvious solution would be self-determination. RGA simply desired Pushtun people be given chance determine their own destiny in accordance international law. Should they opt remain in Pakistan, RGA would be first recognize this fact as Afghanistan had no territorial ambitions. Daud noted GOL [GOP] claim Kashmir based solely on religious ground. RGA interest Pushtunistan not only based on common religion but also common ties blood, history and culture. Although earlier had once formed part Afghanistan, RGA making no annexation claim. Accordingly it hard understand why GOP claim Kashmir considered legitimate while RGA desire see Pushtuns given opportunity for self-determination not accepted.

Daud recalled had outlined foregoing at every level USG from President Eisenhower on down. Had also made same points to GOP in past discussions. Referring latter, he said Prime Minister Suhrawardi had once asked if RGA desired annex territory. Daud said he had replied he would give written engagement foreswearing annexation if assured Pushtuns would have self-determination. Daud had suggested GOP itself get in touch with bona fide Pushtun leaders to this end.

Thanking Prime Minister for his frankness, I said our discussions would not be complete were I not to express our great fear that, while working for objective which in their eyes deemed praiseworthy, RGA would leave itself open predatory forces which might one day cause loss not only Pushtunistan but Afghanistan as well. Prime Minister asked how this might occur. I told him we had seen techniques communism had used, including exploitation political issue such as Pushtunistan to serve their own ends. By supporting divisive regional issues communists made neighboring states increasingly dependent on them. This predatory force would take every advantage of country so placed as Afghanistan. There had so far been no single instance in which such a country had avoided communist toils and RGA was taking terrible chance in assuming it might be first not fall prey this technique.I assured Prime Minister USG fully recognized Afghanistanis determined, brave and dedicated people whose society founded on religious principles but reminded him that sometimes even all this not enough prevent disaster. Prime Minister merely remarked with smile in closing that it was precisely for this reason he had emphasized how greatly Afghanistan needs USG assistance.

Comment follows.

Steeves

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 689.90D/12-1962. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Karachi and Tehran.

1 Telegram 255 from Kabul, December 17, reported that the Afghan Government had failed to respond by December 15 to a demarche made by Steeves in a meeting with Foreign Minister Naim on December 8. (Ibid., 689.90D/12-1762) Steeves reported on the demarche in telegram 240 from Kabul, December 9. On instructions from the Department, Steeves had pointed to the problems involved in continuing major U.S. aid projects, such as the Kabul-Kandahar road, while the closure of the border between Pakistan and Afghanistan prevented the passage of necessary supplies for the projects through Pakistan. Experience had demonstrated that it was significantly more expensive to bring such supplies in through Iran. Steeves asked for a decision by December 15 on a U.S. request for periodic openings of the border to allow the movement of U.S. supplies. (Ibid., 689.90D/12-962)

230. Memorandum of Conversation 230. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Nassau, December 20, 1962, 3 p.m.

SUBJECT

Sino-Indian Dispute

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The President

Mr. Harriman, Assistant Secretary FE

Mr. Talbot, Assistant Secretary NEA

Mr. Nitze, Assistant Secretary Defense ISA

Ambassador Galbraith

Mr. William Bundy, Deputy Assistant Secretary Defense ISA

British

Prime Minister Macmillan

Lord Home

Mr. Duncan Sandys, Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations and Colonies

Mr. Pickard, Assistant Secretary, Commonwealth Relations Office

The President opened the discussion of the Agenda Item on the Sino-Indian dispute with mention of the Indian High Commissioner's approach to the Prime Minister and Ambassador B.K. Nehru's approach to him1 just before the Nassau talks. Ambassador Nehru had complained that the Pakistanis were behaving badly and had urged the United States not to expect much progress on the Kashmir issue. He himself feared that in two or three months India would blame the UK and the US for making a Kashmir settlement their price for providing military aid.

Ambassador Galbraith saw the immediate danger as an impasse between India and Pakistan, since both cannot possess the Valley of Kashmir. In considering the next steps he felt it should be kept clearly in mind that the principal gain of the new situation is in getting India out of its somewhat feckless mood and turned against the Chinese danger to the world. He felt some concern that in Washington, at least, the great problem seems to be Kashmir rather than China. Mr. Duncan Sandys had achieved a great gain in getting the talks started. Now the problem was to keep the talks going and to keep them from heading into a direct confrontation over the issue of who owns or should own the Valley. One way might be to feed a variety of ideas into the two governments. In the short run India must learn that it must make its case to the American public and Congress, who are concerned about progress on Kashmir. The Congress would not support two sides of the dispute. We must not however tell the Indians that further help is conditioned on a Kashmir settlement. This approach would get their back up and would enable them to assert that the US and the UK are forcing them to compromise Kashmir.

Mr. William Bundy reported that in London the US and UK teams had agreed to recommend that the US and the UK/Commonwealth provide equipment necessary to convert six Indian Army divisions to mountain units, to help India's airlift capacity, and to improve India's air combat ability within the scope of India's present type of aircraft. These judgments had been reached on the basis that the contributions of the US and of the UK/Commonwealth would be roughly equivalent within a ceiling of $60,000,000 for each side and that both the US and UK would encourage other nations to assist India as well. In London the parties had agreed to give the financial figures to the Indians. Subsequently, in Washington, it was decided we had better not tell the Indians at this time just how much money we plan to commit to the emergency phase. On the question of giving this information to Pakistan, it was left open to our representative there. The group had not thought these amounts would prove unpalatable to Pakistan.

The President asked whether this would add any divisions to the Indian Army. Mr. Bundy replied that it would not explicitly do so, though the Indians might well add some divisions outside the US-UK assistance plan.

On air defense, Mr. Bundy said that it was envisaged that a team would go out promptly to look at radar and communications matters and at the possibility of rotating squadrons, perhaps four in number, into India. The President asked questions to confirm that the idea was that the team should go out and that consideration was being given to four squadrons, evenly divided between the US and the Commonwealth, which perhaps would move in and out of India rather than staying there all the time. He observed that their role would be limited to air defense.

Ambassador Galbraith suggested that we should have some understanding with the GOI that it would consult with the UK and US on any decision to commit air squadrons to action. He had pointed out this fact to Foreign Minister Desai who had commented that it sounded reasonable.

Mr. Duncan Sandys called the question of air squadrons a very big issue. The UK-US talks seem to have gone quite a long way toward agreement on helping during an emergency phase. We want always to emphasize that we expect the Indians to do what they can do themselves, with production, etc., and that this will involve sacrifice on their part as well as on ours. It would undoubtedly also involve some slowing down of activities on the civil side. He regarded the agreement that the U.S. and U.K./Commonwealth keep to $60,000,000 for each as a reasonable development. On describing these terms to the Indians, he felt we must play the matter by ear. At the beginning, it would be best not to tell them the exact amounts but we must give them some idea of the dimensions of assistance as they are getting quite big ideas about what is possible. On air defense, he believed it was right to send a mission but wished to make it clear that this did not represent any commitment. Assistance in air defense could easily become a very large commitment. Although we are going on to help the Indian Army through the emergency phase without an Indian commitment on Kashmir, we must make it clear that assistance on the air defense would be impossible without some settlement with Pakistan. Big issues are raised by the question of air squadrons. It is one thing to give rifles, mortars, etc., but another to allow them to base their military plans on the expectation of the UK and the US providing planes to shoot Chinese. That would mean we would be faced with either letting them down or getting involved in war at their choosing. This could be difficult.

Continuing, Mr. Duncan Sandys said that in getting into defense planning the Indians will find that no plan makes sense unless it embraces the defense of the entire subcontinent. He felt they would take this fact better from the military than from political representatives. Therefore, our military people should keep pressing this issue. Also, the defense build up, as the Indians see it, may prove to be much greater than India's capacity to accomplish, even with Western help. This leads to the conclusion that the only economically possible way of defending India is to bring India within the general umbrella of the Western defense community as we have done with the members of SEATO and CENTO. This does not necessarily mean that India should become a member of one of the Pacts; possibly that would be politically bad. However, it must be made clear to the Chinese Communists that India has become part of our defense area.

Mr. Sandys added that the immediate need on Kashmir is to avoid having the parties come quickly to the crunch. Rather, they should go slowly. We should try to avoid their breaking down in the early meetings because of a precise confrontation at the outset. If the talks go on, we can probably exercise a certain amount of influence, partly through official channels and partly through carefully selected visitors—a steady drip of opinion expressed by different people in different places emphasizing the importance we attach to a settlement and the very serious difficulties that would confront us in the absence of a settlement. The first move would obviously need to be made by the Indians, and that is what we must concentrate on. The Indians believe now that something could be done; this is not merely Nehru's idea but that of such people as the Defense Minister, military officers, etc. It is quite fertile ground in which to sow this seed. At some stage, if the talks bog down, without linking the points we could perhaps let deliveries of emergency phase military equipment slow down. The handling of the air mission can be an important influence too.

Ambassador Galbraith observed that it was important to realize that we must do more than talk of the desirability of a settlement. This is already agreed to in India and in Pakistan. The question is, what settlement; India and Pakistan both want the Valley. We won't advance chances of a settlement by making threats. We must remember that the specific settlement is not in the minds of either side now and will come about only through extensive talks if at all. We must also remember that the Kashmir effort is at best a long shot, comparable to the Israel-Arab dispute.

On air defense, Ambassador Galbraith noted that it is expensive. The Indian demand is related to the awful nakedness of the cities, and as non-military people the Indians are acutely conscious of this. Air defense thus is a protection to the country. US-UK involvement would be a deterrent force, more than a protective force. The proposals that have been made in this field will work out more cheaply than would an independent Indian air force. It would be also easier with the Pakistanis for us to take this road. We should know that the introduction into India of C-130s with American crews was no problem to the Pakistanis, but if we had given the C-130s to the Indians the Pakistanis would have been furious. The idea of having US and UK squadrons in India would have the same advantage. It would also effectively bring India under the US-UK umbrella.

Mr. Duncan Sandys agreed with the last point but commented that the impression would be left that a non-allied country gets better defense protection from the West than does an ally. Also, he felt that this course of action could get us into a war with China in circumstances which we would not control. Mr. Bundy acknowledged that this could happen but observed that the proposed plan would also be a commitment to keep Indian air action within tactical limitations. Mr. Sandys responded that we also need to be careful not to create a situation in which the Pakistanis would feel that other countries would get all the benefits and more of Western help without ceasing to be non-aligned. That is what the Pakistanis are saying. Mr. Sandys had pointed out in reply that the difference is that if a country like Pakistan is in a Pact with the West, there is less chance that it will be attacked by a Communist country, as India had been attacked.

Governor Harriman said he felt we had not been thinking enough about how to deal with the Pakistanis. There will be a strong reaction in Pakistan. Unless the US and the UK representatives can tell the Pakistanis that we are pressing India hard, there will be trouble. The Pakistanis on their side ought to come away from their extreme position and begin to work seriously at the problem of a practical solution to the Kashmir issue. They perhaps should come quietly to a moderate position, e.g., that they will not insist on a plebiscite. He felt that unless the two countries come together, we will not have a situation in South Asia worth supporting. He agreed that we do not tell the Indians how far we will commit ourselves to their aid, but rather watch the situation carefully, because unless there is progress we cannot go forward.

The President asked what the chance would be that India would make a deal with the Chinese if we press India on Kashmir. Governor Harriman replied that when he and his Mission were in Delhi the Indians were showing themselves to be strongly anti-Chinese. He felt that our target should be joint defense of the subcontinent. When Indians began to realize the enormous costs involved in the defense against the Chinese, he was confident they would see the advantage of making a settlement with Pakistan.

Lord Home observed that we must be extraordinarily careful in dealing with this problem. He thought that the Pakistanis could be close to a decision to leave CENTO.

Governor Harriman felt there would be trouble if we tell the Pakistanis cold what our plans are for military assistance to India. He believed that General Adams, who had gained the high respect of Ayub and other Pakistanis, might have to go out again.

Prime Minister Macmillan said that what worries him is that, as so often before, we support the people who are troublesome, such as Nehru and Krishna Menon, and abandon the people who support us. He was sure it would be dangerous if we let Ayub feel we are abandoning him. The equal danger is that India may be overrun. Nehru, he feared, might be a bit more uppish now that the Chinese have gone away. He liked the idea that we should start slowly and not go ahead building up armies of the people who for 12 years or more have attacked us, have trumpeted the benefits of being non-aligned, have helped build up the neutralist Afro-Asian Bloc, and who have been, how should he say it, contemptuous—like a camel looking down his nose at you.

Governor Harriman reiterated that we must be careful how we tell Ayub of our plans. They must be discussed with him as a soldier in a professional way so that he does not explode. Mr. Harriman believed that we should send Generals Hull and Adams back to discuss, soldier to soldier, what we are doing. It is of the utmost importance, he emphasized, that we deal skillfully with the Pakistanis as well as with the Indians. Mr. Sandys concurred that it is right that the situation in Pakistan is potentially very explosive. He said he would not like the job of telling Ayub of our plans.

Prime Minister Macmillan asked whether it would not be helpful to cut our programs into installments, informing the Indians and Pakistanis of one at a time. Mr. Nitze observed that it would be easier for Ayub if we could identify the divisions we are converting to show that they are old divisions rather than new ones. Mr. Sandys said that the real danger is that the Pakistanis will ask us why we aid India ahead of the aligned countries when we take so much grief from Russia, against whom the aligned countries help us.

Prime Minister Macmillan asked whether the Indians will get MIG fighters. Ambassador Galbraith replied that this was not yet clear. In any case the delivery of a few MIGs would be only a symbolic gesture.

Prime Minister Macmillan said he was not happy about the proposed plan. Money is not the problem, he said, so much as how to explain our actions to the Pakistanis. We should first tell them what we are thinking of and see how they react.

Turning to the unanswered question of Chinese intentions, Prime Minister Macmillan said he does not think that they plan to take over India. What they have done so far seemed to him to be just a punitive expedition. Mr. Sandys said that it had struck home in India, and there is a fear that the Chinese could do it again. Prime Minister Macmillan observed that unless we are careful the Indians will slide back into their same old arrogance and beautifully detached view toward him and the President. He repeated his belief that we have to get them to face up to the fact of Kashmir. In the long run they depend on the West. In the short run they can be helped by the West—on the condition that they settle Kashmir.

Lord Home said he does not believe that the Chinese want to attack India. In his opinion Nehru knows that. At the same time he believes that nothing short of further Chinese attack will get Nehru to move on Kashmir. Mr. Sandys suggested that to get Nehru to move it is not necessary to threaten him. He is a sensitive man.

The President said that it is obvious that Nehru's reason for sending the messages to the Prime Minister and to him was to persuade them not to tie Western aid to the Kashmir question. He asked whether we could start with an understanding among ourselves on the limitations of emergency assistance. Then possibly send out Generals Hull and Adams to talk with Ayub. Mr. Sandys observed that telling the Pakistanis about our assistance plans is a political matter. In saying this he did not mean to decry the ability of General Adams, who had done a good job in the subcontinent. As to how far to tell the Indians what is being planned, he felt that in practice the US and UK will be talking in dimensions that will be clearer to the Indians.

Addressing the Prime Minister, the President asked whether the two of them should get in touch with Nehru, saying how important it is to keep negotiations going. Then they might send out Generals Hull and Adams to talk about the 1963 plan. In the course of that round could not Generals Hull and Adams go up to Pakistan and tell Ayub the sort of things we had been thinking of, adding that it is very important the talks do not break down during the winter. We need to persuade both parties to stay in the talks, even if there is little progress. Otherwise, we would have to threaten to cut off aid to them, and that would not make sense. Let us get a scenario showing what we do, what kind of messages we send to Ayub and Nehru, who goes where, etc. In short, let's get clear where we go in 1963.

Ambassador Galbraith asked rather skeptically whether we should send more high-ranking generals out to the subcontinent. Already there are military teams in Delhi, and perhaps we should send diplomatic representatives to Ayub rather than military men. Nehru, he had reason to know, is a difficult man to deal with on this issue. But in India as a whole there is a large movement in the direction of progress on Kashmir, the movement that forced Krishna Menon out. Beyond Nehru, he felt there is not a man in the government who would not ally India with the West tomorrow. The Indian fright of China will continue.

The President, recessing the session, asked members of the working party to draft proposals for consideration by the Prime Minister and him later in the afternoon.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/12-2062. Secret. Drafted by Talbot and approved by the White House on January 28, 1963. The meeting was held at Taylor House in Nassau where Kennedy and Macmillan met from December 18-21. Their talks covered a range of issues, but focused upon nuclear defense systems. Additional documentation on the Nassau talks is printed in vol. XIII, pp. 1091-1128.

1 See Document 227.

231. Memorandum of Conversation 231. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Nassau, December 20, 1962, 6 p.m.

SUBJECT

Sino-Indian Dispute

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The President

Mr. Harriman, Assistant Secretary FE

Mr. Talbot, Assistant Secretary NEA

Mr. Nitze, Assistant Secretary Defense, ISA

Ambassador Galbraith

Ambassador McConaughy

Mr. William Bundy, Deputy Assistant Secretary Defense, ISA

British

Prime Minister Macmillan

Lord Home

Mr. Duncan Sandys, Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations and Colonies

Mr. Pickard, Assistant Secretary, Commonwealth Relations Office

At the opening of the second session devoted to the Sino-Indian dispute, the working party presented draft proposals for lines of action to be pursued in the immediate phase by the UK and the US. These proposals were discussed and agreed to by the Prime Minister and the President. (See separate paper)1

The President asked whether we could get the Indians to begin to request more assistance from the Europeans and the Australians and Canadians. Mr. Bundy responded that we had tried this. The French are tepid, the Germans have given winter clothing and have arranged to airlift them to India but there has not been much other assistance. He believed that we will have to keep the pressure on to get more help.

Ambassador McConaughy expressed the view that the Pakistanis would be less sensitive to information about equipment that we choose to provide India than to extremely large dollar figures. He would hope that assistance from countries other than the US and the UK would also be well publicized, thereby taking some of the heat off us.

Mr. Duncan Sandys observed that if India should receive MIG fighters there is a great danger that Pakistanis would react by pulling out of CENTO and SEATO. Ambassador McConaughy added that the influence of three developments, should they occur, would particularly hurt our position in Pakistan. These would be (1) massive assistance to India, (2) no Kashmir settlement, and (3) a pullback by the Chinese. Mr. Sandys observed that if on top of these events the Indians should get MIGs and we should offer US and UK aircraft for use in India, the effect on Pakistan would be disastrous.

The President asked what would be so disastrous if the Pakistanis should leave CENTO. Mr. Sandys responded that it would be a slap in the face to the West and that Iran would doubtless follow.

The President asked what we get from Pakistan. In return for the protection of our alliance and our assistance what do they do for us? Ambassador McConaughy responded that Pakistan had offered help in the Laos crisis and in the 1950s had offered to send two divisions to Korea if we would guarantee the defense of Pakistan in the meantime.

Governor Harriman said that there was some thought that it was better to leave the MIG question on. There would not be many MIGs, at least not soon. In any case the MIG deal would be a black eye to the Russians. Mr. Sandys interjected that there might, however, be a lot of Russian technicians in India. We would have to make clear to the Indians that we cannot help them with a lot of Russians running around.

Ambassador Galbraith observed that he doubts the MIG question is important. Probably he could say to the Indians that a condition of our assistance in air defense would be that India should accept no MIGs. The Indians might welcome this demarche, which would get them off an uncomfortable hook. He was sure the Russians would greatly welcome it. Beyond getting them too off the hook with India and with Communist China, it would be a great propaganda ploy. To his mind, for us to make such an approach to India would consequently be a most unwise thing to do. On the question of Soviet technicians he did not think they would be likely to come to India in important numbers.

Lord Home said that the air defense question alarms him. If we gave air defense to India, he felt certain that the Pakistanis would get out of the Pact at once. Prime Minister Macmillan noted that the proposal to send a team to India does not commit us to any specific further action. Mr. Sandys expressed the view that we ought to go at this air defense question very slowly. It is the only carrot we have left to give India to move on Kashmir. We will have played away our best card; this is the only trump we have left and we should play it slowly. Ambassador Galbraith stated that his view is quite different. The proposal for air defense assistance is the safest way of handling the problem. We are not proposing to put squadrons into India, but only promising that they would come when India was under air attack.

Prime Minister Macmillan observed that like everything else this is a question of balance. He said he has been impressed that there has been a great turning to us in India, and we must not repel it. On the other hand, he judged that it is quite clear that Chinese won't attack India seriously. If we do all that is proposed for the Indians and they do not settle Kashmir then we will have lost the last opportunity and the Pakistanis will turn against us. He said that he would be inclined to play this matter of air defense a little slowly; it is the one thing we have with which to exert influence. And, if we should extend the air defense concept to the subcontinent, this would help our situation in Pakistan. In his view, unless something like Chinese pressure causes it, we will not see a settlement of Kashmir. Ayub is not as strong as he was a year ago, possibly due to his having given expression to some naive ideas about democracies, a parliament, etc. We have to bear in mind all the time the problem of the balance between the prospect of losing the sympathy of India and losing Pakistan. If we lost Pakistan, Lord Home added, Iran would follow.

Governor Harriman said that on the other side, it would seem to him that it would be well for the air defense team to go out to the subcontinent rapidly to show the Indians that we are interested in this very emotional question. Then the governments could take their time in making a decision. He felt that we would lose an opportunity in not giving a quick response to the Indian plea for assistance in air defense. Ambassador Galbraith asked what we would get from delaying the air defense exercise. Governor Harriman added that it is conceivable that the Chinese will attack again and it is therefore important that we know our minds on air defense in good time.

The President summarized the arguments for delays as (1) that air defense assistance is our most important card and (2) it would help persuade the Indians to reach a Kashmir settlement. Ambassador Galbraith noted, however, that the proposed plan is the one solution of India's air defense problem to which the Pakistanis should have the least complaint.

Lord Home raised the question whether in the event a Chinese attack were in our view only a border squabble, the UK and US would under this plan be committed to air defense?

The President suggested that agreement be reached that the mission should go out. The UK High Commissioner and US Ambassadors on the subcontinent could express their views about the timing, which could then be set by a communication between the Prime Minister and him, say about January 10.

The Prime Minister asked whether it is felt that there is any chance of Nehru's moving on Kashmir. Ambassador Galbraith replied that there is no chance if both countries demand possession of the Valley. There may be some sophisticated road toward settlement, on the European model, but the two countries are not ready for this yet.

In closing the session, the President suggested that to help the Indians get a sense of the views being expressed, Ambassador Galbraith could indicate to them the flavor of these meetings on his return to Delhi.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/12-2062. Secret. Drafted by Talbot and approved by the White House on January 30, 1963. The meeting was held at Taylor House.

1 A copy of the paper, headed “Final Agreed Text: Sequence of Actions With Respect to India and Pakistan,” is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 12/19/62-12/29/62. The text of the paper was transmitted to New Delhi in telegram 2711, December 27. It was also sent to Karachi and London. (Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/12-2762)

232. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 232. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, December 22, 1962, 11:35 p.m.

938. Ambassador requested deliver following letter from the President to President Ayub.

Verbatim Text.

Dear President Ayub:

Thank you for your two letters of December 17.1 I will answer you separately on the matter of the Tarbela Dam after I have had a chance to hear the views of my advisors on this difficult and complex problem.

I have reviewed your other letter with Prime Minister Macmillan at Nassau. After a full discussion of the problems created by the Chinese Communist aggression against India, we have come to what seems to us a prudent course of action at this time to meet the challenge—a course of action which is in the best interests of the Free World. We agreed on a reasonable and frugal program of military assistance designed solely to enable India to defend itself better should the Chinese Communists renew their attacks at an early date.

To deny India the minimum requirements of defense would only encourage further Chinese Communist aggression, an aggression which we both see as posing as grave an ultimate threat to Pakistan as to India. Therefore, the supply of arms for this purpose should not be made contingent on a Kashmir settlement. Beyond this stage, however, we will certainly take any one-sided intransigence on Kashmir into account as a factor in determining the extent and pace of our assistance.

The Prime Minister and I are fully conscious of the great opportunity that now exists for the settlement of this major issue within the Free World. As you know, our primary concern is the long-range defense of the subcontinent within the context of our global strategy. No single step could contribute as much to the security of the subcontinent as the resolution of the Kashmir problem. Despite the probably painful and time consuming process required, we look forward with confidence to real progress in the ministerial discussions which lie ahead.

Ambassador McConaughy, who participated in all of our deliberations, will give you a full account of the meetings in Washington and Nassau.

With warm personal regards,

Sincerely, John F. Kennedy

End Verbatim Text.

In accordance usual custom this letter is not to be published.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-2262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Grant and Gatch; cleared with FE, EUR, U. Alexis Johnson, and Komer; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

1 See the source note, Document 228.

233. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 233. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, December 22, 1962, 11:35 p.m.

2692. Ambassador requested deliver following letter from the President to Prime Minister Nehru.

Verbatim Text.

Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

I have thought a great deal about the problems of the defense of the subcontinent since I received your letters of December 8 and 10, 1962.1 Ambassador Galbraith has been here and we have had several good talks. I discussed these problems with Prime Minister Macmillan at some length in Nassau.

Prime Minister Macmillan and I reviewed the urgent problems caused by the Chinese Communist threat to the subcontinent and what best we could do to strengthen India's defenses. On the particular problem of air defense, we propose to send at an early date a joint UK-US team for full explorations with you and your people.

We also discussed what the subcontinent can do to direct its energies more fully toward its defense. We were both greatly encouraged by the historic decision of India and Pakistan to take up in direct talks the great problems which separate you. Protracted and time consuming as these talks may have to be, we were confident that you and President Ayub will be able to work out solutions. Nothing could contribute more to the security and progress of the subcontinent.

I have asked Ambassador Galbraith to go over these matters with you in some detail.2

Sincerely,

John F. Kennedy

End Verbatim Text.

In accordance usual custom this letter is not to be published.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 691.93/12-2262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Grant and Schneider; cleared with FE, EUR, U. Alexis Johnson, and Komer; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi and London.

1 See Document 222.

2 Galbraith delivered Kennedy's letter to Nehru on December 27. He noted the plan to send a U.S.-U.K. military team to explore India's air defense requirements, and he outlined the U.S.-U.K. agreement to fund the conversion of six Indian Army divisions to mountain warfare divisions. He added that the question of longer term defense support would have to be made in light of a further assessment of Chinese intentions and the larger problem of the defense of the subcontinent. (Telegram 2522 from New Delhi, December 27; Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/12-2762)

234. Telegram From the Embassy Office in Pakistan to the Department of State 234. Telegram From the Embassy Office in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Murree, December 27, 1962, 2 a.m.

8. Department telegrams 9361 and 938.2

Late today I met for almost one hour with President Ayub to deliver President Kennedy's letter (Department telegram 938) and to discuss decisions reached in Washington and Nassau on Western military assistance to India and Indo-Pak discussion of Kashmir. Dehlavi present and Sneider accompanied me. I reviewed for Ayub fully deliberations on United States policy to subcontinent and presented justification for our action decisions stressing our concern for GOP interests, and provisions to safeguard those interests. I will follow with full report. Key points which emerged during our conversation were: (1) Throughout our meeting Ayub remained relaxed, cordial and very friendly. He was very grateful for President Kennedy's letter and for comprehensive briefing I gave him on Washington and Nassau proceedings. Most important he took news of your decision to provide 100 to 120 million dollars emergency arms aid to India without expressing any disagreement. Even when I pressed him for specific reaction, he avoided any expression disapproval. While he did not give specific approbation, he avoided argument against rationale for emergency arms aid and in fact by implication accepted it when he acknowledged that our initial shipment of military aid to India and over all United States involvement in support of India had proved one of two major deterrents, in his judgment, to further Chinese attacks. (Other deterrent was over-extended Chinese Communist supply lines in NEFA.)

(2) On other hand throughout conversation Ayub made clear that he still felt Nehru would not be moved to negotiate Kashmir settlement except under pressure from United States and United Kingdom. While he did not contest our view that emergency arms aid could not be withheld as condition for progress in Kashmir negotiations, he pointedly asked whether we felt failure to make this aid conditional would harden Indian position in forthcoming ministerial talks. I told him that we did not believe this to be true and were emphasizing importance we attached to progress towards Kashmir solution regarding longer range aid to Indian Army and fact that rate progress towards Kashmir solution would be important factor taken into account in considering any second phase program.

(3) On Kashmir negotiations Ayub remained open minded and flexible. He indicated recognition that first round of talks at best would be reiteration past positions3 and that at some crucial point compromise would have to be proposed by third party. I gathered that he remains willing to accept compromise solution not wholly satisfactory to either party which would be based on recognition interests of all parties concerned, including assured provision for unfettered Indian line of communications to Ladakh.

(4) At close of our conversation, Ayub intimated that his reaction to our emergency arms aid program would ultimately depend on Indian attitude at ministerial talks and that his current tolerant and non-committal reaction could harden if it appeared Indians were taking unwarranted comfort from our continued unconditional provision of emergency aid and adopting as result completely negative attitude in talks. On other hand if Indians show any inclination to explore avenues to resolution of Kashmir issue, I believe Ayub will continue tacit acquiescence in emergency arms program. In my view this makes it all the more important that Indians here indicate they have come to Rawalpindi for more than courtesy call which is all most Pakistanis now expect.

(5) Ayub reacted well to indication that General Adams or other top United States general visiting India and possibly air defense survey team also could endeavor stop off in Rawalpindi, if desired, for military exchanges of information and views. Any gesture along line of high-level consultation or early conveyance of important information or conclusions is psychologically invaluable here.

Comment: The interview went better than I had dared hope. Evident he had made decision to rely heavily on our assumed influence with Indians, which will make it difficult to keep British “half step in front” of us, as we had planned. British HICOM has not yet been given requested appointment with President, but hopes to see him before President's departure for Karachi tomorrow. Tonight I went over my meeting with President analytically and in detail with British HICOM James, and he can take full advantage of this knowledge in his meeting, which can be useful follow up and consolidation. President particularly asked me to stay here throughout meeting, and to maintain contact with both delegations. I agreed to do this.

McConaughy

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/12-2762. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to New Delhi and London. McGeorge Bundy sent a copy to the President in Palm Beach, Florida, on December 28. (White House telegram CAP 5665-62; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 12/62)

1 Not found.

2 Document 232.

3 The first round of Ministerial talks on Kashmir took place in Rawalpindi December 26-29. India was represented in the talks by Swaran Singh, Minister for Railways. Pakistan was represented by Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, Minister for Industries, National Resources and Works. In five meetings, the two Ministers restated well-established positions on the Kashmir issue. Bhutto pressed for a solution based on a U.N.-sponsored plebiscite. Singh countered that India was a secular state and could not countenance a plebiscite based on religious principles. (Telegram 19 from Murree, December 28; Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/12-2862) The talks adjourned on December 29 and the Ministers agreed to meet again in New Delhi in mid-January. (Telegram 1165 from Karachi, December 29; ibid., 690D.91/12-2962) Documentation on the first round of talks is ibid., 690D.91.

235. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 235. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, January 4, 1963, 8:12 p.m.

2775. Now that Kashmir discussions have gained some momentum, there is need for creating atmosphere in which more progress can be made in succeeding rounds of talks. Agreement both sides in joint communique to take steps this direction is necessary beginning and atmosphere both sides has already cleared somewhat. There have been some jarring notes, however, which indicate Paks, Indians and ourselves might profitably examine what steps necessary to create best conditions for Jan 15 talks.

On Pak side, philandering with Chicoms1 presents clear danger to talks. It took forbearance from Indians and some effort on our part to limit adverse effect Sino-Pak border agreement and further steps such as Pak-Chicom trade agreement and talk of Mohammad Ali's visiting Communist China might prove intolerable. Pak statement on Indian invitation to Ayub similarly unhelpful. We would hope and expect Paks could control this sort of activity while concentrating on examination of range of possible solutions to dispute which could be considered during next round discussions.

On their side, Indians have shown bad judgment in issuing invitation to Ayub and then jumping gun on announcement acceptance. We hope Indians can keep from rocking boat and also settle down to serious consideration alternative solutions to dispute.

Our role in this process should continue to be one of exercising influence from sidelines. When either side makes faux pas, we should call attention to effect on atmosphere in other country. Embassy Karachi should take up Pak-Chicom dealings with GOP; prospects for talks would be improved if Paks could be persuaded make some showing of understanding of India's defense requirements against China. This might be enunciation to Indians during next round of principle, which Ayub has mentioned to us (Murree's 9),2 that Kashmir settlement must take into account India's defense needs in Ladakh. Separate instruction being transmitted this subject. Similarly Embassies Karachi and Delhi should as need arises call to attention of local govts any excessive violations of agreement in communique re atmosphere such as overzealous statements by officials or resumption of press propaganda campaigns.

While playing this watchdog role we should not, however, become directly involved in preparations for Jan 15 talks. We should encourage both sides consider various alternatives, particularly in light of glimpses of principles for settlement afforded by first round. If the occasion presents itself, we might assist Indians and Paks at this stage by reviewing with them the entire range of various proposals which have been made for settlement dispute. We hope that two govts will be able to produce some concrete sign of progress by time Dacca Assembly meeting since Ayub's capacity to continue talks might be limited thereafter if no progress shown. Organization of several technical working groups might be one device by which to make acceptable showing. It might be well to make sure Indians aware of this need. Also probably helpful remind both sides constructive communique would have useful effect. Finally, USG should keep its public comments to a minimum. USIA has agreed limit coverage Kashmir negotiations to official US statements and Indo-Pak communiques.

We should continue to conduct other aspects of our relations with both countries with an eye to their effect on the Kashmir negotiations. While there should be no question of linking between emergency phase military aid to India and progress on Kashmir, it should be made clear to Indians there definite relationship with longer run aid. In this connection it would be useful to know of effect Embassy's efforts in accordance with Deptel 2599,3 particularly among military and political leaders below Nehru. It might be worthwhile to continue to point out to Indians that both foreign and domestic resources for strengthening their military establishment limited; relaxation Indo-Pak tensions would not only free resources for defense against Chicoms but would also mean less diversion from economic development.

In Pakistan efforts should continue be made reassure Ayub re US aid to India. We expect keep Ayub informed re arms commitments and deliveries to India. Further, we expect be forthcoming in meeting legitimate Pak request re such matters as MAP deliveries (DOD currently ascertaining, inter alia, possibility of expedited delivery; separate message to follow) and in releasing local currency expected to be made available shortly by AID/W to meet pressing GOP needs. At the same time we should assure Ayub of US determination to push for Kashmir settlement as part of effort strengthen security of subcontinent.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-463. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Schneider; cleared by NEA, FE, and with USIS, AID, and DOD/ISA; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to London.

1 Reference is to the announcement by Pakistan on December 26 that agreement in principle had been reached with China on the demarcation of the Himalayan border between the two countries. Details of the agreement would be worked out by Foreign Minister Ali on a visit to Peking to be scheduled. On December 28, Swaran Singh stated to the press in Rawalpindi that Pakistan's boundary agreement with India's enemy on the eve of the Ministerial talks was not helpful in paving the way for a mutually satisfactory solution on Kashmir. (The New York Times, December 27 and 29, 1962)

2 An apparent reference to telegram 8 from Murree, Document 234.

3 Document 219.

236. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 236. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, January 11, 1963, 12:52 p.m.

3623. There follows for your information message dated January 9 which President has sent to Prime Minister Macmillan on Joint US/UK Air Defense Team:

“Dear Friend:

Now that the Indians have let us know that they would welcome the visit of a Joint UK/US Air Defense Team, we are ready to move ahead and get our experts on the ground. In his last letter to me1 Prime Minister Nehru said, 'the earlier it comes, the better.'

The small group of officers which we are selecting for the Team can come over to London around January 15th if this is convenient. After several days work with your officers, the Joint Team could then go to India.2

I understand that our people are in general agreement about the exact composition of the Joint Team and its terms of reference.

While the odds that the Indians and Chinese will get engaged again on a scale which might involve us seem to be declining, I still believe that an air defense plan of the sort we discussed at Nassau would be a desirable gesture at moderate cost, if satisfactory arrangements can be worked out in detail.

Sincerely,

John F. Kennedy”

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/1-1163. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Cameron, cleared with BNA and by Komer, and approved by Cameron. Repeated to New Delhi and Karachi.

1 The reference is to a letter sent by Nehru to Kennedy on December 29 in response to the letter sent by Kennedy to Nehru on December 22 (see Document 233). (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 12/15/62-2/10/63)

2 Macmillan responded on January 13 with a letter to Kennedy in which he suggested delaying the dispatch of the air defense team to India until after the conclusion of the round of Ministerial talks on Kashmir scheduled to begin in New Delhi on January 16. He felt that the Ayub government would be upset if the mission arrived in New Delhi while the talks were in progress. (The letter was repeated to London in telegram 3655, January 13; Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 204, Macmillan Correspondence with Kennedy, 1963)

237. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 237. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, January 11, 1963, 6 p.m.

1258. Verbatim Text.

Acting Foreign Secretary Kharas gave DCM today copy of letter from President Ayub to President Kennedy dated January 2. Kharas said letter had been forwarded to Ambassador Aziz for transmittal to the President. Following is text of letter:

“I thank you for your message of December 22,1 transmitted to me by Ambassador McConaughy, who also gave me particulars of the present United States-United Kingdom programme of military assistance to India.

“Our assessment of the situation in the context of the Sino-Indian conflict has already been conveyed to you. The trend of the exchanges between Peking and New Delhi as well as the recent statements of Prime Minister Nehru clearly indicating his intention of reaching a negotiated border settlement with Communist China, would seem to confirm our own conclusions as to the deeper reasons behind India's request for massive military assistance from the West.

“Ambassador McConaughy has informed me of the extent of your immediate programme of supply of arms to India which you and Prime Minister Macmillan consider necessary to meet India's minimum requirements of defence. You have made it clear that this programme is not contingent on a Kashmir settlement. While the quantum of military support to India which you have decided to extend in the Nassau meeting may appear to be frugal in the context of your global strategy, we fear that it is sufficiently massive to alter the present ratio of military strength as between Pakistan and India and aggravate the danger to our security.

“Only a speedy and just Kashmir settlement can give us any assurance that the contemplated increase of India's military power is not likely to be deployed against Pakistan in the future.

“I agree completely with your judgment that no single step could contribute as much to the security of the sub-continent as the resolution of the Kashmir problem. Despite the discouraging and provocative utterances of Mr. Nehru on the subject, we are pursuing our sincere efforts to negotiate with India a solution which would meet three requirements: Respect for the wishes of the people of Jammu and Kashmir; protection of the vital interests of Pakistan; and due regard for such claims of India as could be considered legitimate.

“It is only with reference to these three basic criteria that a correct judgment can be made as to the one-sidedness or otherwise of the intransigence which India is very likely to show in the negotiations.

“I am confident that you will view with understanding and sympathy our efforts to reach an equitable and honorable settlement with India on the basis of the three essential principles that I have mentioned.

“No country in the world has so much in its power to promote a just and peaceful solution of the Kashmir dispute as the United States. If the flow of your arms supplies is so regulated as to influence India to negotiate in a more amenable frame of mind, positive results are bound to follow.

“With best wishes for your health, happiness and prosperity in the new year, Yours sincerely, (Signed) M. Ayub.”

McConaughy

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 1/11/63-1/15/63. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Received in the Department of State at 12:54 p.m. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

1 See Document 232.

238. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 238. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, January 12, 1963.

Attached is a brief recap of the current status of our Indian projects. Note particularly that we still confront the problem of getting Congress to lift the ceiling on total aid to India.

Also attached are some of Ken Galbraith's reservations (Delhi's 2696)1 about letting our air defense for Indian project get too closely tied to the Paks. Most of us share these concerns and will try to avoid the pitfalls.

Karachi's 12582 (attached) is new letter from Ayub, which I for one regard as abominable. We simply must bring Ayub around to realizing the folly of letting his relations with us get out of hand before he gets himself so far out on a limb that he can't draw back. Since you are the only one to whom he'll listen, I propose to submit a vigorous reply.

Meanwhile, the second round of Kashmir talks begins 16 January in Delhi. The first round went off without undue bickering (indeed with glimmerings of hope) but each successive round will be more difficult. Each side is trying to get the other to make the first move. We may have to step in as honest brokers before too long, lest the talks break down in a contest of silence.

R.W. Komer

Attachment3

Washington, January 7, 1963.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

SUBJECT

Status Report of NSC Subcommittee on Military Aid to India and Kashmir

The NSC Subcommittee on South Asia has the following report on the status of U.S. military assistance to India and the Kashmir question:

1. Joint U.S.-U.K. Air Defense Team

We are moving ahead as rapidly as possible on sending, with the British, a team to India to determine air defense requirements. The JCS has approved terms of reference and our component of the team will be prepared to depart from the U.S. on January 15 to join its British counterpart in London. The British have handed us their version of the terms of reference for this joint team which seem generally in line with our thinking.

2. U.S. Defense Production Team

The Department of Defense is organizing a team, with Mr. Carroll Staley of the Army Materiel Command as head, to study how defense production facilities can be developed in India and what foreign assistance is necessary for their development. A similar British team is now in India. While its terms of reference are narrow—limited to ordinance and existing facilities—ours will be broad enough to cover such industries as communications and textiles and to include new facilities. We estimate that our team will leave the U.S. on about January 17.

3. Assistance from old Commonwealth and Western European Nations

The U.K. has informed the old Commonwealth countries of the Nassau decisions on military aid to India and is requesting their cooperation in providing aid within the agreed planning basis. We have no indication of their response or of their willingness to increase their contributions.

We are instructing our Embassy in London to request the British to increase pressures on their old Commonwealth partners.

We are also trying to bring the Governments of France, Germany and Italy more actively into the business of providing military aid to India. The British and ourselves are passing on to those governments the agreed U.S.-U.K. planning basis for such aid and seeking their cooperation in working within the planning basis. We also plan to brief the same Western European governments more fully on our views regarding the Sino-Indian conflict and, as they indicate their willingness to provide military assistance, bring them more fully into our coordination machinery.

4. U.S. Shipments to Date

Military aid to India to date approximates $22 million, and may be roughly divided into three categories: equipment sent by initial airlift ($7 million including transportation costs), that sent by sealift ($12.4 million) and other ($2.6 million). The material sent by initial airlift, comprising urgently needed Army ground equipment, was shipped between November 3rd and 14th. The sealift equipment, comprising the bulk of the aid, also consists of infantry equipment and ammunition. Of the three vessels transporting it, the first arrived in India on January 4th, and the remaining two are scheduled to arrive on the 13th. The “other” category includes: two Caribou (transport) aircraft now en route to India; C-119 (transport) aircraft spare parts (the majority as yet undelivered); 50,000 pairs of snow goggles (being transported via Air India International); 25,000 sets of winter clothing (10,000 via air, arrived January 3, 1963; balance by sea); and other miscellaneous administration and training type support. Another form of assistance, not included above since the operating costs to MAP are as yet unresolved, is airlift support, i.e., the twelve C-130s currently in India.

5. Congressional Ceiling on Aid to India

If we meet our commitment of $60 million to provide aid under the agreed planning basis, we will have a leeway of about $15 million under the informal ceiling on aid to India as agreed with Senator Humphrey at the time of the Senate-House Conference on the foreign aid authorization bill. Likely air defense commitments and a continued increase in PL-480 aid will push us over the top. We are, therefore, initiating consultations with the Congressional leaders regarding the ceiling.

6. Policy Studies and Intelligence

We are looking into the need for policy studies on a variety of subjects such as the U.S.-U.K. relationship regarding military aid to India, our approach to long run military aid, long run Indian requirements for economic assistance, and the implications of the Pakistan-Chinese Communist relationship.

We are also taking steps to improve our intelligence regarding Communist China as it relates to the Sino-Indian conflict.

7. Kashmir Negotiations

We believe the opening round of the India-Pakistan talks on Kashmir went as well as could have been expected. We believe for the present we should continue to concentrate on building an atmosphere in which progress can be made, leaving the substance of the negotiations to the two parties. We have instructed our Embassies in New Delhi and Karachi to take certain steps along these lines.

At the same time we are urgently studying other ways by which the U.S. and U.K. can encourage forward movement, including offering good offices when and if they are required.

We are particularly concerned over the effect on the talks of increased Pakistani flirtation with the Chinese Communists, and have instructed Ambassador McConaughy to speak firmly to Ayub on this.

Phillips Talbot

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 1/11/63-1/15/63. Secret.

1 Dated January 10; not printed.

2 Document 237.

3 Secret.

239. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 239. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, January 15, 1963, 8:20 p.m.

2871. Deptel 2775 to New Delhi,1 991 to Karachi.

Our reading from here of GOP and GOI views and likely negotiating positions in upcoming Delhi talks leads us to conclusion best US course is to continue refrain from making specific proposal at present time. Picture we have is that parties may show some flexibility in this next round; our tactics should be offer friendly off-stage encouragement that they out-vie each other in forthcomingness. We should clearly indicate on both sides that outcome this round will have genuine impact on US and particularly Congressional thinking. Hence, both parties have vested interest in demonstrating disposition to compromise in talks. They should know it remains our conviction most desirable and lasting solution Kashmir question will be that suggested and arrived at by parties themselves. We remain hopeful such solution possible and can be achieved soon.

It most important we make clear to both Indians and Pakistanis that we are not prepared see negotiations break down, certainly not at forthcoming talks. Hence, you should continue to urge respective Governments (1) explore any and all proposals; and (2) at minimum agree to continuation ministerial-level talks, and be prepared in advance with communique which will assure this.

In event there is clear indication talks foundering you, preferably in concert UK HiCom but if necessary alone, should inform both sides we will have concrete proposal to submit in nearest future following our assessment Delhi talks; therefore, both sides should agree to further round talks for purpose examining proposal. We believe it would not be advisable to present actual proposal at time talks collapsing as in atmosphere then existing it might be rejected out of hand.

We realize Indians prefer purely bilateral consideration this question and have always objected to third party intervention. As matter of tactics, it might be well to put them on notice that whereas we now also prefer bilateral approach, if it does not produce results, US likely make proposal for solution. We hope you can lead Indians to conclusion that in order to avoid problems which US proposal might cause them, they should make extra effort reach agreement in bilateral talks. We see no need tell Paks this now for fear they might drag feet in bilateral talks in order to stimulate our intervention.

FYI. We are presently considering specifics of possible US proposal which we plan finalize after upcoming talks. We will be consulting with UK on this and will be in touch with Embassies Delhi and Karachi. Our current thinking is to use this proposal only if bilateral talks on verge breaking down or, after period time, fail make progress. We believe proposal should be single balanced formula which is fair to both sides and would require equal sacrifice. While initial reaction by both parties to such formula might be cool, we believe later consideration would be more serious, particularly as they take into consideration implications rejection re US and Congressional reaction. End FYI.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D.91/1-1563. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Ludlow and Schneider and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to London.

1 Document 235.

240. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 240. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, January 17, 1963.

SUBJECT

United States Policy Toward Afghanistan

Ambassador Steeves was called to Washington to participate in a review of United States policy toward Afghanistan. This review has been completed and a proposed course of action has been developed.

The enclosed memorandum reflects the review and embodies the proposal. We suggest this memorandum serve as a basis for discussion during Ambassador Steeves' meeting with you at 4:30 p.m. on Friday, January 18. Under Secretary George C. McGhee, AID Administrator David Bell, Assistant Secretary Phillips Talbot and AID Assistant Administrator William Gaud will also participate in this meeting.1

Dean Rusk

Enclosure2

SUBJECT

United States-Afghan Relations

Proposed Line of Action

To continue our aid program in Afghanistan using the more expensive route through Iran and taking the additional transportation costs out of the planned levels of aid.

Problem

The impasse between Afghanistan and Pakistan has continued and the border between the two countries is still closed. We have now reached the point where we can no longer maintain an aid program of the dimension necessary to the achievement of our objectives in Afghanistan and in the area unless we decide to make fuller use of the more expensive route through Iran. Our bilateral relations with Afghanistan, but more importantly our interest and objectives in the surrounding area, principally Iran and Pakistan, are being placed in jeopardy. A good United States posture in Afghanistan is insurance for United States interests and investments in Afghanistan's two neighbors Iran and Pakistan.

Ambassador Steeves has come back to participate with us in a review of our policy toward Afghanistan and our objectives there and to work out a course of action designed to achieve these objectives.

Alternate Courses of Action

The instruments available to maintain a United States position in Afghanistan in sufficient force to achieve our objectives are limited. In fact, they revolve around our efforts in the aid field. We have considered four possible courses of action.

1. In view of their stubborness on the border issue, we could inform the Afghans that we would delay implementation of various aid projects until the supply route through Pakistan was open to us for heavy and bulky items needed in various capital projects.

2. As a tougher version, we could let the Afghans know that if the border were not open by a certain date we would terminate our aid activities.

3. We could go to the other extreme and expand the fiscal content of our aid program so that the existing levels of aid could be maintained in spite of increased transportation costs through Iran.

4. We could continue our aid program in Afghanistan using the more expensive of the routes through Iran but take the additional transportation costs out of the planned levels of aid.

Conclusion

Course one is, in effect, what we have been doing over the past 17 months. It has not proved effective in getting the border open.

Course two would probably produce a negative Afghan response and deal us right out of the country. This would greatly accelerate the country's drift toward the Soviet sphere.

Course three would reward the Afghans for their stubborness and remove whatever pressure remains for them to seek a compromise with Pakistan. It would also place us in a very difficult position with Congress.

Course four is, in effect, a holding action. We believe it will slow down but not reverse Afghanistan's slide toward the Soviets. However, it does give us an interval during which more favorable conditions could develop. Such developments could include a more moderate government in Afghanistan. Certainly by retaining an effective position in the country, we will strengthen those elements in Afghanistan who wish to continue close ties with the West. Additionally, we will have more time to work for a constructive approach from Pakistan which we are prevented from effectively doing at present because of the tension over the supply of military aid to India.

We believe course four is the only logical one available to us. Even though its objectives are limited, we propose to move forward with it.

Some Aspects of Implementing This Proposal

The major United States project, the Kabul-Kandahar road, has come to symbolize United States interest and position in Afghanistan. To complete this project will clearly demonstrate United States determination to maintain its position in Afghanistan. We propose to complete this project using the route through Iran. Being aware of the effect of extra costs domestically and the need to demonstrate to the Afghans that their stubborn political policies will cost them, we will take the additional transportation costs out of planned aid levels.

Completing the road will demonstrate United States determination to aid Afghanistan, but the specifications for two-thirds of the road will be changed from blacktop to gravel to bring the project within the $41.4 million obligated. Included in this expenditure by the time this road is completed will have been some $2.6 million of additional transit costs. There are force majeure costs of up to $3.0 million which are additional, but the exact figure will not be known for a considerable period, perhaps years, pending review of claims. Total costs of cancelling the road now without having provided one mile of acceptable road would be $22.0 million.

The approach to the road project demonstrates our approach for the over-all program. Projects will be curtailed or specifically selected in order that the additional transit costs will in effect be borne by the Afghan program. In view of the recent IMF Mission and general Afghan Government agreement to their findings, a slower pace of economic development appears not only in order but mandatory. Therefore, what in effect will be a somewhat reduced level of United States aid will probably appear less unpalatable.

The grant program in Afghanistan in FY 1962 was $38.5 million, including $23.7 million for the Kabul-Kandahar road. In FY 1963, the grant program under consideration is for approximately $15.0 million; in addition, a loan program of $5 million is contemplated. The carryover of unliquidated obligations from previous years is about $44 million. Therefore, the actual expenditures in FY 63 will probably reach $30 million. The grant program in FY 1964 will be of the same magnitude, but United States interest in orientating Afghanistan to the Free World through the building of a road to Iran will increase the loan program to approximately $15.0 million.

Our efforts in the aid field would be incomplete were we to ignore the dangerous increase in Afghan-Soviet trade over the past few years. An important facet of our efforts, therefore, is to increase Afghan trade with the Free World. Accordingly, we are working with the Afghans to improve the quality of their exports so that they will find larger markets in the West.

The increased transit costs make a PL-480 program impractical and this will be dropped.

In implementing this course of action, Ambassador Steeves on his return, will inform the Afghan Government that the United States has decided to take up the Royal Government of Afghanistan's proposal that the United States avail itself of Afghan forwarding facilities through Iran. In this manner the real costs of this route will be developed so that both we and the Afghans can use it as a basis for discussion. At the same time, the Royal Government of Afghanistan will be informed that additional transportation costs which we expect to range from 10% to 25% will result in a modification of projects to cover that amount.

We believe the foregoing course of action will achieve our limited aims and can be defended as prudent.

U.S. Objectives

Protection of U.S. Investment in Subcontinent and in Iran

Our aim which is to maintain Afghanistan as an independent buffer state stems not from fondness for the Afghans but rather from the strategic importance of the territory they occupy. The security of our allies, Pakistan and Iran, would be gravely jeopardized should a drastic curtailment of the United States position in Afghanistan result in full Soviet domination of that country. Moreover, there would be implications to the security of the subcontinent as a whole should this situation develop. Thus, the safeguarding of our investment in Afghanistan's Free World neighbors is a fundamental objective of our Afghan policy.

Thwart Soviet Aims

Secondly, but of equal importance, we can thwart a major Soviet effort by maintaining an effective position in Afghanistan. We will be demonstrating to the Soviets that the type of operation they have launched in Afghanistan will not be unopposed and will not achieve the results they hope for. To curtail seriously our position in Afghanistan would be a signal to the Soviets that their efforts were succeeding. If we retreated, the Soviets would press forward to fill the vacuum.

In short, our efforts to counter Communist encroachment into the subcontinent as evidenced by our aid to India, would be incomplete should we neglect the vital northwestern flank.

* Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Staff Memoranda Series, R. Komer Security. Confidential.

1 No record of this meeting has been found, but the conclusions reached during the meeting were transmitted to Kabul on January 25 in telegram 196, Document 246.

2 Confidential.

241. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 241. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, January 17, 1963.

We are at another crossroads on Afghan policy. State has firmed up its own proposals (attached);1 which I hope you can read this evening; I suggest we use your 4:30 Friday meeting with Steeves to get your views. Dave Bell, McGhee, Talbot, Gaud and I will be present.

For years we've been fighting an uphill battle to maintain a competitive presence in Afghanistan vis-à-vis the Soviets. This job has been made doubly difficult by the recurrent Pak-Afghan clashes over Pushtunistan, e.g. border closings which force us to use the expensive Iranian route.

We've been in effect delaying many of our aid projects until the Pakistan route was opened. Since this has failed to move the Afghans, State and AID now propose that we go ahead with what we can within presently planned levels, but deduct from these any additional charges from use of the Iran route. Thus we'll maintain some pressure on the Afghans, but at the same time convince them we'll still try to help them (e.g. by building a new $15 million road from Herat to Iran).

In effect, this policy seeks to buy more time, in the hope that something will give. State agrees that our investment is not big enough to reverse the adverse trend from creeping Soviet infiltration (at best it only slows this down). But it's just big enough to give the Afghans renewed hope that we will continue to back them regardless of their policy toward Pakistan. Here's the rub—I for one simply doubt that we can help the Afghans enough to maintain an already precarious independence unless they're willing to help themselves by composing their quarrel with Pakistan. We've seen few signs of this; in fact, the Afghans just rejected Ayub's latest offer (true, it was a pull-back from the Naim-Mohammed Ali formula).

So long as the Afghans think we'll do all we can to help them regardless of their Pushtun policy, they'll have no incentive to yield. Therefore, if past pressures haven't worked, how about a yet tougher line? Steeves could go back and say, more in sorrow than in anger, that we want to help but simply can't do so effectively while the border impasse continues. Therefore, while we'll finish existing projects insofar as possible, we can't start any new ones (e.g. Herat road) pending a border opening.

Steeves doubts that this would move the Afghans. But what State proposes seems even less likely to move them. And until the Afghans change their own policy, we'll continue slowly to lose ground. A shift may require Daud's removal, but this seems more likely to occur if we don't indulge him than if we do. In short, while I grant that it is more prudent to continue playing for time, I believe you should consider the alternative case.

Bob Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Staff Memoranda Series, R. Komer Security. Secret.

1 See the enclosure to Document 240.

242. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 242. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, January 19, 1963, 9 p.m.

2834. 1. Indians and Paks agreed at last minute today continue talks1 through third round in early February probably second week.

2. Breakthrough came with agreement by ministers (subject higher approval) on confidential joint statement of objectives. At close lengthy morning session, Indians submitted draft paper. In afternoon Paks put up counter draft. After considerable haggling and Pak rejection of third round negotiations on basis separate drafts, joint statement of objectives agreed to with subpara on Kashmir setting forth differing Indian and Pak views on principles of settlement.

3. Following is substance joint statement of objectives [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]: 1) Agree to explore political settlement Kashmir without prejudice to basic positions of parties.

2) Agree to examine proposals for honorable, equitable and final boundary settlement taking into account: A India and Pak seek delineation of international boundary in Jammu and Kashmir.

B Pak Del urged territorial divisions taking into account composition of population, control of rivers, requirements of defense, and other considerations relevant to delineation of international boundaries and acceptable to people of state.

C Indian Del urged that any territoral readjustments necessary on rational basis take into account geography, administration, and other considerations and involve least disturbance to life and welfare of people.

3) Disengagement of Indian and Pak forces in and around Kashmir is essential part of settlement.

4) Settlement should also embody determination of two peoples live side by side in peace and friendship and to solve all other problems peacefully and to mutual benefit.

5) Ways and means of removing other major irritants and developing practical cooperation between two countries should be considered.

4. Joint statement of objectives not to be made public and to be kept confidential.

5. In brief contact with Gundevia, he said it had been touch and go. He expects next round in Karachi about Feb 8.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690D. 91/1-1963. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Karachi and London.

1 The second round of Ministerial talks on Kashmir took place in New Delhi January 16-19. As would be the case throughout the six rounds of Ministerial talks on Kashmir, the Pakistani delegation was headed by Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and the Indian delegation by Swaran Singh.

243. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 243. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, January 21, 1963, 6:23 p.m.

3827. Eyes Only Ambassador. There follows for your information message dated January 21 which President has sent to Prime Minister Macmillan:

“Dear Friend:

Since the second round of Kashmir talks has ended as successfully as we could expect, should we not go ahead with the air defense team as scheduled. We will send it on the 24th. Indeed, I see advantage in announcing the visit before the 23 January Indian Parliament debate on the Colombo proposals.1 Our people are in touch with yours to this end.

I am still persuaded that adding to Indian confidence vis-à-vis the Chinese is more likely to help promote a Kashmir settlement than to make the Indians more intransigent. It appears to us that Nehru is unlikely to settle Kashmir with too obvious a gun at his back.

By the same token, we feel strongly here that Pakistan's rather transparent flirtation with Peiping is harming rather than helping its case. Ayub may merely be giving the Indians an excuse to argue that to make concessions to the Pakistani would be humiliating under these circumstances. I hope you will join us in persuading Ayub that if he wants us to help him settle Kashmir, he must refrain from tactics which make it even more of an uphill climb. Above all it seems to us unwise for him to send Mohamed Ali to Peiping at this juncture, and it would seem prudent for us both to tell him so.2

Sincerely,

John F. Kennedy”

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/1-2163. Secret. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy and approved in S/S by Edward S. Little. Repeated to New Delhi and Karachi.

1 The Colombo proposals were a set of proposals issued on December 12, 1962, at Colombo, Ceylon, by the Conference of Six Non-Aligned Afro-Asian countries in an effort to promote a peaceful settlement to the border dispute between India and China. The six countries were Burma, Ceylon, Ghana, Indonesia, Cambodia, and the United Arab Republic. For text of the proposals, which called for negotiations with the existing de facto cease-fire as a starting point, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, p. 1025.

2 Macmillan responded on January 22. He wrote Kennedy that he concurred in the proposal to announce the dispatch of the air defense team to India, and he agreed that there were dangers in Ayub's policy of “flirting with the Chinese.” He too felt it was important to emphasize to Ayub that such tactics were harmful to Pakistan's interests, but he did not think that Ayub could be expected to abandon a border agreement with China that had already been negotiated in principle. (The text of Macmillan's letter was repeated to London in telegram 3861, January 22; Department of State, Central Files, 791.5/1-2263)

244. Notes by Director of Central Intelligence McCone 244. Notes by Director of Central Intelligence McConeSource

Washington, January 22, 1963.

NOTES ON REMARKS BEFORE THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

I will start by reviewing areas of policy which will be before us in the coming months and indicate the general attitude which I have toward them and to emphasize where we might put our emphasis in the next few months.

[Here follow remarks unrelated to South Asia.]

Regarding our attitude toward the neutrals. There is criticism about our lack of difference between the Allies and the neutrals. The Pakistanis are critical, but we must recognize the importance of the Indians. If they joined the Chinese we would have no free South Asia. The Pakistanis are struggling against the Indians and the Afghanistans. They will use or attempt to exploit our power. Our interest is to make a strong sub-continent. We will use the country that can help further that aim. We have used India lately. We do not like their present leadership, but we can use them. While doing this we have moved away from the Pakistanis and they are moving closer to the Chinese and against the Indians. We have not been able to persuade the Pakistanis or the Afghanistans to change their policy on India. These forces were there long before we came on the scene and we cannot do much about it—we cannot settle all the disputes, but we want to keep them free from the Communists. We cannot permit those who call themselves neutrals to be completely taken into the Communist camp. We must keep our ties with Nassir and others, even though we do not like the leaders themselves.

[Here follow remarks unrelated to South Asia.]

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 80 B 01285A, Box 6, McCone Files, DCI Meetings with the President, 1 January-31 March 1963. Top Secret. According to the President's Daily Appointment Book, the NSC meeting was held from 11 to 11:50 a.m.

245. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 245. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, January 22, 1963, 6 p.m.

1327. Following Foreign Minister's departure for Dacca MEA gave us letter from Foreign Minister to Secretary of State signed just before departure. Letter pouched. Text dated January 21 is as follows, unessential words omitted:

“My Dear Secretary of State.

“I regret I could not reply earlier to your letter of 19th November 1962,1 due to numerous preoccupations. These are indeed, as you have rightly stated, troubled and difficult times for all of us.

“It is, however, source of relief to us that Cuban crisis has been almost resolved and major threat to world peace has thus been averted. It is my sincere hope that this would contribute to general easing of tensions.

“Meanwhile, armed clashes on Sino-Indian border have also, as we anticipated, come to an end. Efforts are now being made by some Afro-Asian nations to enable the two countries to reach peaceful and honorable settlement. We welcome these efforts for we cannot think of an armed conflict between our two mighty neighbors—China and India—which might result in untold bloodshed, cripple their developing economies, disrupt the uneasy equilibrium in this region and even convulse whole world. The interests of world peace demand that far from supplying arms and ammunitions to parties concerned which might lead to resumption of hostilities, every peace-loving nation must exert its legitimate influence to facilitate negotiated settlement between China and India.

“You, in your letter, have dealt with Chinese objectives in Sino-Indian dispute. It appears that you seem to view it 'as stepping stone to next objective.' Whatever ultimate objectives of parties concerned may be, we consider that up to present, Sino-Indian dispute is limited to question of their borders.

“Our President in his letter of 5th November 19622 to your President has already thrown light on consequences of massive military aid to India. It is our firm conviction that this aid would either be used in resuming hostilities on Sino-Indian border with its enormous repercussions on all neighboring countries or consequent military build-up in India might well be used against us in absence of Kashmir settlement. You have correctly been informed of adverse public reaction in Pakistan to your assistance to India. I may add that talk in American press concerning $3 billion five-year arms aid program to India has further alarmed people of Pakistan.

“I have given thought to assurances contained in your letter that United States military assistance to India will not be used against Pakistan. Government of India, however, appears to be committed to a policy of self-sufficient defense establishment. 'The aid to which we attach greatest importance,' said Minister Nehru according to Washington Post, of January 1, 1963, 'is aid which enables us to develop ourselves, to manufacture, to make araments that we need, because that is permanent help in making us self-reliant in that respect … . That means additional machines for our armament factories and our ordnance depots.' Should India be able to acquire such a military capability with foreign assistance, I wonder how any power would be able to restrain her from using output of her own defense establishment in any manner she deems fit. The current United States military aid to India, in above context, is therefore cause of genuine concern to all of us.

“I avail myself of this opportunity to reaffirm that we attach great importance to our long-standing friendship with United States and our common membership in CENTO and SEATO. We are also grateful for assistance we have received from United States. We do believe in you when you say that in recent weeks you have kept in forefront of your minds interests and concerns of Pakistan. I would, nevertheless, in all frankness as desired by you, like to point out that there is genuine fear among our people that your government's preoccupation with Chinese motivations may preclude you in long run to pay adequate attention to vital interests of Pakistan which, it is needless for me to stress, has always given unstinted support to United States.

“The need of the hour is that growing military imbalance in subcontinent, caused by United States assistance to India should be redressed. United States must continue to use its influence to facilitate settlement of Kashmir dispute with view to ensuring lasting peace in this region. Pakistan, which embarked on path of modernization rather late, requires extra assistance to maintain her planned economic growth.

“Finally I would like to say that I also attach great importance to such exchange of views and personal contacts. Looking forward to meeting you in coming months, yours sincerely, Mohammed Ali.”

McConaughy

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 791.56/1-2263. Confidential; Limit Distribution.

1 See footnote 3, Document 201.

2 See Document 195.

246. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 246. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, January 25, 1963, 8:12 p.m.

196. Purpose of this message is to set forth conclusions of full scale review at highest level of USG of our policy objectives in Afghanistan and to outline approved course of action designed to achieve these objectives in light of continuing impasse between Afghanistan and Pakistan. This message constitutes your instructions and is basis for your approach to RGA on your return to Kabul.

Our aim, which is to maintain Afghanistan as an independent buffer state, stems not from any emotional involvement in Afghanistan's area controversies, but rather from our objective assessment of strategic importance of territory it occupies. Security of those to whom we have security treaty obligations, Pakistan and Iran, would be gravely jeopardized should drastic curtailment of US position in Afghanistan result in full Soviet domination of that country. Moreover, there are implications to security of subcontinent as a whole should this situation develop.

Secondly, but of equal importance, we want to thwart major Soviet effort by maintaining an effective competitive position in Afghanistan. We will be demonstrating to Soviets that any plans for monopolistic position in Afghanistan will not escape unchallenged. To curtail seriously our position in Afghanistan would be signal to Soviets that we were abandoning field to them. Our retreat would leave vacuum for them to exploit.

Our efforts to counter communist encroachment into subcontinent through economic aid and security arrangements would be incomplete should we neglect vital northwestern flank.

Most effective instrument available to maintain an effective US position in Afghanistan is our aid program.

We intend therefore to continue our aid program in Afghanistan using Iran route for such time and extent required even though at some additional cost and absorbing such additional transportation costs within currently planned aid levels. We believe this course will at least slow down if not eventually thwart fulfillment of Soviet purposes in Afghanistan. This posture gives us an interval during which more favorable conditions may develop; it could make possible emergence of more moderate government in Afghanistan more allergic to Soviet threat than one now in power. Certainly by retaining an effective position in country we will strengthen those elements in Afghanistan who wish to continue close ties with West. Additionally, we will have more time to work for a constructive approach from Pakistan which we are prevented from effectively doing at present because of its preoccupation with tension elsewhere in area. This policy decision provides us with best discernible course through which we achieve our objectives, placing us in a positive position from which to operate.

Major US project, Kabul-Kandahar road, has come to symbolize US interest and position in Afghanistan. To complete this project will clearly demonstrate US determination to maintain its position in Afghanistan. We intend to complete this project, though to specifications less elaborate than originally planned to minimize additional costs, using route through Iran. To alleviate some of effect of added costs to AID and to demonstrate to Afghans that their political stance imposes responsibilities on them too, absorption of extra transportation costs out of planned aid levels is considered fair and right.

In your presentation manner and method of which we leave to your discretion you should stress our considered judgment that this approach places our relations within framework of understanding where real progress can be made if cooperation characterizes our mutual endeavors. However, you should also point out our continuing belief that Afghan ability to maintain independent position would be greatly enhanced by improvement of relations with Pakistan.

In addition this approach, while taking into account regrettable area conditions which inhibit our fuller freedom of action, does not allow those conditions to distract us from pursuing objectives which are basic to US interests. RGA should find no difficulty in accepting and appreciating this rationale.

Fundamental to foregoing course of action is our conviction that RGA is dedicated to the maintenance of its independence and nonaligned status. Should this prove to be incorrect as evidenced, for example, by RGA complete unresponsiveness to your approach we would be inclined to regard this as an indication that RGA had little intention of, or interest in, maintaining balanced position by continuing effective ties with free world. In these circumstances achievement of our objectives would become remote to point it would be difficult to justify further US investment in Afghanistan and we would be forced to re-examine basis of our relations with Afghanistan.

There follows immediately in a separate message prepared in AID an elaboration of specific AID program activities for your guidance in discussions with RGA.

As part of your presentation you are authorized to extend invitation to King and Queen to visit US at convenient time. If it becomes necessary to discuss availability dates you may say that President's schedule tentatively filled up to September and it would be more convenient plan visit for some time after September 1.1

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.89/1-2563. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Carle and Steeves; cleared with SOV, GTI, U/PR, Cameron, U. Alexis Johnson, Gaud, and Bromley Smith; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi, Tehran, London, and Bonn.

1 Steeves reported on his consultations in Washington and conveyed the substance of the policy decisions outlined in telegram 196 in a meeting with Naim on January 29. He also extended an invitation for a State visit to the United States by the Afghan Royal Family. Naim was pleased by the assurance of continuing U.S. aid and delighted by the invitation, which he felt would contribute tremendously to furthering friendly ties between the two countries. (Telegram 324 from Kabul, January 29; ibid., 611.89/1-2963)

247. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 247. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, January 26, 1963.

Herewith a round-up on Sino-Indian-Pak matters, as we're reaching stage where you may want to intervene directly again.

I. Indian reply to Colombo proposals1 was notable on two counts. First, Indians shrewdly decided they'd agree to talks only if Chicoms accepted interpretations, which they already knew were anathema to Peking: (1) Indian troops would re-occupy NEFA; (2) Indian as well as Chicom police post must be allowed in Ladakh demilitarized zones. Desai tells us in confidence Indians will do both unilaterally over time. Indian ploy puts ball neatly back in Peiping's court.

Second, when Nehru tried to get Congress party to vote approval of resuming talks even on this basis, he ran into so much opposition that he settled for Parliament merely “noting” the proposals rather than formally endorsing them. This confirms how aroused Indian nationalism has made Nehru far less of a free agent in foreign affairs.

II. Kashmir talks are approaching a more critical stage. Both sides have agreed to talk about partition but neither has shown its hand. Paks fear that Indians are stalling, and have no intention of settling Kashmir now that pressures from Chinese are off. Ayub personally seems to be reverting to idea of internationalization of Vale and subsequent plebiscite (UK favors and regrettably sounded him out on this). See Karachi 1361 attached.2

We simply doubt Indians would ever give up the Vale, especially if after ten years or so it would revert to Pakistan. Therefore, we've worked out a partition scheme which we're prepared to throw into the breach if talks seem about to break down. It is quite pro-Indian (map attached).3 Therefore Galbraith likes it, while McConaughy thinks Paks won't buy.

As I see it, before Pak Assembly meets 8 March, we must persuade Indians to make some gesture which will be sufficiently forthcoming to convince Ayub that Nehru is not just stalling. One such would be an Indian proposal in third round talks (12 February) which is more than just a minor adjustment of cease-fire line. Ken is working on this. Another would be a Nehru speech arguing that Chicom threat makes Pak-Indian reconciliation essential, that he is going to accept a compromise Kashmir settlement to this end.

If we could only get Nehru to make the first move, it would go far towards creating the essential psychological climate without which neither side will be able to justify the necessary give and take. You may want to weigh in with Nehru along these lines. Then we could press Ayub to make reciprocal noises.

R.W. Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 1/24/63-1/29/63. Secret. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Taken from Pres. week-end reading dtd 1/26-27/63.”

1 See footnote 1, Document 243.

2 Dated January 25; not printed.

3 Not printed.

248. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 248. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, January 30, 1963, 7:29 p.m.

201. Deptel 196 to Kabul,1 1124 to Karachi, 550 to Tehran, 3939 to London, 1727 to Bonn. In view recent policy decisions set forth reftel and fact that our previous efforts have been unproductive we have decided to make no further exercise of US good offices in connection transit impasse for present. Good offices should be considered inactive except in unlikely event of major shift by either party. Should GOP or RGA raise question you can reply that US stands ready to assist if mutually agreeable. We of course continue to hope for resolution because we believe it to be in interest of both parties.

We do not wish to discourage Iranian efforts because while we not optimistic their outcome they at least provide useful communications channel between disputants. Therefore GOI should not be informed of our decision deactivate US good offices. We should continue maintain close and sympathetic contact with Iranian activity this matter.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.89/1-3063. Secret. Drafted by Carle, cleared with GTI, and approved by Grant. Also sent to Karachi and Tehran and repeated to London and Bonn.

1 Document 246.

249. Memorandum of Conversation 249. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, February 4, 1963, Noon.

SUBJECT

Kashmir

PARTICIPANTS

The President

H.E. Aziz Ahmed, Ambassador of Pakistan

Mr. Robert W. Komer, The White House

Mr. James P. Grant, Acting Assistant Secretary, NEA

The meeting was at the request of the Pakistani Ambassador who was under instructions to request an appointment with President Kennedy to deliver a letter to the President from President Ayub. Following delivery of the letter, which set forth President Ayub's assessments of the Kashmir talks to date and suggested that the introduction of a United States representative in the parleys might effectively bridge the gap between Pakistan and Indian viewpoints, the Pakistani Ambassador also gave the President a supplemental sheet containing an amplification of Ayub's specific suggestions [3 lines of source text not declassified].

After reading the letter, President Kennedy asked what there was in President Ayub's proposals for the Indians given their refusal to consider a plebiscite. The Ambassador briefly reviewed the Kashmir history. He began with UNCIP resolutions and went from there to the Dixon and McNaughton proposals. He stated that the Vale was needed more for the defense of Pakistan than for the defense of India and accordingly should be transferred to Pakistan. Also this would free GOI forces to meet the Chinese on other fronts and would meet the wishes of the inhabitants of the Vale.

The President commented that the Indians now have most of Kashmir, any settlement will call for the Indians to make the concrete concessions, and the real question is how they can be brought to make the difficult and painful concessions which are required. With respect to the second question of United States participation in the negotiations, the President said he would want to get the judgment of Ambassador Galbraith and others as to the extent this would be useful, and the reaction of the Government of India. He said we did not want to be left holding the bag if negotiations were to fail.

The Ambassador stated that there had been sufficient progress made in the last round of talks to justify another meeting, but this had been made possible only by the intervention of the United States and the United Kingdom Ambassadors in New Delhi. The Government of India negotiators have been most reluctant, according to the Ambassador, to show their hands and the Pakistani hope is that the introduction of a third party would speed up the negotiations.

The Ambassador said there was a strong desire among some Indian cabinet members, elements of the Indian public, and the Indian military for a Kashmir settlement. Nehru, however, has given no indication of giving in on Kashmir. The Pakistani assessment is that the Indians do not want the talks to break down at this time but will spin them out until they have received sufficient aid from the United States and at that time will settle with the Chinese Communists. It is because of this assessment that Pakistan wants the United States to push the Indians.

The President replied that he and the Ambassador had talked about this question before. There was disagreement between them on the capacity of the United States to influence other capitals. He said that the United States and Pakistan had been through this on the Afghan-Pak issue without any settlement (the Pak Ambassador interjected at this point that Pakistan had made concessions on this issue). The United States can help bring the parties to the table but has far less influence in bringing about a specific solution. [12 lines of source text not declassified].

The President closed the session by saying that he would be replying in the next couple of days to President Ayub's letter after he had had a chance to ascertain the reaction of our Ambassadors.

Attachment

[13 paragraphs (2-1/2 pages of source text) not declassified]

Attachment

[1 paragraph (12 lines of source text) not declassified]

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 2/63. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Grant on February 8 and approved by the White House on February 18. The time of the meeting is taken from the President's Appointment Book.

250. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 250. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, February 6, 1963, 10:34 p.m.

1200. For Ambassador McConaughy. In addition to delivering President's message1 you should make following points to Ayub regarding the supplementary message he sent to the President by Aziz Ahmed:2 1. As stated explicitly in President Kennedy's letter, we see no possibility of India being willing to give up all of the Vale. Thus we see no utility in idea of arranging transfer of Vale after duration one year or after any period for that matter.

2. It is not at all certain that it will be clear within a year whether there is any likelihood at all of recrudescence of fighting between India and China on the Ladakh front. We see no prospect that the Chicoms intend, for example, to pull out of Tibet in the foreseeable future. The need for an active defense of Ladakh will be ongoing. [3 lines of source text not declassified]

3. Chinese presence in force at southwestern edge Tibetan Plateau new fact of geopolitical life which must be taken into account by GOP and GOI.

4. If Ayub brings up possibility following West New Guinea pattern in Kashmir, you should say that we believe India, unlike the Netherlands, is unwilling give up possession of what it now holds by such a procedure.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution, Drafted by Gatch; cleared by BNA, Ludlow, Grant, Harriman, McGhee, and Komer; and approved by Cameron. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

1 See Document 252.

2 See Document 249.

251. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 251. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, February 6, 1963, 10:39 p.m.

3098. Delivery following letter to Prime Minister Nehru at earliest appropriate opportunity.

“Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

I've been weighing whether to write you on the subject of Kashmir and am persuaded that a word from me would not be misconstrued at this juncture. Our interest in this subject stems from the same concern for the security of the subcontinent which prompted us to try to be helpful when India found itself under attack from Communist China. Indeed, the US is now so heavily engaged in the effort to assure the economic development and insure the security of the subcontinent, that I hope you regard our interest in this matter as not amiss.

For this reason, I will venture to speak frankly on an issue of such moment as Kashmir. We Americans are perhaps too far away to appreciate fully the passions aroused by this painful issue. Perhaps, however, this also gives us perspective to argue that the great issues affecting the subcontinent's future overshadow in significance the differences between India and Pakistan over Kashmir.

While the history of this problem, and the antagonisms it has aroused will demand statesmanship of the highest order on both sides to achieve such a settlement, the open Chinese Communist aggression against India seems to have provided a new and pressing reason for its achievement. I hope that this opportunity will not be allowed to pass.

What chiefly motivates me to write you are the strong Pakistani allegations, expressed to us in many ways, that India is not serious about negotiating an acceptable compromise settlement. I well realize that the Pakistani may be pressing this point in order to induce the US and UK to intervene. At the same time, however, it does underline the desirability of disposing of this argument to the extent it can be done. To this end, I wonder whether some public gesture on India's part placing a Kashmir settlement and Pakistan-Indian reconciliation in the context of the subcontinent's long term need for security and economic development would not help give the negotiations renewed momentum and provide us grounds for urging reciprocal expressions on Ayub.

Even more important, it seems to me, would be some concrete Indian proposals in the next round of talks which take sufficient account of their point of view to be proof positive to the Pakistanis that you are genuinely seeking a settlement. I believe Ambassador Galbraith has talked more specifically with you on this. President Ayub told Harriman that he recognized any viable compromise would be one unpalatable to both parties. I have no doubt that it will be hard for him too to accept a compromise, but I can assure you that we do not intend to support proposals which lean too far to one side.

Let me close with a private thought. President Ayub is in a weaker position in his own country than you are, and Pakistan is the lesser power. By these tokens it is harder for him to take the first step toward you than you toward him. I too have repeatedly been forced to accept that more is required of great powers than of others. It is always the weaker who must seem unyielding. Of course, I do not mean in any way to discount the importance of Kashmir to India, or the many factors which make settlement difficult. But the costs of settling Kashmir, great as they are, must seem less in relation to India's larger purposes than they are to Pakistan's. If only this issue could be settled, it would open new perspectives in terms of India's role on the world stage, while eliminating a painful diversion which adversely affects the security of the subcontinent and inevitably complicates US-Indian relations in ways disadvantageous to us both.1

I hope that you will not mind my frankness in this matter. I have been so only because of our great interest in your country, and my own strong feeling that your personal role will be vital to the resolution of this dispute.

Sincerely, John F. Kennedy“

Letter is designed to lend impact to “joint instructions” you have received, without getting into specifics. It is also designed to impress on Nehru that the President is taking a close personal interest in the talks.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret: Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider; cleared by BNA, Grant, Harriman, McGhee, and Komer; and approved by Cameron. Repeated to Karachi and London.

1 In telegram 3086 to New Delhi, February 5, the Department informed the Embassy that Senator J. William Fulbright, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, was disturbed by the prospect of an increased program of arms aid to India before settlement of the Kashmir dispute was agreed upon. Without such a settlement, Fulbright was concerned that an enhanced military capability might lead India to attempt to compensate for any losses suffered in the border war with China at the expense of Pakistan. (Ibid., DEF 19-3 US-INDIA)

252. Letter From the Ambassador to Pakistan (McConaughy) to President Ayub 252. Letter From the Ambassador to Pakistan (McConaughy) to President AyubSource

Karachi, February 7, 1963.

Dear Mr. President: President Kennedy has asked me to transmit to you the following message under the date of February 6, 1963:

“Dear Mr. President:

“I hasten to reply to your letter of January 26,1

“[1 paragraph (3-1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

“[2-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]. Indeed any settlement achievable at this juncture must in some way get around the basic irreconcilability of the present Indian and Pakistani positions on the Valley.

“However difficult this may be, I must say in all candor that I doubt there will ever be a better opportunity than this one. Whether or not the Chinese Communist attack on India is over for the time being, the threat remains and has had a profoundly sobering effect on India. It has led the Indian Government to realize the importance of a reconciliation with Pakistan and to embark upon talks to this end. While the Indians have not yet shown their hand there are indications that they genuinely desire a compromise settlement.

“India's desire for US-UK military aid is also an incentive, since we have made clear to the Indians that their attitude toward Pakistan must inevitably be a factor in our long-term military aid plans. However, if the threat increases or Sino-Indian fighting flares up once more, we may again be faced with the problem of providing India with substantial help.

“If India is forthcoming in further talks, it would appear to be greatly in your interest to respond in the same sense. I recall your prescient remark to Governor Harriman that any settlement will be highly unpalatable to many on both sides. For either side to fail to recognize this essential fact would simply foreclose the possibility of fruitful negotiations, and it is difficult to see how or when they could be reopened under as favorable circumstances. Certainly recourse again to the UN would accomplish little. Thus, however I look at the problem, I am driven to the conclusion that Pakistan should make every possible effort to achieve a compromise settlement now.

“I can assure you that the United States will do everything it can, within the limits of what we conceive to be helpful in bringing about such a settlement. We have, as you know, not been idle up to this point. But, after surveying the matter [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], we do not believe the current circumstances are such that a direct U.S. role in the talks would be productive. I think we can be more helpful behind the scenes.

“My sincere hope is that during the next round of talks in Karachi both parties will get down to considering the possibilities for an international boundary running through Kashmir. This can only be achieved through substantial compromises of present positions. Even if this goal proves impossible to achieve in the third round, it would seem essential at a minimum to fix an agreed date in the near future for a fourth round of talks lest the crucial momentum of the negotiation be lost.

“You are quite right about my deep personal interest in resolving this thorny and long standing dispute. Yet I fear that you overstate my influence if you think that it alone can be decisive. The United States and the United Kingdom cannot force a solution on either India or Pakistan. Our influence can only help weight the balance if statesmanship on both sides has brought matters to the point where the gap remaining between the two parties is sufficiently narrow that third-party efforts have some hope of success. We are far from that point as yet, but I am hopeful that it will be possible from the current talks to bring about the settlement which we all desire.

“Mrs. Kennedy and I send you our very warmest regards.

“Sincerely, (signed) John F. Kennedy“

With assurances of my high regard, Mr. President, I have the honor to be, with great respect,

Very cordially and sincerely yours,

Walter P. McConaughy2

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Karachi Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 1814, Item 63, 361.1 Kennedy-Ayub, Secret, 1962-1963. Secret.

1 See footnote 2, Document 250.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

253. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 253. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, February 16, 1963.

Here is a brief updating on our India and Kashmir enterprise. [2 lines of source text not declassified]

DOD is also embarking upon an overt, but hopefully unpublicized Special Forces training effort which will involve 35 of our people initially and perhaps more later.1

We still see little evidence that Peiping is planning any spring attack; indeed the pace of Indian preparations suggests that they don't really expect one either.

R. W. Komer

Attachment2

Washington, February 16, 1963.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

SUBJECT

Status Report of NSC Subcommittee on Kashmir and Military Aid to India

1. Kashmir

Some progress has been made in the talks between India and Pakistan. A fourth round has been set for March 9-12. In the third round,3 for the first time both sides suggested lines by which Kashmir might be divided. Under considerable prodding from us India led off with an offer which included limited but significant concessions to Pakistan beyond the cease-fire line. This offer suggests that the Indians may be willing to begin bargaining on a Kashmir settlement based on territorial division, including the Vale.

Pakistan replied with a proposal which would give Pakistan all of Kashmir (including the Vale, Ladakh and even certain Hindu majority areas) except a part of Jammu in the south. This seems to us to be an extreme initial position from which we would expect the Pakistanis to move during later bargaining. Since the Pakistani proposal gives all of the Vale to Pakistan, it provides no clues as to whether or not Pakistan will abandon its insistence on temporary internationalization followed by some sort of plebiscite.

Our role has become somewhat more active, although we have neither become a party to the talks nor introduced specific proposals. Before the third round, we decided that our best immediate tactic was to urge both parties to seek a settlement by partition, and to speed the bargaining process by making concessions. Although the British believe internationalization of the Vale must ultimately be considered, we persuaded them to go along with our tactics. Our joint efforts with the Indians and Pakistanis both before and during the talks seem to have produced some results. We are now tentatively planning similar efforts prior to the fourth round, designed to produce a new agreed course of action.

We continue to believe that with active pressure from the British and ourselves, bilateral talks can produce additional progress. While we believe partition offers the best prospect for a Kashmir settlement, we are keeping our minds open to various possible forms of internationalization.

We believe that while the most difficult stages of the negotiations are still ahead, there is a sporting chance they will ultimately succeed. The immediate hurdle is the next round during which both sides will be subject to pressures generated in the national legislatures of both countries, which will be in session at the time. If the talks can be kept moving through this round and progress further in later discussions, we foresee a situation in which the British and ourselves might submit a proposal for a settlement with some chance for acceptance.

2. U.S. Military Aid to India

Past and currently pending outlays under the $60 million ceiling agreed on at Nassau total almost $38 million: a) $19.5 million in air and sea shipments to date (mainly infantry arms, ammunition and equipment plus two Caribou aircraft).

b) $5.4 million for C-119 aircraft spare parts (shipment has begun).

c) $3.1 million (estimated) for the cost of the airlift operations of our twelve C-130 aircraft in the Ladakh and NEFA areas though 30 June.

d) $5.5 million for small arms, ammunition, and communications and medical equipment just ordered.

e) $4.3 million for related supply operations and administrative costs.

These expenditures will cover a substantial portion of our share of the Nassau commitment to support the conversion of six mountain divisions, and to improve IAF transport capability. We foresee further aid, under the $60 million ceiling, for supporting units for the six divisions, engineering and additional communications equipment, and repair parts, etc.

3. Air Defense

The joint US/Commonwealth Air Defense Team arrived in New Delhi January 30 and we expect it to complete its study about the end of February. Canada and Australia are participating as well as the British and ourselves. We have suggested to the British, Canadians and Australians that the team's leaders stop briefly in Karachi to obtain Pakistan's assessment of the Chinese Communist air threat. We also think the team leaders should be prepared generally to discuss air defense requirements for the subcontinent should a need similar to that in India arise in Pakistan. We hope to get this squared away in the next few days after we hear from the other participating governments.

4. Defense Production

Our defense production team arrived in India February 1, talking in London to the U.K. ordnance team that had visited India early in January. The U.S. team includes experts in the fields of ordnance, communications, textiles, and automotive repair. We expect the team's report about middle or late March.

5. Other U.S. Government Activities

a) A U.S. Army Medical Research Team is in India to conduct a joint study with the Indians of the effect of extreme conditions, especially in Ladakh, on military personnel and equipment.

b) We hope for early Government of India agreement to a visit by a S/DMICC team—a prerequisite to transfer of U.S. classified material. To date, limited amounts of non-sensitive classified information have been made available to India as exceptions to U.S. National Disclosure Policy.

6. Assistance From Old Commonwealth and Western European Nations

The British in New Delhi provided us a progress report on their aid February 13. We have not received details but understand that a ship with military supplies arrived in India on February 13 and also that the British will supply much of the signal equipment requested by India. The U.K. is also considering findings of the RAF Mission to India.

British efforts to encourage substantial Canadian and Australian participation in the Nassau-based effort have been reasonably successful. The Canadians have decided to supply on a grant basis military items India requires which Canada possesses in surplus, and is arranging delivery of certain aircraft and winter clothing. Australia has completed one shipment of defense supplies and is discussing further aid with India.

We and the U.K. made strong demarches to France, Germany, and Italy to enlist their participation. Results to date have not been encouraging. The French and Italians insist on commerical credit terms in their discussions with the Indians. There may be some flexibility in the Italian position so we plan further action in Rome. The Germans, who provided some winter clothing during the hostilities, are discussing further assistance with the Indians but have not yet firmed up their position.

7. Indian Defense Efforts

India's Ministry of Defense under the Chavan-Chaudhuri leadership is engaged in an intensive effort to redefine India's defense plans in the new strategic situation facing the country. They have not yet firmed up long-term plans and will probably be unable to do so realistically until they receive definite indication on the volume of long-term Western aid. In any event, Indian Defense spending will rise appreciably with a 1963-64 Defense budget reportedly programed at over $1 billion (approximately one-third higher than 1962-63). The Indians themselves are also studying how to increase defense production and have been working closely with visiting foreign teams on this subject.

8. Policy and Intelligence Studies

In connection with AID's global policy review, we are intensively studying India's long-term economic assistance requirements in the light of recent developments. The joint UK/US estimate of Communist Chinese air capabilities against India was completed in late January and transmitted to the Indian Government just before the arrival of the air defense team. The USIB has initiated a similar study of Communist Chinese ground capabilities. We are also doing a number of studies on various aspects of possible Kashmir settlements. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have been requested to make a strategic appraisal of India and the subcontinent to serve as a basis for the further development of policy for that area.

Phillips Talbot

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 2/14/63-2/17/63. Secret.

1 The reference is to assistance in training units of the Indian armed forces in guerrilla tactics and unconventional warfare. Documentation on this training program is in Department of State, Central Files 791.5 and DEF 7 INDIA-US)

2 Secret. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Taken from Pres. weekend reading dtd 2/16/63.

3 The third round of Ministerial talks took place in Karachi February 7-11. Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, who again headed the Pakistani delegation to the talks, was appointed Foreign Minister on February 3 following the death of Foreign Minister Mohammed Ali on January 24.

254. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 254. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, February 16, 1963, 8:13 p.m.

3181. Here are our thoughts regarding tactics for fourth round Kashmir talks in Calcutta. These are based on study your excellent analyses as well as impressions brought back by Talbot and Jackson.1 You should comment urgently so we have time to coordinate with British and get our lines straight long enough before next round to enable us step up our input.

We view talks as having progressed logically, if somewhat slowly. Indians and Paks sloughed off traditional positions at first round, agreed on certain principles in second, got down to maps in third. We agree with Karachi, however, that parties have yet to come to grips with hard realities. Indians have failed so far to signal disposition to divide Vale, and Paks have reserved position on tough choice between an internationalization formula which Indians probably would reject and territorial division plan which would be politically risky for them.

Looking toward round at Calcutta we see two problems. First relates to bargaining positions both sides. Indian proposal at Karachi was step forward which seemed invite Paks into market place. Paks responded with such an inadequate offer that we might have expected Indians to turn it down out of hand. Instead it has probably been left over for final disposition at Calcutta where Indians seem likely start off by complete rejection Pak line. Problem then will be how to get talks moving again. We believe burden will and should be on Paks to restore movement by making a business offer.

This gets us to second problem. We are perplexed by timing Calcutta talks. Pressures on negotiators which may be generated in Lok Sabha and National Assembly seem likely increase difficulties of compromise already evident in press reactions from both sides, particularly in Pakistan. Task therefore is to avoid impasse stimulated by political pressures and produce achievement adequate to justify continuation talks.

It is our judgment that Paks are unlikely to give serious consideration to proposal for partition of Vale until they have introduced their idea of internationalization and had it discussed seriously. If this analysis correct, we see advantage Pak internationalization idea coming in promptly in fourth round. This would have double advantage getting this proposal aired and letting Paks face and cope with Indian objections and its introduction might ease Pak public opinion problem. It will not be enough, however, for Paks to talk of vague idea of internationalization. They must get down to specific, carefully thought out formula if it is to serve as basis for useful discussion.

If our judgment of Pak intentions is correct, we will have to prepare Indians to give fair hearing to internationalization proposal. Providing such proposal includes realistic lines north and south of Vale, discussion of it might serve purpose keeping bargaining going during difficult period when legislatures in session. To counter Pak internationalization proposal, we would hope Indians might come up with refined proposal for territorial division giving Paks substantial position in Vale and incorporating functional arrangements which, as Delhi points out, would divide Vale without denying it to people on either side. We recognize, however, that they may have other ideas about counter proposal at this stage. Such an exchange would give us opportunity throw in more detailed ideas before and during fourth round on functional arrangements. Also it could lay foundations for circumstances in which ultimately we might, if necessary, make proposal cloaked as combination territorial division and internationalization.

Obviously scenario like this calls for increased US/UK input and prodding. Our ideas on tactics for Karachi: 1) We should inform Paks we look for further progress in bilateral talks. We will have suggestions for both sides to consider in these talks and intend to step up our substantive discussions with both. Best course for Paks is to tone down expectations and start looking to fifth round when better groundwork laid for more productive bargaining. Moreover legislatures may not be in session.

2) Make it entirely clear we believe Paks must make first substantial move in next round. We believe that settlement can be achieved only through agreeing upon international boundary running through Kashmir. But if, as we expect, Paks insist they can't go beyond Shahi's “fall back” position, we should emphasize that they must make some negotiable proposal. Although we believe internationalization is not route towards solution, it would be better for Paks to table it than drawing another unsatisfactory line, provided proposal includes realistic borders to north and south.

3) GOP obviously making little effort to prepare Pakistan people for an unpopular solution. We feel there two steps Embassy might take to help this necessary educational process along. a) We should indicate our deep concern to GOP at lack of effort in this connection. We realize GOP does not exercise tight control over press, but it does lay down guidelines. These guidelines should at minimum point out that interests of India as well as Pakistan must be taken fully into account if workable settlement is to be reached. We are aware of anti-American bias in Information Ministry and believe any approaches on press policy should be made to Bhutto or at minimum at DG level in MEA.

b) Country Team should work out complementary and coordinated approaches pitched at various significant segments of Pakistan society. These approaches should stress that chances for a workable Kashmir settlement are better now than they have ever been, but that if this opportunity is missed, chances are exceedingly dim that status quo ever will be changed. Both India and Pakistan must sacrifice long held positions, but this painful process is a prerequisite for a solution. Military and security aspects of this should be stressed in conversations with Pak military; economic benefits with business community and labor; and whole range of benefits accruing to Pakistan with GOP officials and MNA's including opposition politicians.

In India we propose following: 1) We should make clear to GOI that while Indian proposal was step forward it fell far short of what Indians knew in advance we thought was necessary, i.e., substantial Pak position in Vale. Indians should know that they must be prepared to concede considerably more than symbolic Pak presence in Vale if settlement is to be reached.

2) We should explain to Indians in same manner as to Paks reasons why we believe expectations of Calcutta round should not be exaggerated. Indians should demonstrate understanding of political pressures under which Pakistan delegation will be operating.

3) We should alert Indians to be prepared for likelihood Paks may propose internationalization plan. We should tell Indians that we assume they will give this fair hearing. If they do not believe they can accept such a proposal, they should be prepared to submit a more attractive plan for territorial division.

4) We should suggest to Indians that one way of making such a plan for division more palatable to Pakistan would be by incorporating in it certain functional arrangements designed to minimize inconvenience of division of Vale. FYI: We will be sending our suggestions soon which we expect on basis preliminary studies should be of interest to both parties. End FYI. Obviously such features would be meaningless, however, if Pakistan were not given a substantial position in Vale.

5) We believe circumstances require new campaign in depth to convince Indians of influence in political, military, civil service and business fields of reasons why it in India's interest to make concessions necessary for Kashmir settlement. Emphasis this campaign should probably be on need for substantial Pak presence in Vale since we believe it is here Nehru may balk. We do believe events have indicated Nehru is responsive to political groundswells beneath him. Our efforts to influence those who can influence Nehru might tip balance in achieving settlement. This we believe is worth risk we realize is involved. Our efforts should emphasize importance of Kashmir settlement to India's defenses against Chicoms. Particular emphasis should be given to inescapable relationship between longer run military aid to India and Indian contributions toward settlement Kashmir dispute. We should also stress that general Congressional attitude toward India will be greatly affected by Indian efforts to improve relations with Pakistan.

We again stress that efforts should be made to prepare public on both sides for compromise settlement (Deptel 3153 to New Delhi,2 1235 Karachi, repeated info 4321 London). Also desirable urge each side to try to look at negotiations and formulae for settlement from standpoint of selling job which other must do at home. This particularly pertinent during next round which will take place under wary eyes two legislatures.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider, Cameron, and Gatch; cleared with BNA and FE; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to London.

1 Elmore Jackson, Special Assistant for U.N. Planning in IO and an expert on the Kashmir issue.

2 Dated February 13. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK)

255. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy 255. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President KennedySource

New Delhi, February 16, 1963.

* [Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 2/11/63-3/31/63. No classification marking. According to a February 27 memorandum from William Brubeck to McGeorge Bundy, the letter was delivered to the White House on February 18 by Ambassador B.K. Nehru. (Ibid.) This letter has not been declassified by the Indian Government. In his biography of Prime Minister Nehru, Gopal states regarding this letter: “It was now Nehru's turn to complain that Pakistan was not wholly serious and not anxious to come to an agreement.” (Gopal, Jawarharlal Nehru, Vol. 3, p. 258)]

256. Letter From the Pakistani Ambassador (Ahmed) to Secretary of State Rusk 256. Letter From the Pakistani Ambassador (Ahmed) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, February 18, 1963.

Dear Mr. Secretary, The President of Pakistan has desired that in connection with his proposal for a Kashmir settlement, the considerations stated below may be brought to the notice of President Kennedy.

2. As the United States Government is aware, the President's proposal is set out in his letter dated January 26, 1963, to President Kennedy, and the addendum1 I presented therewith. It was subsequently amplified when Ambassador McConaughy called on the Pakistan Minister for External Affairs on February 7. In the President's view, no Government of Pakistan can accept any settlement of the Kashmir dispute which would leave the Valley with India without any form of reference to the wishes of the people.

However, he would not insist on an immediate transfer of the Valley, provided irrevocable arrangements are made at this stage for the final disposition of the Valley and the adjoining Muslim territory of Ladakh either in accordance with a plebiscite or some other method, in the latter case bearing in mind that the allotment of any significant part thereof to India would be manifestly contrary to the wishes of the inhabitants.

3. During his meeting with Ambassador McConaughy on February 7, the Pakistan Minister for External Affairs stated that, since it appeared the the Valley was linked in the United States' view with the defence of Ladakh, he wished to make it clear that if Ladakh (which has a 79% Muslim majority) came to Pakistan (as under any equitable settlement it would), the Pakistan Government would naturally assume full responsibility for its defence which attaches to sovereignty.

4. A settlement on these lines would have several obvious advantages. (i) Such a settlement alone could bring about disengagement of the Indian and Pakistan armies;

(ii) India would be relieved of responsibility for the defence of the Ladakh front;

(iii) She could then withdraw some 5 to 6 Divisions of troops from Pakistan's borders for deployment elsewhere.

5. Any other settlement—even were it possible—would necessitate the continued presence of substantial Indian forces on Pakistan's strategic flank in Kashmir; it would fail therefore to inspire in Pakistan the confidence necessary to bring about a genuine improvement in India-Pakistan relations and a disengagement of their armies either in Kashmir or elsewhere along Pakistan's borders. In terms of the Sub-continent's overall security, it would, in short, achieve nothing.

6. Disengagement of Pakistan and Indian forces is crucial from every point of view. (i) Only thus could the two countries be freed from mutual fear and tension that plague their relations, and genuine Indo-Pakistan friendship and cooperation promoted.

(ii) Disengagement could enable India to save as much as $300 million in defence expenditure—expenditure which would be bound to go on increasing if there was no disengagement.

(iii) There would also be savings in Pakistan's defence expenditure.

(iv) In consequence of the resulting division of defence responsibilites, which a settlement such as is visualized by the President of Pakistan implies, the defence posture of the Sub-continent as a whole would be immensely strengthened, despite the anticipated reduction in defence expenditure of both countries.

(v) These savings in defence expenditure would, furthermore, help speed urgently needed economic development in both countries.

(vi) Disengagement should also result in a substantial reduction in United States' commitments in the region, more especially, in the calls on her resources for the defence and development requirements of India and Pakistan.

Yours Sincerely,

Aziz Ahmed

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 2/63. Secret. A copy of the letter was sent from the Department of State to the White House under cover of a February 20 memorandum from Brubeck to McGeorge Bundy. (Ibid.)

1 See Document 249.

257. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 257. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, February 20, 1963.

We have laid on a meeting for 5 p.m. Thursday1 to put before you our ideas on Kashmir strategy. After three rounds of sparring the talks are entering the critical stage. Neither side is yet willing to make the essential compromises. Nehru's and Ayub's latest gloomy letters (attached) make this clear, although their intransigeance may be partly bargaining tactics.2

But we have about reached the point where only a major US/UK effort, involving more direct intervention, will give even a fair chance of settlement. Before we engage in such an enterprise you will want to be satisfied as to whether the chances of success are sufficient to justify the effort, the likely costs if we fail. We also need your general approval of the form and extent of leverage we'll need to apply.

Attached is a State paper addressed to these issues. Talbot's people think we may be able to get through one or two more rounds before we have to start real arm twisting. I feel that we had better start weighing in harder now, lest the talks lose momentum, though holding off on precise proposals if possible till after the fourth round. And since we, not the UK, are the only ones with real leverage, and both sides are in fact looking to us, we ought not to try to stay a half step behind the UK.

The alternative would be to plug for one or two more rounds, but to begin disengaging if there is insufficient progress, and neither advance our own solution (which will inevitably outrage the side adversely affected) nor use forms of pressure which risk serious damage to our relations with India or Pakistan. Moreover, there's no point in signing on to a real effort unless we're willing to go the distance. Injecting ourselves directly into this dispute will buy us trouble with both sides, and plenty of flak from the Hill. Since at best we've got only a 50-50 chance of pulling it off, we may end up with a failure to boot.

But we're unlikely ever to have a better chance to settle Kashmir on other than the status quo, and a hard try seems well worth the risks. If you agree, then aside from approving State's recommendations, I'd urge you ginger up State by: (1) telling them you want every effort made to bring off a settlement; (2) explicitly authorizing a hard sell to Ayub on the need to compromise now if he is ever to get one, including warnings that we may be unable to back him if he goes to the GA and that we'll have to go ahead with military aid to India.

Bob Komer

Attachment3

Washington, February 20, 1963.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

SUBJECT

Kashmir

1. Purpose of Meeting.

The purpose of your meeting at 5:00 o'clock Thursday is to decide on future Kashmir strategy. We have reached the point where further real progress is unlikely without increased United States involvement; even with it, a settlement is not a sure thing. Whether we should invest the necessary extra effort, and what leverage we should use are major questions on which we need your views.

2. The Talks So Far.

[Here follows a two-page assessment of the progress of and prospects for the Ministerial talks, which is similar to the assessment contained in the attachment to Document 253. The Department of State assessment is somewhat more pessimistic than that produced by the NSC Subcommittee, but still concludes that “there is a fair chance for a settlement.”]

4. Leverage Available To Us.

In India our usable leverage is primarily related to our military aid. The Indians already seem well aware of the link between it and Kashmir. This impression will be intensified as we get more into the aid season. The danger is, however, that if we overplay our hand, the Indians may conclude that the cost of military assistance, in terms of concessions in Kashmir, is so great as to make it necessary to seek peace with Communist China.

We might also link our economic assistance with Kashmir. This would increase the pressures for settlement but, if the Indians failed to respond and we cut aid, the economic and political consequences within India would be serious.

In Pakistan we could also tie military and economic aid to Kashmir. If we did this with military aid we would be resiling from outstanding commitments to Ayub and if we did it with economic aid the same objection as in India would apply. Also we can warn Ayub that the United States will continue to build Indian military strength if the Kashmir negotiations fail because of Pak intransigence. Further, we can tell him that this is his best opportunity for a Kashmir settlement and the United States and United Kingdom will not support him in any other Pak moves on Kashmir (e.g., UNGA). If we carry any of these tactics too far, however, we may either force Ayub to accept a Kashmir compromise which he cannot sell at home, or put ourselves in the position of having further weakened his political position.

5. Our Proposals For Future Action.

a. For Fourth Round

Our involvement in the talks has steadily increased and we believe it should continue to do so. So far we have done a great deal of prodding and some stage managing. At each round our Ambassadors have been credited by one party or the other with “saving” the talks. We plan to continue our prodding (e.g. further Presidential correspondence) and begin making substantive suggestions to both sides regarding aspects of possible solutions (e.g. functional arrangements to mitigate partition of Vale). We would not now offer an integrated proposal for settlement. We plan, however, to authorize our Ambassadors, if necessary to save the talks, to urge the negotiators at Calcutta to schedule a fifth round to consider such a United States-United Kingdom proposal. We will coordinate the details of these tactics with the British early next week.

In India we propose to continue our efforts to insure that the wide range of Indian leaders who can influence Nehru are aware of the relationship between United States capacity to aid India militarily and a Kashmir settlement. We would not similarly link economic aid, but we propose to warn Indian leaders that Congressional attitudes on such aid are certain to be affected by India's approach to the Kashmir talks.

In Pakistan we propose to remind Ayub that we see no prospect of any better result for him than a genuine compromise, and make clear to him our determination to continue military aid to India if Pakistan obstructs the way to a Kashmir settlement. We plan also to signal that we will not in the future take an active role in support of other Pak moves on Kashmir if Pakistan is not forthcoming in these talks.

b. After Fourth Round

In any event, we are prepared to put forward a proposal some time after the fourth round if further bilateral progress seems unlikely, with exact timing dependent upon progress in future rounds of bilateral talks. We are now refining such a formula for possible future use, but its exact content will depend greatly upon the direction in which the bilateral negotiators have moved. Our formula calls for special joint Indo-Pak arrangements in the Vale while reserving to each party respective areas of political control in the Vale and elsewhere in Kashmir.

6. Implications of This Course and Risk of Failure.

We are gradually moving toward a degree of involvement in the talks which may vitally affect our relationships with India and Pakistan. While the benefits of success would be great, the cost of failure should be considered. If we tie the extent of military aid to India to a settlement—and we have already done so to a large degree—failure will affect this important component of our relationship. Should India appear responsible for failure, its reputation on the Hill and elsewhere would greatly suffer, complicating our already difficult tasks. If we push Pakistan hard without result, we may damage relations with Ayub and weaken his political position at home. Even if we abandoned our efforts now, some of these same effects would be felt. Yet with further U.S.-U.K. involvement, they could become more severe.

On the other hand, if a settlement is achieved, the prospects for the future of the subcontinent—and our relations with both countries in it—are immeasurably brightened. Furthermore, even a failure could, if the effort had resulted in a narrowing of the gap between them, be used to demonstrate to Congress that an honest effort had been made on both sides and that neither party should be penalized.

7. Recommendations.

We are asking at this time for your specific approval of our stepping up our prodding and advancing certain substantive ideas about possible solutions. We also request your approval of our proposals for use of leverage as set forth in Section 5. We think we see our way clear through the fourth round of talks and perhaps to the fifth. You should know that this course, unless deliberately interrupted, will almost inevitably lead to a greater U.S. commitment. This is bound to raise fundamental questions concerning our relations with India and Pakistan (See Section 5). Failure to achieve a settlement may seriously damage those relations at a time when the Chinese Communist threat is likely to require closer cooperation between us and the nations of the subcontinent. We therefore ask that you consider these aspects of the situation while making your decision.

Dean Rusk4

* Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Staff Memoranda Series, R. Komer Security. Secret.

1 February 21.

2 Reference is to Nehru's letter of February 16 and to the message conveyed from Ayub to Kennedy in Ahmed's February 18 letter to Rusk, Documents 255 and 256.

3 Secret.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

258. Notes on Discussion 258. Notes on DiscussionSource

Washington, February 21, 1963, 5:30 p.m.

INFORMAL NOTES ON DISCUSSION WITH PRESIDENT ON KASHMIR NEGOTIATIONS

The President met February 21 at 5:30 p.m. with Secretary Rusk, Governor Harriman, Mr. Talbot, Mr. Komer and Mr. Schneider to discuss the U.S. role in the Kashmir negotiations.

Mr. Talbot opened the discussion by presenting a resume of the current status of the Kashmir talks. Speaking from a wall map, he explained that in the third round of talks both parties got down to maps and suggested lines by which Kashmir might be divided. The Indians made the initial offer and the Paks responded. The President asked about a third line on the wall map, and Mr. Talbot replied that this was our staff suggestion of a line of possible settlement. We were now inclined to move the line somewhat to the right, in favor of Pakistan, but at any rate we were not planning to make a proposal at present. The talks were continuing on a bilateral basis.

Continuing his presentation, Mr. Talbot said that the latest letters on Kashmir from both Aziz Ahmed and Nehru were quite negative. Nevertheless, Ambassador Galbraith believes India can be moved to give Pakistan a reasonable foothold in the Vale. On the other hand, Ambassador McConaughy feels that the Paks are not inclined to seek a settlement and he finds their position extremely rigid. Nevertheless, Mr. Talbotexplained, we believe there is a fair chance we can move the parties to a compromise. We believe the Paks may come up with a proposal for internationalization or autonomy in the fourth round. It is just as well that these be considered so that the parties may then move on to drawing lines on maps in future talks.

Mr. Talbot pointed out that we believe the stakes are high enough to justify an increase in our involvement in the talks. We wished the President's authority to step up our activities from prodding both parties to making certain substantive suggestions regarding aspects of possible solutions. We proposed to begin this prior to the fourth round.

The President commented that he had recently written letters to both President Ayub and Prime Minister Nehru. Did we think there was a need for him to do so again? Mr. Talbot said he believed there would be such a need before the next talks, but not right away.

Mr. Talbot described our coordination of our Kashmir tactics with the British prior to the third round of talks and our plans for similar coordination prior to the fourth.

The Secretary intervened at this point to explain to the President that the major problem we may face in the fourth round is how to get through to the fifth. In view of the political pressures which are likely to be generated by both national legislatures, it will be difficult to make any major progress at Calcutta. There could be greater progress at the fifth round which might be held in April. The Secretary also pointed out that the Paks had offered virtually nothing when they put in their line at Karachi. Our efforts at present, therefore, must be concentrated on getting the Paks to be more forthcoming.

The President then commented rather wryly that if Pakistan doesn't come through with a better compromise offer, it will probably try to blackmail us into holding off on aid to India.

It was to deal with this problem, Mr. Komer explained, that we proposed to make clear to Pakistan that if the Kashmir talks failed because of Pak intransigence, we would not feel obligated to work out our military assistance to India in consultation with Pakistan. Speculating on other Pak moves, Mr. Talbot said that they may be thinking of taking the Kashmir issue to the Security Council this fall and, following a Soviet veto, raise it in the General Assembly. We believe Zafrullah's recent tour may have been intended to sound out Afro-Asian opinion with this move in mind. In order to deal with this eventuality, we propose to tell the Paks in advance that if the talks fail because of their intransigence, we would not support them in the U.N. this year.

The President expressed the view that to say this would simply annoy the Paks. They knew perfectly well that they could get nowhere in the U.N. on Kashmir.

The President then turned his attention again to the map, and, in particular, the dividing line which the Department has suggested as a possible basis for settlement. Mr. Komer said that this line represented the most we thought the Indians might give up, since a settlement would depend on Indian concessions.

Mr. Talbot then brought his presentation to a close with a brief review of our complete formula for a settlement, which, he said, would call for special joint Indo-Pak arrangements in the Vale while reserving to each party respective areas of political control in the Vale and elsewhere in Kashmir.

As the discussion came to a close, the President asked if we were suggesting some immediate communication or letter. Mr. Talbot replied that our request was for him to authorize us to step up our involvement in the Kashmir negotiations. The Secretary remarked, we were asking permission to get in from up to our ankles to up to our knees.

The President gave his approval.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret. Drafted by Schneider on February 23. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Kennedy Library)

259. Memorandum of Conversation 259. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, February 23, 1963.

SUBJECT

Kashmir: Sino-Pakistan Border Agreement

PARTICIPANTS

H.E. Aziz Ahmed, Ambassador, Embassy of Pakistan

Mr. M. Jaffri, First Secretary, Embassy of Pakistan

Present

The Secretary

NEA—Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary

SOA—John N. Gatch, Jr.

The Secretary told the Ambassador that we are worried about a Kashmir settlement. It looks to us as if things were getting more difficult. We had sensed some movement during the third round in Karachi on the part of India, but the Pakistan proposals had not seemed to us to provide a basis for further negotiation. Now, Foreign Minister Bhutto's visit to Peking1 made things more difficult. The Secretary wondered how Pakistan viewed the picture—had there been any agonizing reappraisals in Rawalpindi? He added that, viewing the Kashmir question from a vantage point 12,000 miles away, there was a tantalizing aspect to it. This was that both sides approached the Kashmir issue as enemies, but the issue itself was the only thing that made them enemies. This differentiates the Kashmir issue from such issues as Berlin and Cuba.

The Ambassador began by stating his Government's position on the Bhutto visit. He had reported our objections to Bhutto and to President Ayub. These had been considered and the proposal to have the Pakistan Ambassador in Peking sign the agreement had been made to the Communist Chinese. They refused to agree, pointing out that the Nepalese and Burmese border agreements with China had been signed by the King and the Prime Minister respectively, and insisted that at least the Foreign Minister sign the Pakistan one. Pakistan was playing down the importance of the trip—the delegation consisted of only four men who would only spend three days in Peking and one in Shanghai before returning to Pakistan. In any case, India should not read too much either into the fact that the Foreign Minister was going, or into the substance of the agreement itself. Pakistan feels it has acted wisely. The border agreement is provisional and does not prejudice India's interests.

The Secretary said that if he were the Communist Chinese Foreign Minister in Peking, his primary policy objective would be to wreck the Kashmir talks. It seemed to us that the contrived way these announcements about the border agreement had been made indicated that the Communist Chinese were actively using their relations with Pakistan to achieve this objective. The Secretary said he was not viewing the Sino-Pakistan agreement against the background of better than a decade of bitter Sino-United States relations. Rather, he was viewing the agreement as something which Pakistan, a close friend of the United States, was doing which, in the context of the total situation in the subcontinent, might be very harmful to the fourth round of Kashmir talks.

Ambassador Ahmed reiterated that they had tried to call off Bhutto's visit but could not. He added once again that the Indians were being too sensitive.

The Secretary pointed out that Pakistan has asked us in the past to influence the Indians on Kashmir. We have been working hard on getting the two sides together. Perhaps the Indians should not get upset by Pakistan's action, but the fact remains that they are. This puts an additional burden on us in a situation where our influence is already limited.

The Ambassador then turned to the Pakistan position on Kashmir. This, he said, had been stated in President Ayub's last letter to President Kennedy and amplified in his own letter to the Secretary of February 18. It represented the farthest limit Ayub could go consonant with public opinion in Pakistan. Pakistan continues to believe the best solution is a plebiscite, or, at least, the Dixon [Sir Owen]2 proposal for a limited plebiscite with partition. India says it cannot accept either of these for security reasons—i.e., India needs to maintain military supply routes through the Vale for the defense of Ladakh.

At this point, the Ambassador digressed from the subject of Kashmir and dwelt on military affairs. He said that intelligence reports coming to Pakistan indicated that the Indian military wanted to get rid of Ladakh as a military liability. If Pakistan took on the responsibility for the defense of Ladakh, it would result in a real joint defense of the subcontinent—i.e., Pakistan would defend the western flank, consisting of Kashmir and Ladakh, and India would defend NEFA. This arrangement would also provide for the disengagement of Pakistan and Indian forces so vital to a workable settlement. Other settlements would not permit Pakistan to disengage because Pakistan suspicions of Indian intentions would be kept alive by the presence of Indian military forces on Pakistan's flank. The Ambassador said that, the merits of the Kashmir dispute aside, Pakistan believed the concept of Indian responsibility for the defense of NEFA and Pakistan responsibility for Ladakh and Kashmir was a good strategic one. If the United States agrees, Pakistan thinks rightness of concept should be emphasized with Nehru.

Returning to the Kashmir issue itself, the Ambassador said that the Pakistan position contained in his letter to the Secretary of February 18 demonstrated a desire to be reasonable, since India's security concerns in Ladakh were taken into account. This position has not yet been imparted to the Indians, unless the United States had told them. Mr. Talbot said we had not. The Ambassador said that even this position would be hard to sell in Pakistan, but Ayub believed he could sell it.

The Secretary said that from a strictly U.S. national point of view, we do not care what sort of a solution is arrived at in Kashmir. We are interested in it only because it is an unsolved problem which affects our other interests because it perpetuates the confrontation of Pakistan and Indian forces. The solution is really up to India and Pakistan. However, it seemed clear to us that India will not give up Ladakh. He wondered whether it would not be useful to try to find an acceptable political line outside the Vale taking the Indian view into more account than was done at Karachi. He realized that one can never say last chance in diplomacy, but he did consider that if Kashmir was not settled now, the situation would become more serious all around, and we would all be set back farther.

The Secretary continued that, for example, a breakdown in the Kashmir talks would be welcomed in Peking as an invitation for more adventures in a disunited subcontinent. Then we and India's Commonwealth friends would feel compelled to provide India with further military assistance. This would inevitably have repercussions in Pakistan because the military balance would be upset.

The Ambassador said he agreed the Chinese Communists would not like to see a Kashmir settlement, but wondered if Nehru realized this. The Secretary said that in his opinion Nehru's ideas on Kashmir were involved with considerations that go far beyond whatever interests Peking (or Moscow) may have in the issue. The Ambassador wondered whether Nehru can afford to be sentimental on the issue. He believed a more realistic point of view was necessary.

The Secretary said that we urge utter realism on both sides. Kashmir is the number one problem. Perhaps the Chinese Communist involvement with Pakistan had elevated Nehru's concern. The Ambassador said Nehru was the biggest stumbling block. Pakistan believed that many other elements in India wanted a reasonable settlement. The Secretary said that if Pakistan was in touch with these elements in India, he would expect that Pakistan would be aware of the lack of appeal its Karachi proposals had. The Ambassador said that his Government had decided not to table at Karachi the plan mentioned in his letter to the Secretary of February 18. Perhaps Indian leaders would be more reasonable if they could learn the details of this plan.

The Secretary said he wanted to get a precise understanding of this plan. We gathered that it meant partition outside of the Vale and Ladakh now, and then a later transfer of Ladakh and the Vale to Pakistan. The Ambassador said that our understanding was correct. He said that the United States should understand that Pakistan and India public opinion on Kashmir were different. Pakistan has a grievance—India does not. Pakistan feels it has been cheated out of what is its rightful territory. Ayub has to deal with this public opinion, but has gone farther than any other Pakistan government before him has ever dared to go. Ayub feels he can prepare the public for a later transfer of Ladakh and the Vale, but if India wants more, Ayub would not be able to convince the Pakistan people.

The Ambassador said that the Pakistan position was firm, and that Bhutto intended not to agree to a fifth round after Calcutta unless the Indians were more forthcoming than simply presenting minor adjustments to the cease-fire line. The Secretary said that Pakistan's line on the map presented at Karachi was much more unrealistic than was the Indian line.

The Secretary went on to say that the stakes were too high to break off the discussions, and continued effort must be made on both sides. A failure at this point would be serious. The Ambassador agreed, but said effort had to come equally from India. He believes the Ayub offer is reasonable and that Pakistan is prepared to wait for Ladakh and the Vale. Mr. Talbot asked how long Pakistan would wait. The Ambassador said that within a year there would be evidence of recrudescence of Chinese Communist aggression if there was to be any, which Pakistan doubted. The Ambassador said that Pakistan would do its best to see that the talks do not fail. Pakistan was anxious that the United States and India understood this.

The Ambassador then reverted to the question of the attitude of the Indian Army towards Ladakh, and wondered whether we had had any intelligence reports that the Indian Army considered it a liability. The Secretary replied that we had no evidence of this nature.

The Secretary then asked why Pakistan and Indian forces could not disengage in connection with a settlement that gave Ladakh to India. The Ambassador said that the answer to this goes to the root of the problem. Pakistan feels that India has not accepted the fact of its existence, and that if India kept an army in Kashmir ostensibly to defend Ladakh, that army would constitute a threat to Pakistan which it could not disregard. Thus, the settlement would be meaningless.

Mr. Talbot said that the Pakistan proposals do not have enough in them to make negotiations towards a settlement possible. Pakistan must be more forthcoming or there will be no settlement. The Ambassador said that he would communicate this to his government but that he was afraid the Pakistan position would be firmer rather than more forthcoming at Calcutta. He sensed a hardening of the Pakistan attitude. Speaking personally he had been surprised that Ayub had gone as far as he had in the proposal on the Vale and Ladakh. It would be hard to explain to the Pakistan people, and this is why there had been so much furore over the Welles Hangen business. The Hangen broadcast could be construed to give away more of the Pakistan position than was desirable.

The Secretary said that the Pakistan position allowing for only one year delay in transferring the Vale and Ladakh to Pakistan was really no position at all—the year would be consumed by the administrative arrangements. The Ambassador said that the year would provide the answer to a disagreement between India and Pakistan about the immediate Chinese Communist threat in Ladakh. Ayub does not believe it a live threat, the Indians do. Ayub therefore is willing to wait a year to see if the threat materializes.

The Secretary emphasized again the importance of the next round to both sides. He said that if the talks failed because of Pakistan, the sympathy that Pakistan has enjoyed from other governments on Kashmir in the United Nations and elsewhere would be dissipated, and these governments would relax into indifference. The Secretary recalled that Ayub had said to Governor Harriman that any workable settlement would be hard to accept in both countries. The Ambassador said that Ayub had sent a clarification of this statement dealing with the interests of the people involved in any settlement.

The Secretary and Mr. Talbot expressed the hope that the United States and Pakistan could keep in continuous and close communication on the Kashmir issue.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret. Drafted by Gatch and approved in S on March 2.

1 The Embassy in Karachi was informed on February 22 by the Foreign Ministry that Bhutto intended to travel to Peking on February 24 to sign the border agreement with China which had been presaged by the agreement in principle signed by the two countries on December 26, 1962. (Telegram 1603 from Karachi, February 22; ibid., POL 32-2 CHICOM-PAK) The border agreement, which delineated the border between Pakistan and China's Sinkiang province, was signed in Peking on March 2 by Bhutto and China's Foreign Minister Chen Yi. (Telegram 1654 from Karachi, March 5; ibid.)

2 Brackets in the source text.

260. National Security Action Memorandum No. 223 260. National Security Action Memorandum No. 223Source

Washington, February 26, 1963.

TO

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT

Appraisal of Sino-Indian Situation

The President would like an analysis of the possibility that the Chinese might return to the attack on India any time this spring. Obviously, the intelligence requirements are essential, but he would like a political and military appraisal as well, and I suggest that an informal and prompt report be coordinated by the Department of State. If there is a prospect of the Chinese resuming the offensive, are we doing enough to help India? If we are doing enough, are we doing it soon enough?

McGeorge Bundy

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAMs 215-240. Secret.

261. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 261. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, March 2, 1963.

The waning prospects for a Kashmir settlement have been further dimmed by (1) Pakistan's border agreement with Peiping, which has given India a new excuse for stalling; and (2) Pakistan's still adamant refusal to consider any form of partition which doesn't give it the Vale. Aziz Ahmed's latest talk with Talbot (To London 4566 attached)1 shows rigidity of Pak stand.

Meanwhile we have reached US/UK agreement on tactics for the next round (London's 3330 and 3331 attached).2 In essence we will press the Indians to show willingness to give the Paks a position in the Vale, and press the Paks to be sufficiently responsive to keep the talks going.

The British agreed not to toss in internationalization at this point, but we believe they still see it as the preferred solution, and suspect that they may have talked about it with the Paks. Since the UK idea involves some form of self-determination, i.e. reversion to Pakistan after a few years, it is a flat non-starter. But if the Paks so choose, they can try it out at some point and get an Indian turn-down. Then we can get back to talking partition.

It's hard to tell how much Pak intransigeance is really bargaining tactics and how much a feeling on Ayub's part that public opinion will not accept partition at this point or that by waiting until Nehru dies, the Paks can get a better deal. We are trying to disabuse the Paks on the latter score.

We could probably get a fifth or even sixth round of talks. Since these highly publicized ministerial rounds sharply restrict maneuverability of the negotiators, however, we are looking for a way to get private talks going instead, with the ministerial sessions coming at much longer intervals.

The odds are increasingly against an early Kashmir settlement, but we must play out the hand. At the minimum we must get the Indians to be sufficiently forthcoming that the failure can be attributed to Pakistan. If this is the case, it should ease our problem on going ahead with aid to India. The Paks will no doubt be unhappy, but at least we'll be able to counter that we made a real effort to get India to come to terms.

Bob Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Kashmir, 3/63. Secret. A note on the source text reads: “Taken from the Pres. week-end reading dtd 3/2/63.”

1 Dated February 27; not printed.

2 Both dated February 28; neither printed.

262. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 262. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, March 5, 1963, 9 p.m.

3432. Department Pass White House and Defense. We continue to have a serious problem here of keeping Indians moving on Kashmir, firm on China and threading our way between Pakistan baiters, anti-American and other local thickets. The Menonites and fellow travellers are working very hard for a comeback. They are naturally discontented with the way Indian public opinion has moved toward the West in recent months and would like to neutralize the anti-communist and anti-Chinese reaction.

This group has a potentially very dangerous argument that the US responded promptly enough with the help when the Chinese came last fall but now we are subordinating Indian aid to domestic considerations, our fear of arousing the Pakistanis and other adverse factors. It follows that India need not pursue an active Pakistan policy for she is not going to get much help anyway. There is further danger of a realpolitik argument that Americans being largely indifferent, India had better make up with the Chinese along Pak lines.

As you will be aware, I have been meeting these arguments with considerable energy and some success. But given the state of Indian alarm over the Chinese there is a feeling that we are being very studious and deliberate. This was reflected, as these things always are, in Nehru's comment this time to Chalmers Roberts. Accordingly, it is very important that we have rapid movement on the air defense matter. Most immediately if I could indicate the prospect of a fairly prompt response, I would be in a far stronger position in pressing at Calcutta on Kashmir. “You must uphold our hand at this juncture while we are getting you air support.” I have just been over the intelligence data and it seems clear that the danger of air operations from Tibet is not large. Accordingly, in accepting some commitment to support the Indians against Chinese air attack we are not running an appreciable risk. At the same time, the supporting effect here will be perfectly enormous. Particularly after this Bhutto trip to Peking I need something to work on. Note also value of example to those who seek to move GOI of successful movement of USG.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1-4 INDIA. Top Secret; Operational Immediate.

263. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate at Dacca 263. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate at DaccaSource

Washington, March 9, 1963, 6:17 p.m.

383. For Ambassador McConaughy. Deliver following message from President to Ayub at earliest opportunity.

March 9, 1963

“Dear Mr. President:

I must tell you of my concern over the turn of events between the third and fourth rounds of the Kashmir talks. As you know, we and the United Kingdom pressed for these talks at Pakistan's urging. We have done our best to get talks started and to keep them going. Indeed, I have gained confidence that we are on the right track from the fact that your government has repeatedly expressed its appreciation for our efforts. I also feel we have made progress in getting India to offer terms better than any in recent years. There is a reasonable prospect that under proper circumstances India will go further still. Thus we have hoped that a resolution of the long-standing dispute between you and India was in sight.

Now, however, the timing and form of Pakistan's negotiations with Peiping, however justifiable these might be on other grounds, have had the predictable effect of seriously clouding the atmosphere. The Government of India will now find it more difficult to gain public acceptance of necessary concessions to Pakistan. I know you had your reasons for concluding the border agreement with Communist China. But there is no blinking how adversely it has affected the negotiations.

It was with this in mind that I noted and was encouraged by your statement in Dacca on the next round of talks. You said the agreement with Communist China would not prejudice the Kashmir talks in Calcutta and that Pakistan would enter them with honest intention to seek an equitable and honorable settlement.

To this end, I feel that the Pakistan delegation at Calcutta should take the initiative by advancing a far more forthcoming and realistic position than that adopted not only at the Karachi meetings but also subsequently heard from some of your officials. I can tell you that I am also urging Mr. Nehru to approach the negotiations in a forthcoming spirit.

Any serious effort to settle the Kashmir issue requires the willingness of each side to reckon with the interests of the other in the Vale of Kashmir. Yet at Karachi, neither side came to grips with this central issue. I continue to think that the best solution involves an international boundary through Kashmir. Nevertheless, should you believe some other formula would be workable, I hope you will come forward with it at Calcutta.

Let me again underline my conviction that there will probably never be a better opportunity for an honorable settlement on terms as good as those we think attainable now. If we do not succeed in our efforts this time, it would seem almost inevitable that the issue would, for all practical purposes, be settled on the basis of the status quo.

The Kashmir discussions are a challenge requiring patience and determination along with a high order of statesmanship. I know we can count on you to do your share. I hope that we can keep in close touch as the discussions continue.

With warm personal regards,

Sincerely,

John F. Kennedy“

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Gatch; cleared by BNA, Harriman, McGhee, Rusk, and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi, London, Karachi, and Calcutta.

264. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 264. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, March 9, 1963, 6:17 p.m.

3366. Verbatim Text. Deliver following message from President to Prime Minister Nehru at earliest appropriate opportunity:

March 9, 1963

“Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

I appreciate your replying to my letter in the same frank manner in which I had written to you.1 I can understand the discouragement you expressed about Kashmir. I can see, however, how the accumulated tensions and emotions of the last sixteen years make the path of compromise most difficult to tread on either side.

If possible, the United States should also send planes flown by American personnel wouldhave to man these fighters and communications. American personnel would have to man these fighters and installations and protect Indian cities from air attacks by the Chinese till Indian personnel had been trained. I'm persuaded you will agree from your own experience that, in negotiations such as those between India and Pakistan on Kashmir, day to day developments tend to take on an importance they do not always deserve. They sometimes seem to obscure the broader realities which initially caused each party to conclude that agreement rather than difference was in its national interest. As I think you will agree, the realities which dictate India's discussions with Pakistan include the security of the subcontinent from outside aggression, the need to free energies and resources for internal development, and the need to end the fear of one nation and one people of the subcontinent of another. These realities, and the talks resulting from them, provide a historic opportunity for laying the foundations of friendship, well-being and strength in South Asia. India's potential role and responsibility in this historical process is central and your own capacity to exercise a decisive influence is great.

In your letter you described the proposal made by India during the talks at Karachi. While this was a real step forward, I suspect that until India and Pakistan have made serious proposals which take into account the position of each regarding the Vale, they will not have made use of the historic opportunity presented by the talks. Pakistan certainly has not done so. But I hope that India would nevertheless begin discussion of the Vale. It would be tragic if that beginning were not made.

Let me, therefore, renew my urging that India continue to make proposals which will be proof positive to the Pakistanis that you genuinely seek a settlement by signalling a willingness to give Pakistan a substantial position in the Vale. I urge this not only because I hope that statesmanship can yet find the way to honorable compromise that is so much in the interest of the subcontinent as a whole. I urge it also because India would demonstrate to the world its sincerity in seeking a Kashmir settlement, and would clearly show Pakistan India's desire to compromise the central issue of the dispute. You will appreciate the dangers of waiting too long to take this step.

As to Pakistan, I hold no brief for the timing of Mr. Bhutto's visit to Peiping nor the extent to which Communist China has been enabled to use the conclusion of this agreement to serve its interests. We have made this clear to them. But we cannot remake the past. And with patience and tolerance there is still an opportunity for the future. I hope the talks go well at Calcutta and that real progress will be made.

Sincerely,

John F. Kennedy“

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider; cleared by BNA, Laise, Harriman, McGhee, and McGeorge Bundy, and in draft by Rusk; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Dacca, Karachi, London, and Calcutta.

1 For Kennedy's letter, transmitted to New Delhi on February 6, see Document 251. For text of Nehru's February 16 letter, see Document 255.

265. Editorial Note 265. Editorial Note

On March 9, 1963, the Afghan Government of Mohammed Daud resigned. (Telegram 394 from Kabul, March 10; Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 AFG) Daud was succeeded as Prime Minister by Dr. Mohammed Yusuf, who had served as Minister of Mines in the Daud government. Yusuf also held the positions of Foreign Minister and Minister of Mines in the cabinet he formed on March 13. (Telegram 411 from Kabul, March 13; ibid., POL 15-1 AFG) On March 13, the Embassy in Kabul reported to the Department of State that a “rash of rumor” was circulating in Afghanistan to the effect that the fall of the Daud government was the result of “adroit U.S. engineering.” (Telegram 407 from Kabul; ibid., POL 15 AFG)

The Department concurred with the Embassy's assessment that speculation associating the United States with the change of government in Afghanistan was probably inevitable and largely uncontrollable. The Department also agreed that U.S. actions should provide no fuel for such speculation. Accordingly, the Kennedy administration intended to pursue “cautious and correct” relations with the new Afghan Government. The object was to “neither burden it with embraces nor discourage it with coldness.” In line with that policy, the Department informed the Embassy that no new initiatives with regard to the border dispute between Afghanistan and Pakistan were contemplated. (Telegram 248 to Kabul, March 17; ibid., POL 15-1 AFG)

266. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 266. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, March 12, 1963.

JCSM-203 – 63

SUBJECT

Report by Commonwealth/United States Air Defense Mission to India (U)

1. In response to a request from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, International Security Affairs, a draft of the report by the Commonwealth/United States Air Defense Mission to India has been obtained and is forwarded herewith.1 It is understood that, with the exception of necessary editorial corrections, the findings contained therein will approximate those in the final report of the Mission.

2. Provided there are no substantive changes in its final form and subject to Joint Chiefs of Staff review of the final report of the Chief of the US element, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe the findings of the Mission are generally acceptable.

3. With respect to implementing actions to improve Indian air defense capability in the short term, the preliminary views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff are that: a. The United Kingdom should assume over-all responsibility for implementing the air defense program for India, with assistance from other Commonwealth countries and the United States.

b. The United States should be prepared to commit one US fighter squadron and one mobile ground control intercept radar (GCI) to assist the Indian Air Force in air defense tasks in the event of resumption of Sino-Indian hostilities on a scale which indicates the immediate danger of Chinese air attack on Delhi or Calcutta. A US fighter squadron could be deployed in approximately 58 hours, and a mobile GCI would require six days.

c. The United States should not make any commitment, such as 3 b above, to the Government of India involving US combat air defense units unless political reasons therefore are overriding and provided no Constitutional objection exists. Even then, such commitment should be withheld until there is agreement between the United States and the United Kingdom as to contributions and responsibilities in the air defense program for India.

d. In such an agreement, the United Kingdom, in accordance with undertakings at Nassau, should be requested to take immediate action to improve present Indian day-fighter capability to include supply of spares for Hunter aircraft, technical assistance in making the Gnat operational, and supply of attrition aircraft. Further, the United Kingdom should make arrangements with the Indian government for improvements to existing TPS-IE and type 8 radars.

e. Prior to governmental approval of commitments as outlined above, action will be required to determine the concept for employment and extent of combat involvement of UK and US air defense units. Due consideration must be given the principle that in committing United States Forces to combat, there will be an implied further commitment of US military force as may be necessary for the defense of India.

4. The US fighter currently available for deployment (F-100 or F-105) is not a true all-weather interceptor. By reason of its over-all performance, however, deployment of one of these types would add to existing Indian air defense capability. Furthermore, current estimates of the threat do not credit the Chinese with a significant all-weather offensive capability. If the threat changes, plans may be required for deploying some other type, such as F-102's or F-4C's, if available at the time.

5. It is recommended that the foregoing be used as a basis for the air defense aspects of the informal reply to the questions contained in NSAM 223.2 The views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on longer range Indian air defense requirements will be submitted when the final report of the Commonwealth/United States Air Defense Mission has been reviewed.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Maxwell D. Taylor
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, India, 091.3 (26 Oct 1962), 1963 Papers. Secret.

1 Attached but not printed.

2 Document 260.

267. Telegram From President Kennedy to the Ambassador to India (Galbraith) 267. Telegram From President Kennedy to the Ambassador to India (Galbraith)Source

Washington, March 22, 1963, 10:45 a.m.

For Ambassador Galbraith From President.

I've just caught up on current status of Kashmir, and am worried lest the Indians have lost their sense of urgency over settlement. Of course, the Paks asked for trouble by Bhutto's trip to Peking, but I gather the Indians did nothing else but play this record during the Calcutta round1 instead of moving the ball forward even an inch. At any rate, we can't let them hide behind this issue any longer.

I'm also concerned lest the Indians got the idea from my press conference statement on 21 February,2 and Rusk's on 8 March,3 that we've already decided to go ahead on longer term military aid, so they can relax on Kashmir. Clay Report4 may add to this impression. Since the prospect of our aid is still our chief leverage, even though it may be a wasting asset, keep pressing on them that a Kashmir settlement or at least an all-out Indian effort to get one is central to my ability to secure them the massive aid they want; and this is all too true. To add this burden on top of the already staggering economic assistance we give to India may be well-nigh impossible for me to sell the Congress, unless I can point to concrete evidence of India's own seriousness of purpose. We'll have to move fairly soon on the air umbrella and the other Indian military requirements, so we don't have too much time before this leverage on the Indians will no longer be as useful.

I am counting on you to get these matters moved forward. Remember that you are still my Ambassador until August or so, which time you can become critic rather than executor of our policy, and let GATO5 go by the boards. Instead of GATO let's settle for a Kashmir solution as the crowning monument to Galbraith in India. Chester can then move on to grander strategy.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Ambassador Galbraith, Special File, Miscellaneous Messages, 1/63-7/63. Secret; Eyes Only. Handwritten notes on the source text read: “Send via CIA channel,” and “cite CAP 63143.”

1 The fourth round of Ministerial talks on Kashmir took place in Calcutta March 12-15 without achieving any progress toward a settlement.

2 For the text of Kennedy's statement on the issue of air defense support for India, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 204-205.

3 Rusk's comment in his March 8 press conference on the question of additional military aid to India is printed in Department of State Bulletin, March 25, 1963, p. 439.

4 Reference is to the March 20 report to President Kennedy from the Committee To Strengthen the Security of the Free World. The committee was chaired by Lucius D. Clay, and the report dealt with the scope and distribution of U.S. military and economic assistance programs. The recommendations of the report are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 1148-1163.

5 In a January 9 telegram to Galbraith, sent by the same channel, Kennedy referred, with a trace of humor, to Galbraith's “grand design for the subcontinent,” which Kennedy styled “GATO—Galbraith's Allpurpose Treaty Organization.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Ambassador Galbraith, Special File, Miscellaneous Messages, 1/63-7/63)

268. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 268. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, March 23, 1963.

I've summarized on attached page State's reply last week to your query1 about risks of renewed Chicom attack on India this Spring.

Just this week Indian sources have been playing up alleged 2-4 division Chicom reinforcements and hostile tone of recent Peiping notes. We have no evidence of buildup, have tracked down source of above report, and think it false (see Delhi 3667 and 3637 attached).2 Our hunch is that Indians are playing threat up partly as a pitch for US aid, partly to keep Indian people alive to threat.

We think Chicoms would lose more politically than they'd gain militarily by renewed attack. It would almost certainly serve our interests rather than theirs.

Bob Komer

Attachment3

Washington, March 14, 1963.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

The attached response4 to your query about the possibility of renewed Chicom attack on India, and the impact of our aid on India ability to resist, can be summarized as follows: 1. We see little likelihood of renewed major Chicom attack this spring. Their withdrawal from areas seized last fall, lack of any subsequent major build-up, and our analysis of Chicom intentions all suggest that the Chicoms feel they achieved their limited objectives, and are unlikely to risk triggering US/UK intervention. There might, however, be a renewal of minor skirmishing.

2. The Chicoms are capable of reoccupying all of the areas they seized last fall. However, the Indian army has elected not to re-occupy and defend these areas. In the NEFA the Indians would defend down on the Assam plain and would give a much better account of themselves in general than last fall. The Chinese logistic problem would also be much more difficult, if they tried to advance out of the Himalaya foothills into the critical river valleys. The Indians might well be able to contain any such Chicom advances, particularly if they used their air, though the Chinese might make some further gains.

3. If the above estimate is correct, our aid has been at about the right pace, considering our desire to use its rate of flow as leverage on Kashmir. Given the present limited absorptive capacity of the Indian forces, they could not really have used a great deal more. What aid we gave did much to meet their emergency needs. The key further short-run step we could take would be to provide the US/UK “air umbrella,” which we will be recommending shortly.

4. The longer term military threat to India may be greater than the immediate one, depending on how both sides handle themselves in the disputed zones. Therefore we ought to consider moving shortly on (a) the next tranche of military assistance beyond the $120 million emergency ceiling (b) assisting Indian defense production (c) rehabilitating the Indian air force (which we hope the UK will take on).

R.W. Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 3/22/63-3/31/63. Secret.

1 The query was expressed in NSAM No. 223, Document 260.

2 Not attached. Dated March 22 and March 21, respectively. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CHICOM-INDIA)

3 Secret.

4 Not found.

269. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 269. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, March 25, 1963, Midnight.

3693. Dept Pass White House and Defense. I have now settled in my mind on the tactics for the next approach to the Indians on Kashmir. This supplements and extends Embtels 36021 and 36072 to which incidentally I have as yet had no response. We assume here that the Department has not lost its interest in a Kashmir settlement. If this is so would hope there might be more positive indication to this effect in the speed and precision of future comment.

As the basic point of departure let me note that I have exhausted my present line of argument. The Indians are listening to my speeches on the security of the subcontinent and the need to placate our Congress with exceptional equanimity. I would attribute this to my own incoherence were it not that the eloquent letters drafted for the President are producing an equal absence of perturbation. At the same time as shown by the past and forthcoming trips of the local power elite to Washington, Indians have a continuing and increasing concern for war production assistance, longer-run defense aid and air defense. There is also (Embtel 3607 again) increasing concern about developing independent strength by the IAF. As the immediate fear of the Chinese Air Force recedes and national pride re-asserts itself they are beginning to think of new equipment. This yearning will continue and increase.

One further point. Instead of waiting for the April talks, there is a chance for speeding up these dreary negotiations by getting the Indians to outline an offer in advance. This would put them in a very good light, and put the Paks in a position where they would have to prepare a responding step. This offer should be fairly definitive and could be wholly contingent on a Pak response. The Calcutta exercise (Embtel 3602) is causing me to have doubts about whether the existing forward process is going forward at all. We need a bigger step. In light of the above I propose: (1) After preparatory work with Krishnamachari, Shastri and FonSec Desai and possibly Chavan, I propose to go to see PriMin and put forward a plain political bargain. Alternatively, “I may ask” the above cast to do it for me and preliminary soundings with TTK suggest that this could be best course. The deal is that we will give the Indians substantial support on machinery, equipment and raw material for the development of their defense industry. We will give them backup support on air. We will negotiate a sizeable program of longer-term aid. These things we are prepared to work out with Krishnamachari on his forthcoming trip to Washington. But we must however have something from the Indians. That is a clear indication that they will make a substantial concession, not a sliver, in the valley. I shall note that one dominant view, which I happen to hold, is that Vale should be divided with the rights to the valley residents to move and trade freely across the line. There must also be ironclad guarantees to the Pakistanis on the rivers. Something on this line should be offered in advance of Karachi as a major move to settlement. At Karachi Indians should propose a joint team of experts to work on mutually acceptable arrangements in valley for presentation first to ministers and then to summit.

(2) I will stress that early indication of offer along the foregoing lines will serve two purposes: (A) it will set the stage for Krishnamachari's negotiations and enable him to sew up these vital matters, and (B) it will make it possible for us to put the arm on the Paks in an equally serious way. We do not know whether the Paks will accept. But the Indians will have put the ball plainly in their court. If Paks don't respond to a suitable offer, we will of course go ahead with military aid. The Paks will have lost their right to complain.

(3) The foregoing concerns the major step. I come now to a later stage of the bargain. I plan to say that we are aware of the Indians need for transport planes, high-performance fighters and pilot training. The C-119's we will provide as part of the present program. However, we have no choice but to go slow on high-performance fighters and pilot training and probably C-130 type transport because of the danger of an adverse and damaging Pakistan reaction. But it should be understood that just as soon as a Kashmir settlement is effective we will provide planes and training so welcome this accretion to the air strength of the non-communist world. I am perfectly aware that this takes us some steps beyond present thinking. Notice however that it is an offer that is contingent on a settlement. Should we get a settlement, some fighters and training would be a small price. And it gives Indians strong incentive for further adjustments and amendments beyond the major step. Once we get the major steps, small changes can follow always assuming the Paks can be brought along.

There are risks in the above strategy and I have no doubt that they will be adequately discussed. This is the first time we have descended to quite such a crude bazaar level with the Indians. They may not like it and the sensitive Nehru soul may be somewhat seared. The Communists and the Menonites will [garble] a barter of sacred territory for the defense and sound off. However, I must stress that I have exhausted the verbal lines of approach including those that are still to be suggested by the Department and this is the most practical next step. Moreover, it might work. Accordingly: (1) May I have Washington support for the defense production air defense and longer-range arms aid which are our part of the bargain? May I note that if caution causes you to cut back on my offer you will be directly damaging my case. And may I note that these are things that in one form or another we are going to do anyway, so why not use them?

(2) To avoid misunderstanding I should give some indication of the general magnitude on defense production and longer[-range arms aid?]. While these figures need not be precise, I will need guidance and neither vagueness nor parsimony will help me a bit.

(3) May I have specific approval for talking about the longer-run air prospect in event of a full settlement?

(4) May it be understood (Embtel 3607) that air defense deals with procedure but at the moment it seems at all odds the most promising course?

(5) May it be known that I view with continuing alarm the indication in the cables that Sandys may return to the subcontinent and I regard as irresponsible the failure to tell the British when this talk of the glint in Sandys' eye comes up how disastrous this would be. (They are clear here.) I am in fact persuaded that at any time we seem to be close to agreement he will be back with the hope of propping up his admirably unpromising career and presumably with his talk of CENTO, nuclear deterrents and the rest. I must again urge in strongest terms the grievous damage that this would do and the importance of preventing it. If nothing else serves, you must have in mind a direct appeal by the President to Macmillan.

(6) May I have, for God's sake, reasonably prompt reply? If you are very prompt I might plead for speed here so you could put the bite on Bhutto. May I also remind all hands that just as Washington considers it prudent to remind ambassadors to move with all firmness, vigor and determination, so ambassadors are entitled in characteristic humility to ask Washington to collect itself effectively for supporting action. I notice with mild distaste my feeling that while I should be expected to move GOI with some celerity, the tempo USG must be taken as given and very deliberate at that.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and Karachi.

1 Telegram 3602 from New Delhi, March 18, contained Galbraith's assessment of the Calcutta round of the Kashmir Ministerial talks, which he described as “a frail dish,” and his suggestions for tactics to pursue in the wake of those talks. (Ibid.)

2 In telegram 3607 from New Delhi, March 18, Galbraith outlined what he saw as the unique opportunity to influence India policy offered by the negotiations taking place over the Indian request for air defense support. (Ibid., DEF 1-4 INDIA)

270. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 270. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, March 31, 1963.

SUBJECT

Kashmir: Tactics For Fifth Round1

1. Our Proposed Tactics

In our efforts to encourage India and Pakistan toward a resolution of the Kashmir dispute, British and United States officials have just agreed, ad referendum, to courses of action described in the attached three papers. Your approval is requested.

2. What Ambassador Galbraith Proposes

Ambassador Galbraith has proposed much different tactics for the coming weeks:2

Prior to the Karachi talks we should strike a “crude bazaar level” political bargain with Nehru. We would offer India defense production assistance, backup support on air, and sizeable long-term aid. We would ask in return that India promise to offer Pakistan in advance of the Karachi talks a substantial position in the Vale and ironclad guarantees on the rivers.

If India accepted, it would be up to Pakistan to respond with a suitable offer. If it did not, we would go ahead with military aid to India.

We would tell the Indians now that when a Kashmir settlement is effective we will provide India with high performance fighters, pilot training and probably C-130's.

3. Difference between suggested U.S./U.K. tactics and Ambassador Galbraith's Proposal

Our tactics assume that more common ground needs to be built up before the two parties can face the final confrontation without great risk to themselves and to our interests. Ambassador Galbraith's are designed to purchase not a settlement, but an immediate breakthrough from the Indian side. The price is an open-ended military commitment to India. Since this is just the thing which the Pakistanis fear most, we would expect them to react violently. This would reduce the likelihood of a Kashmir settlement and increase Indo-Pak tensions. We would, therefore, suffer a severe setback in our efforts to strengthen subcontinental defense against Communist China. Moreover, we would risk losing the special advantages of our relationship with Pakistan.

4. Emerging Differences with the British

We are agreed with the British on Kashmir tactics through the Karachi talks. You should, however, be alerted to the prospect that differences regarding military aid and Kashmir are likely to arise in the future:

If there is no progress in the Karachi talks, we will encounter increasing difficulty in getting British cooperation on additional military assistance to India.

The British might reluctantly agree to commitments on air defense under the scope of the joint recommendations but would find great difficulty in providing defense production assistance. They have not considered long-range military assistance to India; quite apart from the Kashmir issue it would require a reversal of long-standing policy toward Commonwealth countries.

DR

Attachment3

SCENARIO FOR KASHMIR NEGOTIATIONS

I. Objectives for the fifth round—April 21:4

To get discussions concentrated on the Vale and the possible alternatives; to devise means for pursuing future negotiations more effectively.

II. Suggested action for accomplishing this:

1. U.S./U.K. should agree upon the preparations required and the joint line of action to be followed in regard to the fifth round.

2. An early, high-level approach to President Ayub and to Prime Minister Nehru is probably desirable if U.S./U.K. exploratory talks with officials prior to the fifth round are to be productive.

3. It will be necessary to seek through other forms of diplomatic representation to impress upon both sides the political necessity of making concessions in regard to the Vale.

4. We should seek by quiet behind-the-scenes talking with both parties based upon the joint instructions agreed upon by the U.S. and U.K. to prepare the ground for a more fruitful fifth round. This would include discussions with the two parties of a U.S./U.K. statement of the elements which would indicate the general limits of what we believe to be a practicable settlement. We hope that this might make it possible for the two parties to abandon their reluctance to reveal their bargaining positions.

5. The U.S. has found value in having Embassy efforts supplemented by a single U.S. representative to present the Washington views to the two sides and proposes to send Elmore Jackson back to the subcontinent about April 7.

6. No commitments on air defense, defense production, or long-term military assistance will be made prior to the fifth round, but urgent planning and continuing consultation will be necessary in order that decisions can be taken at short notice if developments in the negotiations make this desirable.

III. Post-fifth round follow up:

The presence of the UK and US officials in the subcontinent for the CENTO meeting in late April will provide an opportunity for discussions in Karachi and Delhi of the problems of securing the subcontinent against Chinese ambitions and the central importance of a Kashmir settlement and improved Indo-Pak relations to this end.

By late April the U.K. and the U.S. must be prepared: to discuss both in New Delhi and with numerous high ranking Indian official visitors questions relating to U.K./U.S. military aid for the next phase; to Indian air defense and to defense production requirements; and to use the discussions in this regard to encourage forward movement by the Indians on the Kashmir question. Hearings on aid to India will already be under way before the U.S. Congressional committees, but the floor debate and decisions may not take place until mid-summer.

The Pak consortium meeting (pledging) is scheduled for the end of April; the Indian consortium meetings, both preparatory and pledging, are scheduled for May.

The President of India visits the U.S. and U.K. in June.

Attachment5

JOINT U.K./U.S. INSTRUCTION FOR FIFTH ROUND KASHMIR TALKS6

Our objective before and during Karachi meeting is to get parties into serious discussion of Vale and of line south of Vale.

We do not believe that present pattern of periodic three-day ministerial meetings with no provision for detailed examination of alternatives in interval is productive method of negotiation. Accordingly, our objective at Karachi should be sufficient ministerial agreement on political elements of solution so that parties, possibly through quiet discussion at technical level, could then proceed either directly to Nehru-Ayub meeting or to a final ministerial meeting followed promptly by Ayub-Nehru meeting.

To achieve these objectives we must take vigorous action to step up badly lagging tempo of talks. Practice of urging parties narrow differences by offering proposals and counterproposals has not been productive. Therefore, we plan stimulate proposals regarding Vale by discussing with parties a number of elements which would indicate general limits of what we believe practicable settlement. (Instructions regarding these elements will be sent separately.)7 We would not expect either party explicitly to accept these elements but we would hope that concentration on these elements will assist parties, prior fifth round, to shape realistic proposals to be considered at Karachi.

In your discussions with Indians and Paks leading up to fifth round, you should be guided by appropriate portions of instructions relating to fourth round, including authorization take specified emergency action if necessary to avoid breakdown of talks. In addition, you should take following line: (1) There must be substantial achievement at Karachi talks. Following preliminary discussions at Rawalpindi, Delhi, and Karachi, and regrettable slow-down at Calcutta, talks have reached decisive stage. Major progress is essential and if there is to be such progress both parties must be prepared to make major compromises. We regard fifth round as key test of seriousness with which both sides seek compromise settlement which so much in interest of both economic and military security of subcontinent.

(2) We believe main business of Karachi talks should be serious discussion of Vale, and you should make this clear to both parties. In order to help them come to grips with problem, we will be discussing with them a number of elements which we believe would apply to any mutually acceptable agreement on Vale.

(3) You should continue to insist that each side must accord other a substantial position in Vale and their proposals must take this central principle into account. Each party must come to Karachi prepared give fair hearing to proposals of other. While we continue believe solution which would lead to least difficulty would be achieved by delineation of an international boundary, we will support any feasible settlement upon which India and Pakistan can agree.

(4) You should tell Indians it would have most unfortunate effect on Karachi talks were they again to raise subject Pak-Chinese border agreement, and it should now be dropped.

Attachment8

ELEMENTS OF A SETTLEMENT

It is proposed that the following points, which are designed to encourage the parties to concentrate on the immediate questions at issue, should be put to the parties by the Ambassador and by Elmore Jackson, after the latter's arrival on the subcontinent. The British, through their High Commissioners, will concert, as appropriate, in the presentation and the subsequent discussion.

1. Neither India nor Pakistan can entirely give up its claim to the Kashmir Valley. Each must have a substantial position in the Vale.

2. India and Pakistan must both have assured access to and through the Vale for the defense of their positions to the north and east. These defense arrangements must be such as not to impede a disengagement of Indian and Pakistan forces.

3. Outside the Valley, the economic and strategic interests of the two countries should be recognized, e.g., India's position in Ladakh and Pakistan's interest in the development of water storage facilities on the Chenab.

4. The position of the two countries in the Valley must be such as to permit: (a) clearly defined arrangements for sovereignty and for the maintenance of law and order.

(b) political freedom and some measure of local self-rule for the inhabitants.

(c) free movement of the people of the Valley throughout the Vale, and their relatively free movement to other parts of Kashmir and to India and Pakistan.

(d) the rapid development by India and Pakistan of tourism in the Kashmir area—with its important foreign exchange potential for both countries.

(e) the effective use in Kashmir of development funds, available from external sources, for such purposes as improving water and forestry resources, the development of communications and small industries, and improving the health and welfare of the people.

* Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Countries Series, India, Security, 1963. Secret.

1 The fifth round of Ministerial talks on Kashmir took place in Karachi April 22-25.

2 See Document 269.

3 Secret.

4 The fifth round of talks began on April 22.

5 Secret.

6 The text of this joint instruction was sent on April 2 to New Delhi as telegram 3561 and to Karachi as telegram 1495. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK)

7 The text of the elements of a settlement, cited in the joint U.S.-U.K. instruction, was sent on April 2 to New Delhi as telegram 3562 and to Karachi as telegram 1496. (Ibid.)

8 Secret.

271. Memorandum of Conversation 271. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 1, 1963, 4:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

The President

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Mr. Harriman

Mr. McG. Bundy

Mr. Talbot

Mr. W. Bundy

Mr. Kaysen

Mr. Jackson

The Secretary opened the discussion by indicating the importance which he attaches to the defense of the subcontinent. He emphasized the central role of a Kashmir settlement in the development of that defense system.

Mr. Talbot interpreted the present status of the Kashmir negotiations. The last Indian-Pakistan Ministerial Meeting in Calcutta did not move the two parties forward. It may have gotten them over certain hurdles growing out of the Pak-Chicom border agreement. In talks here in Washington during the last few days with the British, a general line of approach has been developed which includes moves to re-emphasize to India and Pakistan the importance which the US and UK attach to a Kashmir settlement.1 It also included an agreement (ad referendum) on: 1. A scenario for the period preceding and immediately following the next Ministerial Meeting in Karachi, scheduled to begin on April 21.

2. A paper setting forth certain “elements of a settlement,” and

3. The informal use of a background paper elaborating various alternative approaches to a settlement.

As a means of emphasizing the importance which the UK attaches to a settlement, the British are considering the possibility of the Prime Minister addressing letters to Prime Minister Nehru and President Ayub. The United States has already moved in this area by sending Walt Rostow and Bob Komer for talks with senior officials in India and Pakistan.

The President indicated that he understood some of the reasons why, under present circumstances, the Indians might be brought to a willingness to reach a compromise settlement on Kashmir. He asked what incentives there were for President Ayub to compromise. It was pointed out that the next few months might be the last good opportunity for Pakistan to settle. The US and UK might be able at the present time to persuade the Indians to make a substantial compromise. The two countries may not have at hand equal leverage in the future.

The President asked if Duncan Sandys was likely again to become directly involved in the negotiations. Mr. Harriman indicated that he did not share Ambassador Galbraith's feeling about the usefulness of Mr. Sandys' efforts. He felt that the latter had already been of substantial assistance in getting the present negotiations underway.

The President asked if the Indians understood that they must settle the Kashmir question. Mr. Talbot suggested that there had been some slippage in the Indian approach during the period surrounding the Pak-Chicom border agreement but said that Mr. Rostow's trip was designed to re-emphasize to the Indians and the Pakistanis the importance of a Kashmir settlement.

The President asked why, if the US was going to make certain military assistance available to India during the next few months, certain of the arrangements could not be made promptly in a manner which could relate them to a more forthcoming Indian offer on Kashmir. The Secretary and Mr. Talbot suggested the problem was partially one of timing. It was pointed out that the India-Pakistan negotiations had not yet reached the stage where it was possible for the US and UK to get a sufficiently clear reading of what the ultimate compromise should be for us to put our full weight behind a particular Indian offer. In addition, a US-Indian deal would certainly leak. This would lead almost certainly to a Pakistani rejection.

The President asked how soon decisions could be made on a military aid program for India. The Secretary of Defense pointed out that while the US might, at an early stage, reach a decision in regard to air defense questions, and perhaps on the first stage of a defense production program, the Indian government's requirements for the later stages of their defense production program and for their long-term military assistance program, were most unclear. The US, as of now, has no firm indications from the Indians for these latter requirements. It would thus be difficult at this stage to relate most of these military programs to a specific Indian offer on Kashmir. If such relationships were to be considered desirable, they could be established much more effectively in early May.

The Secretary of Defense indicated that the costs of an air defense program and of the first stage of a defense production program would not be difficult to handle.

The Secretary suggested that the aim of the United States should be to secure a Kashmir settlement and not just to stimulate an Indian offer which, if the Pakistanis turned it down, would clear the way for additional military assistance to India. This would lead to an accelerating arms race between India and Pakistan and continued wastage of US and other economic resources on the subcontinent. He emphasized the importance of our looking at the defense of the subcontinent as a whole.

The President suggested that perhaps the proper course would be to indicate to Ambassador Galbraith that we might come to some such proposal as his following the meeting in Karachi.

Mr. Talbot said that he hoped that enough progress could be made in narrowing the gap between the two parties before and during the Karachi meeting and it would be possible after that meeting for the US to be much clearer in stimulating or promoting compromise proposals. In response to a question, Mr. Jackson indicated that he thought it would be premature to attempt to work out a final proposal for settlement, of the kind which Ambassador Galbraith suggested, previous to the Karachi meeting. He felt that, using the elements of a settlement on which the US and UK had agreed (ad referendum), it should be possible to get India and Pakistan at the Karachi meeting into a discussion of the Vale. He believed that, following such a discussion, the US would have a much more definite view of the nature of the ultimate compromise toward which the parties should be encouraged to move.

The President suggested that Ambassador Galbraith be told: 1. That Washington is moving promptly to define our response to Indian military aid requests;

2. That we are lacking adequate information with regard to the Indian need for a long-term military aid program and that we urgently need the Ambassador's assistance in getting more precise estimates, and;

3. That the kind of proposal on Kashmir which he has suggested could better be considered later in April or early in May.

Mr. Talbot asked whether this meant that the President approved the scenario which had been worked out with the British. Mr. Bundy suggested that the President might wish to put the consensus that had been reached at the meeting to Ambassador Galbraith, getting his comment, before making a final decision. The Secretary suggested that the consensus should similarly be sent to Ambassador McConaughy for his comment.

The President assented to this approach.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret. Drafted by Elmore Jackson on April 3. The meeting was held at the White House.

1 See Document 270.

272. Memorandum From the Department of State Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to President Kennedy 272. Memorandum From the Department of State Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to President KennedySource

Washington, April 8, 1963.

SUBJECT

India-Pakistan Conversations, April 1-7, 1963:1 The Impending Negotiating Crisis

The message was delivered loud and clear in the two countries; and they [it] may have marginally helped our Ambassadors set the stage for the presentation of Principles and Round Five. In any case, as we left, the two parties and the assorted doves of peace were girding themselves for what they know to be a fateful period.

The reactions to our messages and the emotional and political posture of the various principal actors followed a well-worn script wholly familiar to those in the Kashmir business and even to observers at one remove like myself.

But one reaction emerged, which I had not anticipated. It took different forms with different men; it almost always surfaced as the final thought, the last sentence; it was expressed at high levels and low almost unconsciously, always in a moment of sincerity, by Indians and Pakistani, British and Americans; with fatalism, scepticism, or anxiety; and in the case of a few bitter die-hards, with anticipation.

The reaction was this: no one can yet see by what process the negotiation over Kashmir—any negotiation over Kashmir—can be brought to a politically viable conclusion. Nehru, after agreeing the case for a settlement, asked aloud: “But how can it be done without creating more tension than we now have?” Ayub, after warning that a Kashmir settlement might raise tensions, went through his concept of moving by stages, closing in on the Vale only at the end. Ken Galbraith's last thought was: “Perhaps the lines will never meet, but we've got to try.” The Indian High Commissioner in Karachi said: “We'll discuss the Vale all right in the Fifth Round; but we won't settle it; and then what do we do?”

And so it went.

This prevalent, vision of a stone wall ahead arises from a complex of psychological, political, and technical negotiating problems.

First, of course, Indian minds run into a real block in surrendering any substantial part of the Vale; and Pakistani minds run into an even greater block in ceding once and for all any part of the Vale to India. Quite aside from political pressures; the issue is so highly charged and men's minds have run so often over the tracks which rationalize their respective present positions that it is literally difficult and literally painful for them to visualize a change in the way things are (for Indians) or anything short of the fulfillment of their dream and crusade (for Pakistani).

In addition, back in a more rational world, both sets of politicians see trouble as they contemplate any conceivably negotiable Kashmir compromise; and tolerably objective observers concede the possibility of trouble—for example, the Pakistan High Commissioner in Delhi concedes Nehru's problem, and the Indian High Commissioner in Karachi, Ayub's. At the same time, men perceive that Ayub and Nehru both retain, if they are determined, very large potential influence to alter the political scene. Their problem, as I see it, is that they cannot afford to move off their present political postures until two conditions are satisfied: the terms of the whole deal are known; and each is satisfied that the other will wholeheartedly commit himself before his own people to that deal. By “the whole deal” I mean the terms of economic coexistence and at least implicit military collaboration (as well as disengagement), not merely the Kashmir deal. The dilemma, then, is this: only a radical change in political atmosphere, plus economic and military ameliorations, can justify the inevitable pain of a possible Kashmir settlement; but it is possible that the change in atmosphere cannot be brought about until Ayub and Nehru see the whole package; and our present negotiating sequence, for good and sufficient reasons—notably the Pak desire to get at the Vale before being diverted to other issues—does not permit the other, softening issues to be gripped and the vested interests in both countries connected with them, to be brought effectively into play.

The problem may well be complicated by the emergence of negotiating postures, designed to put the other fellow in the wrong and to impress Washington and world opinion rather than to move forward.

Ayub, for example, is so deeply convinced of Nehru's political unreliability (not without recent reinforcing ammunition) that only very hard commitments by the Indians are likely to lead him to defend reconciliation before his people. Similarly, Desai asked us: “Why should we give anything to the Pakistani if their hostility to us is so deeply rooted and fixed that reconciliation is impossible?”; and after I heard Dehlavi, I was damned if I knew what I could have replied to Desai. Thus, the Indians will require very firm assurances that they will, in fact, get the advantages of a new relation to Pakistan before surrendering any part of what they hold.

It is quite clear that thoughtful men on both sides appreciate the irrationality of the present arrangements and the advantages of sensible coexistence; although the economic advantages are, I suspect, even greater than most political figures now understand. But the Pakistani dare not expound these nor evoke the political forces that are directly interested (e.g., East Pakistan) until something substantial in the Vale is sewed up; and the Indians dare not give up something substantial in the Vale until it is clear that Pakistan is broadly committed to a policy of conciliation and that the military benefits of that policy will be available to India.

The vicious circle will operate, I suspect, even within the narrow orbit of the Kashmir and Vale discussions. The complexities are inherently such that “clean surgery” is either likely to lead to events which will produce the higher tensions Nehru and Ayub fear; or it will require for its success a degree of intensive and sympathetic Indo-Pak cooperation which, in turn, is only possible if the two leaders had already committed themselves before their own peoples to a fundamental change in policy.

I conclude, therefore, that if the principles are accepted or if the Vale gets gripped in negotiation by other means, we are likely to run into a dangerous cul-de-sac. At the moment the notion is, as I understand it, that under such circumstances various high-level Anglo-American chaps might be rushed into the breach to hold appropriate hands and try to bring the lines closer together; or, in the last resort, to trot out an internationalized Vale. If this analysis is correct, any amount of pressure and hand holding about Kashmir will not then do the trick. Two other elements must then be introduced, perhaps in sequence, before a Kashmir settlement could become viable: a. While the Kashmir discussion proceeds on some sustained basis, the other issues must be brought into negotiation in a separate but equal forum (or forums) with an understanding that a total package will be brought together and no part of the negotiated deal is final until all elements are brought together.

b. At a certain point, when the deal as a whole is clear, but before it is signed and announced, Nehru and Ayub would have to enter into a solemn commitment, verifiable by what they say and do before the sign off, to take the case for reconciliation to their people and to be prepared to deal with violent dissidents on a ruthless basis, if necessary.

The latter provision may appear farfetched; but the mutual suspicions go so deep and the interactions of the two governments' policies are so sensitive, that until the deal is consummated—and perhaps for some time thereafter—it could spiral off into a debacle unless each government performs its part of the bargain with unexampled consistency and rigor.

I would only add this: assistance to Ayub and Nehru in finding their way through this political and psychological maze will be vastly more important than any direct bargaining pressure or exhortation we can mount in getting a solution. Or, put another way, bargaining pressure and exhortation at the right moment may prove useful, but only if there is a workable track that these two highly responsible politicians can perceive. Right now the central fact about Nehru and Ayub is that they do not see such a track, embracing the full complexity of the problem—and neither does anyone else on the subcontinent.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 4/12/63-4/23/63. Secret.

1 Rostow and Komer visited India April 1-3 and Pakistan April 4-7. Additional documentation on the visit is in Department of State, Central File POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK.

273. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 273. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, April 10, 1963, 8:23 p.m.

268. We may have reached point where the two essential elements for solution on transit impasse are in sight, i.e., Pak willingness restore Afghan representation in Peshawar and Afghan action to moderate Pushtunistan campaign. GOP has shown desire normalize relations and willingness not be difficult on question Peshawar consulate (Karachi tel 1935 to Dept1 rptd Tehran 119, Kabul 151). At same time Paks have indicated they prepared accept continuation of Pushtunistan campaign but have defined limits of tolerance, i.e., no active incitement by Afghans in tribal areas and some abatement propaganda. On Afghan side, policy of nonincitement of tribes apparently has prevailed for some time and has been given official sanction by Prime Minister Yusuf in initial speech when he underscored peaceful pursuit Pushtunistan aspirations. If initial reports (Kabul tel 447 to Dept2 rptd Karachi 185, Tehran 167) that RGA radio propaganda moderating are borne out, then gap between disputants seems narrow.

If this assessment valid, we think some steps should be taken shortly attempt capitalize on developments. We are concerned that propaganda slip or unfortunate statement by leader of either side could reverse current trend. We think US can at this stage supplement Iranian effort. We have no wish take over job from Iranians, but our better communications may assure clarity at critical juncture.

We have in mind direct and confidential approach to GOP and RGA Foreign Ministers by Ambassadors McConaughy and Steeves to determine whether they willing discuss in Tehran settlement within framework set of principles which both governments would agree to in advance of Tehran meeting.

As we see it, such set of principles might include following: a. Mutual agreement to resume diplomatic relations;

b. GOP agreement to restoration Afghan consulate at Peshawar (and perhaps at Quetta) and Afghan trade agencies in Chaman, Parachinar and Peshawar;

c. RGA agreement, if GOP so desires, re-establishment Pak consulates in Afghanistan;

d. Mutual agreement that officials stationed in each others territory will be received in accordance with established international usage and will function in accordance with established international usage;

e. Mutual agreement that both countries will abjure propaganda which creates hatred and incites to violence against each other. FYI: This is formula in Gentleman's Agreement ending 1955 dispute. End FYI.

f. Any matters of mutual concern between the GOP and RGA in the future will be handled through normal diplomatic channels.

FYI: If either party raises question of RGA agreement to withdrawal of trade agencies if completion rail spurs make their functions unnecessary, US position is that we willing complete Spin-Baldak spur as soon as possible, and will consider economic and engineering feasibility of improving and extending Khyber railway into Afghanistan. We would hope however latter project would not prove necessary. End FYI.

It would be explained to both governments that foregoing proposals are being submitted in identical fashion on US initiative to each country and do not have prior agreement of other party. Nevertheless we believe that they provide equitable and honorable route to normal relations. If both governments indicate substantial agreement on basic principles, we will request their permission to present formula to Aram with suggestion that he invite both governments to send plenipotentiary representatives to Tehran to “continue negotiations initiated in New York between Naim and Mohammed Ali.”

If foregoing works out, we would envisage short tripartite meeting in Tehran chaired by Aram from which would be issued a communique embodying agreed principles and containing expression of appreciation from both sides for Iranian efforts.

For Karachi and Kabul

Embassies' comments on foregoing proposal and timing requested soonest.3

For Tehran

Embassy's comments requested on foregoing proposal, especially as regards avoidance appearance of taking over from Iranians.4 If all three Embassies consider proposal worth trying, Ambassador might tell Aram frankly what we are considering and reasons therefore.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AFG-PAK. Secret. Drafted by Carle, Naas, and Gatch; cleared by Cameron and with GTI and AID; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Tehran and Karachi.

1 Dated April 7. (Ibid.)

2 Dated April 6. (Ibid.)

3 The Embassy in Kabul cabled back concurrence in the substance and timing of the proposals outlined in telegram 268, but questioned whether the text of an agreed set of principles should be released in a concluding communiqué. (Telegram 455 from Kabul, April 11; ibid.) The Embassy in Karachi also concurred that a U.S. initiative could usefully supplement the continuing good offices effort on the part of Iran. But the Embassy felt that there was little chance of securing the agreement of the Ayub government to the proposed set of principles unless there was evidence of moderation of the Afghan propaganda campaign concerning Pushtunistan, and unless point b. in the set of principles was modified to read: “GOP agreement restoration such Afghan representation, including at Peshwar, as may be agreed appropriate and necessary.” (Telegram 1984 from Karachi, April 12; ibid.)

4 Ambassador Holmes cabled from Tehran that, in his opinion, it would be a mistake for the United States to attempt to take over the Iranian mediation role to the extent proposed. (Telegram 876 from Tehran, April 13; ibid.)

274. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 274. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of StateSource

London, April 11, 1963, 7 p.m.

3989. Department Pass Defense. Embassy telegram 3984.1 During two-hour meeting2 which Secretary McNamara group had April 10 with British group headed by Sandys and including Mountbatten and General Hull,3 there was general agreement on important aspects of US/UK military assistance programs to India which laid the groundwork for subsequent discussions by the Bundy group with the British. Major points of interest in these meetings not covered in agreed record reported reftel were as follows (should be noted this telegram not reviewed by Secretary McNamara or Bundy):

1. Secretary McNamara stated UK and Commonwealth should take the lead in future military assistance to India; US would not wish to spend any funds beyond Nassau ceiling until a firm plan had been agreed between the US and UK. Sandys noted his relief at this statement and indicated he had thought the British would have to restrain the US regarding future military assistance. Secretary McNamara said that assuming political decisions on further aid to India were reached, US would be prepared to support such an agreed plan on same 50-50 basis as Nassau agreement.

2. In commenting on implications of US/UK air defense scheme for India, Sandys stressed that it was necessary to consider carefully where introduction of US and UK units might lead us. In particular, he noted that actual engagement of US/UK aircraft with Chicoms might lead to “war with China,” with possibility Chicom retaliation against Hong Kong. He also said that an air defense commitment might lead US/UK close to a “defense pact” with India. He suggested these implications lead back to thought that only logical Indian defense arrangement is one covering subcontinent as a whole with US/UK participation. Secretary McNamara responded that the introduction of US/UK units should be only a remote contingency; present priorities should go to strengthening existing units of the Indian Air Force.

3. Following extended discussion, agreement was reached that strong efforts should be made to restrain Indian planning to a level of approximately 16 army divisions, which would include three for Kashmir. Discussion of manpower level for ground forces initially centered on figure of 650,000, but it was agreed this might be low and needed further refinement.

4. In response to Sandys question if US had calculated any financial total for possible future US/UK military assistance, Secretary McNamara said that although no precise calculations had yet been made, his own very rough estimate might be about $150 million, spread over a three-year period, for both nations. Sandys later emphasized that the UK is not now committed to any specific method of sharing costs of further military aid to India beyond Nassau limits.

5. General Taylor stated that priority of effort should now be given to maximizing the effectiveness of existing Indian units, particularly the six mountain divisions. Secretary McNamara repeatedly emphasized the serious logistic and training deficiencies of the Indian Air Force.

6. Both Sandys and Snelling emphasized that any discussions with Indians of force levels and any actions with respect to military assistance should be most carefully related to political developments, particularly Kashmir.

7. In meeting with Bundy, Snelling indicated that while final decision not yet made, Sandys proposes to attend CENTO meeting, primarily for discussion of Kashmir question with Paks, and to proceed to Delhi about same time as Secretary Rusk's visit.

Bruce

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1-4 INDIA. Secret. Repeated to New Delhi for USMSMI, Karachi, and CINCEUR.

1 Telegram 3984, April 11, transmitted the agreed record of a series of meetings in London of a U.S.-U.K. working group on military aid to India. The U.S. participants in the working group were headed by Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense William Bundy. The British contingent was headed by Sir Arthur Snelling, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations. (Ibid., DEF 19 US-INDIA)

2 A memorandum of the conversation which took place during this meeting is ibid., DEF 12 INDIA.

3 Lord Mountbatten, Chief of the Defense Staff, and General Sir Richard Hull, Chief of the Imperial General Staff.

275. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 275. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, April 13, 1963, 5:32 p.m.

272. Karachi's 19771 and 1984.2

On basis reports from Kabul and Karachi we judge that atmosphere on Afghan side has not improved sufficiently to justify carrying forward with our suggested initiative on Af-Pak border impasse. We see no advantage in trying this out until Afghanistan has reciprocated conciliatory Pak gestures. Before putting idea aside, however, we believe Ambassador Steeves should make another try at convincing new Afghan leaders that favorable opportunity for improvement Af-Pak relations now exists but will be lost unless Afghan response to conciliatory Pak gestures is forthcoming. April 1 Afghan statement is not enough. There must be perceptible toning down of Pushtunistan broadcasts beamed to Frontier Area. This action is sina qua non to further progress particularly on question restoration Afghan consular offices in frontier area. Without moderation Afghan propaganda, Paks may end their own self-imposed moratorium. While perhaps desirable from RGA viewpoint to maintain fiction that normal relations with Pakistan and Pushtunistan are separate issues, fact remains that events August-September 1961 were direct GOP reaction to intensified Afghan propaganda and increase in Afghan-inspired incidents in tribal area during previous year. We do not wish cloud picture with Pushtunistan issue, but RGA should have no doubts of our view that this issue is heart of problem. Accordingly progress on transit impasse will require some adjustment, though not necessarily abandonment, Pushtunistan campaign.

In carrying forward these discussions with RGA, Ambassador Steeves may find it necessary to remind them again that border remains closed at Afghan insistence and that though it is in over-all Pak interest improve relations with Afghans, there are few if any immediate pressures compelling one-sided Pak generosity.

When and if there is evidence that in fact offensive Afghan propaganda is toning down we will reassess situation and decide if course of action proposed Deptel 268 to Kabul3 can be moved forward. In this connection we concur modification point b of formula along lines suggested Karachi tel 1984 to Department. In meanwhile we hope Embassy Karachi will continue urge GOP maintain cease-fire on propaganda pending further developments.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AFG-PAK. Secret. Drafted by Carle and Cameron and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Karachi and repeated to Tehran.

1 Telegram 1977, April 12, reported that a review of radio broadcasts from Kabul to Pakistan during the previous few days provided no evidence of any moderation of Afghan propaganda on the Pushtunistan issue. (Ibid.)

2 See footnote 3, Document 273.

3 Document 273.

276. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 276. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, April 15, 1963, 11 p.m.

3985. I had a long (hour and a-half), difficult and by no means encouraging discussion with Nehru this evening, all of it devoted to Kashmir. Once or twice he got very angry, shouted and pounded the table but in the end calmed down. The following emerged: (1) I put up to him the importance of a prompt move toward a settlement and spelled out view that this could only be accomplished by dividing the Valley with appropriate arrangements. (I avoided words “substantial position” to be sure of a fair split. This may have been a mistake.)

Thanks apparently to my careful preparatory work, he was admirably equipped with all the adverse arguments: the ancient integrity of the community, the small area and (there may be some merit in this) the hostility to the idea in the Valley itself. He noted also that any retreat from the past left the Valley indefensible. I countered these arguments without much difficulty. There are innumerable places—Bengal, Assam, Punjab borders—which are equally indefensible. Partition solved the problems of Bengal and the Punjab. The effect can be softened. I was proposing this only because no better opportunity seemed in evidence. Etc., etc.

(2) He then asked why we were pressing so hard. I replied that it was because we had important tasks ahead and Kashmir stood in the way of completing them. He then said it would have been easier to solve the issue if it hadn't become involved in the problem of arms aid and related decisions. I pointed out that they were inextricably involved by nature. We were serious about defense and had to pay for any misuse.1

(3) He then asked, this involving considerable anger, why we assumed the Pakistanis were right and the Indians wrong. I reverted to impossibility of solution that excluded either from the Valley and added that Indians had in fact alienated world opinion. Their UN representation had won the battles and lost the wars. The American people could never understand any issue that wasn't decided by a vote.

(4) The latter point produced a remarkable turn to the discussion. He said he too would prefer a vote. I said this was most encouraging news and I would promptly report it. We had avoided pressing him on a plebiscite because we didn't think it was acceptable.

(5) I probably moved in too rapidly on this. In any case Nehru backwatered. He said such a course would have to meet the approval of the Kashmir government and his cabinet colleagues who were less favorable. I pointed out that the people of Kashmir could hardly object to voting on their own fate and his cabinet colleagues were, one assumed, subject to persuasion on his part. He then elaborately emphasized the personal nature of his remark and said he would have to consult with his colleagues.

(6) There was a great deal more debate which would be far too dreary to repeat. I returned repeatedly to the question of whether he wanted me to report to Washington that GOI although avowing a desire for settlement had nothing to offer. He kept reiterating that they had offered a great deal and I in turn pointed out ad nauseum that they had not offered anything in the Valley and no Pakistan government could accept any solution that excluded them from the Valley. He also went off at intervals into Pak misbehavior with China, the past sins of the British on communal matters, Kurshid's alleged visits to China and other irrelevantia. I noted that our intelligence on Kurshid's movements was quite good and dismissed this and the allegation that the Chinese were training guerrillas in Kashmir as fabrications.

(7) I kept pressing him if he rejected partition as to what he had to offer of an affirmative sort. While I could understand his reluctance on some solutions I could not accept his reluctance on all. There was, perhaps, a half hour of this. The upshot was a postponement. He finally said he wanted to consult his cabinet colleagues before making a final statement as to what they could accept. We made an engagement to meet the end of the week.

I am naturally disappointed. He was in a very resistant mood and I had the feeling that something may have bitten him in the last day or two.

(8) Tomorrow I will see T.T. Krishnamachari and M.J. Desai and impress upon them the importance of trying to move the old man, though I have to be careful as usual not to seem to be mounting a campaign within his own government. I also need to test the repercussions of tonight's session which, though I kept it cool on my side, repeatedly reached the bare knuckles stage. It was, in fact, the most unadorned conversation I have had with Nehru in two years, although we ended on an even note. I will pass the full story on to the British.

Galbraith

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Kashmir, 4/63. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Karachi and London. A copy of this telegram was attached to White House telegram CAP 63197, April 16, from Bromley Smith to the President's Naval Aide, Captain Tazewell T. Shepard, Jr., for transmission to President Kennedy, who was vacationing in Palm Beach, Florida. A handwritten note on the source text, in an unknown hand, reads: “President read.”

1 Galbraith elaborated upon this point in a message that he sent to Nehru on April 17. He pointed in particular to the difficulties involved in securing Congressional approval for military assistance to both parties involved in a festering dispute. (A copy of the message was sent from New Delhi to the Department of State in telegram 4011, April 17; Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-INDIA)

277. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 277. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, April 16, 1963, 6 p.m.

2007. In course of call by me on Foreign Minister Bhutto Karachi April 15, he raised Afghan question. He said he now had opportunity to study problem more fully and discuss it with President Ayub.

Ayub had given him green light to move ahead with normalization Afghan relations whenever concrete, tangible, affirmative gesture received from Afghans. Paks are ready to be forthcoming in doing their part to mend the rift, but Bhutto stressed GOP needs substantive sign of change in Afghan attitude not merely assessment that new government and its radio output will some time in future be more moderate.

Specifically Bhutto is prepared to go Tehran to meet with Afghans immediately after May 15 if stage is set for reconciliation by then. Pak-Indo talks, CENTO meeting Karachi and subsequent trip to Nepal with Ayub (May 9 to about May 14) will not permit earlier travel. Additionally, Bhutto in reply observations and queries by me indicated: 1. For present GOP prepared continue restraint and moderation Radio Pak broadcasts to Afghans, recognizing abatement of Afghan propaganda tone changed gradually. In this connection I mentioned recent reports from our Embassy Kabul on steps to moderate Afghan Radio.

2. GOP reconciled to continuation for some time of nominal Pushtunistan position of GOA as long as it played in low key and does not seek inflame tribal elements. Bhutto viewed GOA Pushtunistan campaign as defense mechanism and felt Afghan tribal policy not as enlightened as that of Pakistan. He believes theoretical GOA talk about Pushtunistan does not offer any real threat to GOP national interests, since all countries recognize and accept territorial integrity of Pakistan as now constituted, and no country takes Pushtunistan agitation seriously. GOP can therefore afford to be long suffering with Afghans, in his view. He favors intensification of GOP efforts to integrate tribal areas into normal flow of Pak life. Pushtunistan campaign would create difficulties only if Afghans used it in effort to incite Pak tribal groups.

3. Bhutto also thought GOP could seriously consider in right atmosphere some form of Afghan representation in Peshawar and Quetta. He indicated awareness of “New York formula” in this context.1

Additionally, Bhutto expressed some uneasiness over the forthcoming state visit of President of India and entourage to Afghanistan. He seemed convinced that Indians intent on perpetuating rift between Pakistan and Afghanistan and would show their cleverness in stirring up Afghan distrust of Pakistan. When I took issue with this estimate, he argued that India saw merit in dividing her neighbors in South Asia and particularly in preserving an example of Pak inability to get along with a neighboring Muslim country. He thought Education Minister and others who would accompany President were carefully selected for their presumed ability to influence the Afghans.

McConaughy

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AFG-PAK. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Kabul, Tehran, and New Delhi.

1 In telegram 1579 to Karachi, April 17, also sent to Kabul and Tehran, the Department indicated that Bhutto's comments to McConaughy “provide guidelines over the next month or so for all concerned in seeking solution of Pak-Afghan transit impasse.” (Ibid.)

278. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 278. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, April 19, 1963.

SUBJECT

Kashmir; Military Aid to India; Burma

In your memorandum of April 8 to Mr. Talbot1 you asked four questions. The questions and our replies follow:

1. What progress are we making with the British in reconciling our position as set forth in our fifth round of talks with India and Pakistan?a

We and the British have agreed on approaches to be made to the Indians and Pakistanis prior to the fifth round of talks on Kashmir.

We have not reached agreement with the British on steps to be taken after the fifth round, whether there is marked progress toward a Kashmir settlement or whether there is not.

a. No decision has been made on U.S./U.K.-Commonwealth air defense assistance. The British position, as presented most recently by Duncan Sandys to Secretary McNamara, is to question seriously whether U.S./U.K. air squadrons should be sent to India to assist in defense against Chinese Communist attackers. Sandys views this with extreme caution, particularly since it would involve the possibility of actual engagement between Western interceptors and Chinese Communist bombers with far reaching consequences. He is worried about increasing the vulnerability of the British position in Hong Kong. We understand that a contrary view is being expressed within the British Government, notably by Lord Mountbatten with Foreign Office encouragement. If we are to be in a position to make a quick offer to India on commitment of air squadrons along the lines of our Air Defense Team's recommendations, you may need to discuss the question directly with Macmillan. First, however, the United States Government's position must be made firm.

b. On defense production, neither the British nor we have yet reached decisions on the recommendations of our respective survey teams nor on the much more elaborate Indian requests. The Bhoothalingam team2 currently in Washington will press Indian requests, and Minister T.T. Krishnamachari will come early in May hoping for clearer indications of what the United States will do. We should by then have concerted our position with the British to the extent possible. Quite apart from insistence that any further aid to India be conditioned upon a Kashmir settlement, the British take a somewhat narrower point of view of defense production than we do. Their team addressed itself only to the question of assistance to the Indian munitions industry.

c. Neither the British nor we have yet made material progress on possible longer range military assistance to India, in part because of imprecision that verges on unreality in Indian military planning. The British have so far maintained a generally limited and resistant posture. However, both the British and ourselves have agreed to produce certain data leading to agreed positions by the beginning of May on basic elements of Indian defense planning, such as strategic concepts, acceptable force goals, and valid defense production needs. Even in the so-called “immediate” phase agreed to at Nassau, the British are encountering difficulties that may postpone some deliveries until 1965. They have done little yet to increase the efficiency of the Indian Air Force (one of the tasks allotted to them in the Nassau Agreement).

2. If these talks fail, what will our strategy and tactics be?

a. We believe that neither Pakistan nor India is ready to accept the onus for causing a breakdown of the Kashmir talks during the fifth round. Should the talks nevertheless fail, our tactics would depend upon our appraisal of the cause and responsibilities for the failure. Strategically, we would still need to be in a position to give India some assistance against Chinese Communist pressure, tailoring this as best we possibly can to maintain our security interests in Pakistan.

b. If there is no major progress on Kashmir at the fifth round, we anticipate that the British will be strongly resistant to further military assistance to India this summer. Even if there should be substantial progress, there are as yet few if any indications that the British would be prepared to move further with the U.S. on the Nassau 50-50 formula or anything approaching that. Reinforcing the desire of some elements of the British Government to be more forthcoming, however, are pressures related to the need to provide production contracts for distressed areas and the desire to avert U.S. pre-emption of traditional British relations with India.

3. Do the proposals of Walt Rostow have relevance?3

a. On the assumption that progress can be made in the fifth round to bring the positions of the two parties closer together, we see a developing need to enlarge the perspective in which further talks can take place. Our object is to assist both parties to create a climate in the two countries in which a Kashmir settlement can be sold.

b. Walt Rostow's talks on the subcontinent have laid the groundwork for developing this wider perspective.

c. We plan to find ways to continue the process of educating both the Indians and the Pakistanis about the strategic problems of the subcontinent, perhaps helping both countries to define military, political, and economic policies to serve their strategic requirements.

[Here follow a question and response concerning Burma.]

DR

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Kashmir, 4/63. Secret.

1 A copy of this memorandum is ibid.

2 Shri Bhoothalingam, Secretary of the Indian Ministry of Economic and Defense Coordination, led a team of Indian defense experts that visited Washington April 17-26 to consult with officials of the Departments of State and Defense and the National Security Council. Documentation on this visit is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 4/24/63-4/27/63, and Department of State, Central File POL 7 INDIA.

3 See Document 272.

279. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy 279. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy

New Delhi, April 21, 1963.

[Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 4/1/63-8/31/63. No classification marking. This letter has not been declassified by the Indian Government. In his biography of Nehru, Gopal summarized the substance of the letter, which was an Indian response to U.S. efforts to mediate in the Kashmir dispute, and quoted a sentence from the letter which summed up Nehru's reaction to those efforts: “Intervention by third powers, if quiet, inobtrusive and objective, might have been helpful; but public and semi-public efforts at pressure had only worsened the situation. ‘I am convinced that these ill-considered and ill-conceived initiatives, however well-intentioned they may be, have at least for the present made it impossible to reach any settlement on this rather involved and complicated question.'” (Gopal, Jawharlal Nehru, Vol. 3, p. 259)]

280. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 280. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, April 24, 1963.

In assessing the motives behind Nehru letter1 I'd put less weight on Galbraith's hard sell or introduction of US/UK “elements” than on the likelihood that these and other steps simply made Nehru at long last face up to what we wanted on Kashmir. Nehru tends to avoid facing up to unpleasant decisions as long as possible, and we know that he personally is the chief roadblock to a forthcoming Indian position on Kashmir.

Thus Ken's pressure and the “elements” seem more precipitant than cause of Nehru's reaction. Nonetheless we may have pushed him harder and more precisely than was wise, particularly Ken. As he told me when there and indicated in private messages, he was already airing to TTK and others the “package deal” he proposed to Washington in Delhi 3693, 25 March,2 of trading assurance of substantial US aid for Indian agreement to a substantial Pak position in the Vale.

Despite the clear warnings from here that such a concrete proposal was premature and the joint US/UK instruction3 on building up to the fifth round by seeking Indo-Pak agreement to the “elements” of a settlement (approved by you on 1 April), Ken was already so far down his own track that he apparently decided to go ahead. He felt (1) the only way to pin the elusive Nehru down was with a concrete proposition; (2) to switch back to the “elements” alone was bad; and (3) his proposal was fully consistent with the “elements.” In effect, Ken was disgusted with what he regarded as US/UK shilly-shallying, and anxious to settle the affair before he left Delhi. His cables show he was quite aware of the risk that he'd precipitate a Nehru turndown. Of course, fear of just such an impasse was precisely why State proposed stepping up US/UK intervention by means of a vague set of principles (which could apply to partition or internationalization) rather than going Ken's route. The expected occurred; in two rough sessions with Nehru on 15 and 20 April Ken got nowhere, and Nehru's visible irritation was ample omen of the fireworks to come.

Just at this point Nehru got the “elements” paper, regrettably first given in writing to the Indians via our Embassy in Karachi. Nehru's complaint about them goes less to their substance than to his fear they were a product of US-Pak collusion. There is little doubt that Galbraith's delay in giving them to the Indians was a tactical error. We told them to the Paks on April 11th, and then McConaughy (assuming Ken had also told them to Indians) gave a copy to the Indian HICOM in Karachi on the 18th at the latter's request. Nehru and others must have immediately jumped to the conclusion we had cleared them with the Paks first, so over-read them as meaning more concessions and reacted emotionally. Up to this point they probably felt we were genuinely trying to tone down Pak claims; now they felt we were again peddling Pak wares. True, Ken and then Gore-Booth had mentioned the “elements” to Gundevia, Desai, and even Nehru, but in such low key it apparently didn't register. In fact, Nehru asked Ken on the 20th why he hadn't brought the “elements” into the discussion sooner, and Ken replied that he was more interested in hard specifics.

It is in the above light that one must read Nehru's complaint that he'd understood from Galbraith the US felt only the “northwest corner” of the Vale (down to Wular Lake) need be given to the Paks. This was indeed our original idea, and Ken admits he told Indians (Delhi 4101).4 Then we decided to up the ante somewhat by moving our proposed line down toward Srinagar, but the Indians presumably didn't know this and Ken claims he'd already switched to talking about a line “somewhere between Wular Lake and Srinagar.” Nonetheless the Indians must have learned about this change, and regarded it as upping the ante on them. Nehru's letter amply indicates that he interpreted the “elements” as being just this.

The moral of this story is that one can't effectively stage-manage a difficult negotiation when the two parties are getting different signals from us, and when each is prone to assume the worst. Ken's decision to handle things his own way was done with his eyes open. He took a chance in order to move the ball forward, and it backfired.

But as Ken himself agrees, at some point we would probably have hit this stone wall anyway. Nehru in fact turned Ken down twice on partition (on the 15th and 20th) before seizing on the “elements” to cover his intransigence. The reasons for this basic attitude are many, e.g. Nehru is a Kashmiri himself, his concern lest he appear to be yielding to US/UK pressure, his emotional reaction to the badly chosen Pak pressure tactics, less sense of urgency over the Chicom threat.

We should shift tactics now and see if he'll buy something other than partition. But the odds are that between Nehru's emotional reluctance and Ayub's insistence on more than half a loaf we aren't going to get a Kashmir settlement. Hence the issue may soon become one of whether, and how far, we go ahead regardless on aid to India.

R. W. Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Staff Memoranda Series, R. Komer Security. Secret.

1 Document 279.

2 Document 269.

3 See the second attachment to Document 270.

4 Telegram 4101, April 22, transmitted Galbraith's assessment of Nehru's April 21 letter. Galbraith concluded that the Indian Government saw in the “elements” paper a welcome opportunity to “get off the hook on specific and concrete concessions in the valley.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK)

281. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 281. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, April 24, 1963, 8:10 p.m.

1635. Following summary for information only and contents should not be disclosed to foreign officials. It is uncleared and subject to amendment upon review.

Pak Ambassador Ahmed had one hour discussion with Secretary April 23 on US arms aid to India. Ahmed stated GOP very perturbed over indications US intends go ahead with long-range military assistance to India in absence Kashmir solution. He then reviewed at length familiar arguments: Indians will reach accommodation with Chinese Communists; Chicoms have no intention resuming attack; already precarious military balance on subcontinent will be greatly upset by doubling of India's arms budget taken together with outside aid; in view past history Indian actions in Hyderabad, Kashmir, Junagadh and Goa, GOP does not trust Indian intentions; India will use its superior military strength against neighbors, etc. GOP believes US has great leverage now with GOI and should use it get settlement Kashmir. If GOI concludes it will receive arms without Kashmir solution, then there will be no chance for solution.

Secretary stated we cognizant Pak concerns and fears and he was looking forward to full discussion all aspects problems with Ayub and Bhutto in Karachi. Said that we had not yet taken decisions on long-range arms aid to India but reports of various study groups were being examined and we were discussing matter with GOI. Perforce we viewed arms aid to India from somewhat different perspective than GOP. Secretary indicated our impression was that initial arms aid may have had something to do with Chicom cease-fire and that any future arms aid might act as deterrent to possible future Chinese aggression directed at subcontinent. Defense of subcontinent is of concern to all of us. In our own national interests we must get a clear signal to the Chinese about the consequences of further aggression. Pakistan could hardly be comfortable if another attack occurred. Defense of subcontinent, as well as whole Free World, is indivisible. Those issues which divide countries in non-Communist world must be solved in order present unified front to Communist pressure.

Next few months may be somber for all of us. Soviet domestic troubles, its relations with Peiping, failures in Iraq, Congo, and elsewhere are causing Soviets reappraise their policies. Possible outcome may be some retreat from policy coexistence to resumption more bellicose policy closer to stance of Chicoms. US trying probe in many ways Soviet intentions but we must be alert possibility we face dangerous period ahead during which Chicoms may push out against points on Free World perimeter. We must, therefore, view arms aid to India and defense subcontinent in context this possible threat. US cannot subject our over-all strategic objectives to settlement Kashmir, or any other single problem.

US, however, as Paks well know, is anxious for Kashmir settlement. Otherwise we would not be in present onerous position in middle between GOP and GOI. Kashmir dispute has cost us dearly. US has no brief for any particular settlement. Any settlement both sides can agree upon is satisfactory to us if it contributes to stability subcontinent and improved Indo-Pak relations.

Ahmed stated GOP interpreted US/UK “principles” as in effect advocating partition of Vale and GOP could never agree partition. Secretary said GOI apparently equally adamantly opposed to partition. At least two parties had agreed on what they could not accept and perhaps this would pave way for consideration other solutions.

In closing, Ahmed commented that US and GOP are in full agreement on gravity of world situation and objectives. Differences arose in tactics. In GOP view arms to India, unless preceded by easing of tensions in subcontinent, will not result in more secure subcontinent.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-INDIA. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Naas and Cameron and approved by Cameron. Repeated to New Delhi.

282. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 282. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, April 25, 1963.

SUBJECT

Review of Problems Pertaining to the Subcontinent

In preparation for my visits to Karachi and New Delhi, we should discuss several issues which we face in India and Pakistan. It would be premature, however, to seek final decisions on these matters at present. The following represents the views of the Department of State:

1. Kashmir

Our pressure on Kashmir has angered Mr. Nehru; his misunderstanding, for whatever reasons, of our tactics has caused him to think we have been doubledealing. Responsibility for this appears to rest partly on his own officials. The resulting fireworks have clearly revealed the Indian position. In being willing to discuss a political settlement with Pakistan, the Indians have not been willing to go beyond minor border adjustments except apparently to the extent of an offer of the northwestern third of the Vale to Pakistan. They had believed this would satisfy us even if it didn't satisfy the Paks.

Mr. Nehru's letter to you1 clearly indicates a hardened position on Kashmir, loss of confidence in our “objectivity” on the issues, and unwillingness to have his need for military aid be used to force him to make large enough concessions on Kashmir to satisfy Pakistan's requirements for a settlement. The combination of the Chinese withdrawal, the Pak exploitation of the Indian difficulties with the Chinese, and our own strategic interests in the subcontinent do in fact limit our leverage with the Indians on the Kashmir issue. At this juncture Nehru is the principal key to the achievement of any movement on Indo-Pak issues. Therefore, the task is to see what can be done to get Nehru back in tune with us, and to reaffirm the considerations which lead us to view a settlement of the Kashmir issue as so important to the security of the subcontinent. The Pakistanis must be led to understand that Chicom aggressiveness against India also constitutes a threat to Pakistan. Once they do, Ayub may be more willing to continue talks with the Indians and to explore the necessary compromises to achieve Indo-Pak accord.

This requires that we now explore in Karachi and New Delhi possible directions in which the talks might proceed in the future.2 It may be that the Indo-Pak talks should be extended to cover a broader range of problems plaguing Indo-Pak relations. It is clear that we cannot expect the timetable for the talks to fit our schedule for making decision on aid to India, even though there will continue to be a correlation between the two problems. At least for a cooling off period, our pressure should be greatly eased.

2. Air Defense

The Commonwealth-U.S. Air Defense Mission found that a measure of security from strategic air attack can be provided to the Calcutta and New Delhi areas by 2-3 Western fighter squadrons using U.S.-U.K. mobile radars. Such air defense assistance would strengthen the deterrent to a Chicom attack on India, indicate a continuing Western interest in India's defense at little expense, strengthen India at minimum cost to our relations with Pakistan, and buy us time during which we could hold off on other military aid if we desired. There is, of course, some question whether this degree of involvement in India's defense would stimulate a Chinese military reaction against the West in the event of actual hostilities between the Chinese and Western aircraft.

The British, however, are uncertain whether they should go ahead on this. Sandys is worried about the consequences of an engagement between these Western squadrons and the Chinese Air Force. In any case, he believes our defense assistance should be conditioned on a Kashmir settlement. We believe we should make every effort to get the British to provide this assistance jointly with us; perhaps you should write to Macmillan.

Note: In connection with air defense as well as with defense production and long-range military assistance discussed below, I believe there are two very important questions which we may have to face but which ought not to be answered until after my talks in Karachi and New Delhi. These questions are: (1) whether we should provide substantial military assistance to India without U.K./Commonwealth participation and (2) whether we should provide such substantial assistance regardless of the state of Indo-Pak relations.

3. Defense Production

Our Defense Production Team, the Staley group, has mapped out a program, keyed initially to a four-year program to meet the combat needs of the Nassau 6 mountain divisions, which would require foreign exchange support up to a total of $34 million for capital goods and $20 million per year for raw materials. Such assistance would have the advantage of helping to meet India's defense needs, and contributing to the development of its economy. The principal problem it gives us is its possible effect on our relations with Pakistan.

The British, for many reasons, give defense production assistance a very low priority. These reasons include their concern about their relations with Pakistan, their limited aid resources, and their concern about the possible effect on British industry. They believe it should be conditioned on Kashmir progress, as they do regarding all additional military aid.

We are inclined to believe that we should approve the Staley plan for defense production support of the six mountain divisions and do our best to get the British to share costs. The question of timing of notification of the Indians is a separate matter on which we would reach a decision after my visit to Karachi. As a minimum we should go ahead on a piecemeal basis with certain projects (e.g., U.S. surplus ordnance equipment) during the next several months.

4. Long-Range Military Assistance

Although we have done some preliminary planning, our plans on this have not yet taken concrete shape. The Department of State is satisfied, however, that there should be military assistance to India beyond the present phase. The questions relate to extent, types, and timing of military assistance.

There are very good political and military justifications for long-range assistance regardless of the outcome of the Kashmir talks. We have much at stake in India and the Chinese can be expected to threaten the Free World at the periphery of their control for many years. Not only must we maintain a degree of Indian military strength to deal with the chance that fighting may again flare up on the border, but we must also support our efforts to strengthen our political relationship with India in a concrete manner. Additionally, we must give India confidence that it has our support in the growing confrontation with Communist China.

5. Economic Aid to India (Consortium)

Very preliminary indications are that Western contributions this year in support of India's Third Plan may fall short of India's estimate of its requirements. If this is combined with a failure to meet Indian requests in the military field, we can expect an adverse Indian reaction.

A preliminary meeting of the Indian Consortium will be held on April 30-May 1 to consider the progress of economic development in India and India's aid requirements for the third year (April 1963 to March 1964) of the Third Five-Year Plan. This meeting will be followed by a pledging session several weeks later, probably in Paris.

The Indians have indicated a requirement for the Plan's third year of $1,255 million. AID is requesting $450 million in development loan funds for India for FY 1964. If this becomes available, and if the Export-Import Bank approves another $50 million, the U.S. will be able to provide up to $500 million for the third year of India's Third Five-Year Plan.

How much aid the U.S. would provide will depend primarily upon contributions from other members of the Consortium. We estimate that IDA and IBRD will pledge an aggregate of $200 million. It now appears that the contributions of other countries may be as low as $200-$300 million. If we followed last year's precedent we would merely match the contributions of these other countries. This would limit India's total foreign aid to somewhere between $600 and $800 million. Once we have a better idea of what these other countries will do, we will have to decide whether to abandon our matching technique in order to enable India to come closer to meeting its over-all requirements of $1,255 million.

6. Economic Aid to Pakistan (Consortium)

There is a substantial gap between Pakistan's wishes for economic aid and what the Consortium thinks Pakistan needs. This is of particular concern to us because of the delicate state of our current relations with Pakistan.

At the Pakistan “pre-Consortium” meeting in Paris on March 28-29, a consensus was reached among the donors that the level of aid required for FY 1964 to meet Pakistan's Plan targets is in the range of $350 to $400 million of new money. The U.S. strongly supported the figure of $400 million indicating that it would be prepared to pledge up to about $200 million of the total. Last year the U.S. contributed $250 million, constituting 53% of the total Consortium aid including IDA and IBRD.

The GOP, which had asked for $550 million, reacted strongly to the results of the pre-Consortium meeting. Top officials blamed the U.S. for the rejection of their $550 million request. They also insist that the U.S. not reduce its contribution below that of last year.

There is to be a pledging session of the Consortium in Washington on May 2-3. On the basis of information now available, we are by no means sure that the contributions from all other members will come to $200 million.

We are prepared to inform the GOP that while we support the $400 million figure, we stand ready to examine with Pakistan and other Consortium members possible additional needs for FY 1964 should events indicate that the Consortium has underestimated Pakistan's foreign exchange needs.

7. Bokaro

A problem which is not yet ready for decision is Bokaro, the proposed public sector steel mill being considered for possible U.S. assistance. A recent report on this project procured by AID from U.S. Steel raises a number of technical and economic questions requiring further study. We mention it because it may have important political implications in the present state of U.S./Indian relations. The problem is further complicated by the Clay Committee's critical comments on aid to public sector plants.

DR

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 4/24/63-4/27/63. Secret.

1 Document 279.

2 The fifth round of talks concerning Kashmir took place in Karachi April 22-25. According to a summary of the talks sent to Rusk in Tehran on April 28, the only point on which Bhutto and Singh agreed was that the valley of Kashmir could not be partitioned. The two delegations agreed to continue the talks in New Delhi on May 15, but the Pakistanis spoke of the sixth round as a “last go” at the Kashmir issue. (Tosec 16 to Tehran; Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK)

283. Memorandum for the Record 283. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, April 25, 1963, 5:30-6:30 p.m.

President's Meeting on India, 25 April 1963

PRESENT

The President

Secretary Rusk

Undersecretary Ball

Mr. James Grant

Ambassador Bowles

Mr. Frank Coffin

Mr. William Gaud

Secretary McNamara

Deputy Secretary Gilpatric

Mr. Paul Nitze

Admiral George Anderson, Jr.

Mr. John McCone

Mr. McGeorge Bundy

Mr. R. W. Komer

Secretary Rusk described his pending mission to India and Pakistan. Our overriding purpose is some accommodation between Pakistan and India. The question is how to achieve it. If we back India against the Chinese, we may drive the Paks off the deep end; if we abandon the Indians, they might move toward the USSR and China again. On the merits of Kashmir, Rusk felt the shape of the settlement was irrelevant to us. We could buy anything they could agree on. The trouble was that any settlement would be more favorable to Pakistan than the status quo; it was precisely [that] which created the problem with India. He saw two other issues: (1) should we get involved in aiding India without the UK if necessary—we felt we must do so if India were really threatened, but must make every effort to bring the UK along; (2) should we give India substantial military aid regardless of Indo-Pakistan relations. We shouldn't condition aid totally on a Pak/Indian reconciliation, nor should we go ahead ignoring it. We should condition aid partly on the course of Indo-Pak relations.

Secretary McNamara then outlined the military aid problem. It was essentially a small one; as the intelligence community pointed out, the Chicom threat was small over the next 2-3 years. Their maximum capability in Tibet/Ladakh amounted to 230,000 men, of whom only 120,000 could be combat forces. They would need 40,000 trucks and 40% of the Chicom 1962 gasoline supply to support such a force. To cope with this threat, we and the British estimate that 12-14 Indian divisions are needed or with reserves some 16 divisions and 3 brigades, totalling an army of 650,000. But the Indians want to build up to 1.4 million men, a $1.8 million annual defense budget of their own, and $1.6 billion in MAP over the next three years. All this is quite unrealistic.

The air threat is even smaller than the ground threat; McNamara himself really didn't think there is any. The Indians could meet this air threat by themselves if they were not so inefficient.

So the first problem from a military viewpoint was to develop a realistic program. McNamara personally estimated this at a maximum around $300 million jointly from the US and UK over the next three years (including defense production), and perhaps only half that. It would take 2-3 months to work up such a realistic program. However, there was also a serious political problem involved in the Indian military buildup as it bore on Kashmir. The President queried whether $300 million would be enough for the purpose and McGeorge Bundy asked whether the estimated threat included that from Burma; it was essential to look at the problem of defense of the entire subcontinent. Including Burma was essential if one looked at the problem in the framework of a decade. McNamara agreed but felt this didn't bear on the immediate Indian buildup problem. Komer pointed out that our estimate of the threat is based on existing Chicom logistic facilities and does not include what the Chicoms could do over the next three years or so. McCone said one couldn't add Burma to NEFA as an additional route of invasion because we estimated the Chicoms couldn't support both. Moreover, Burma would present the Chicoms with a vastly more complicated political problem if they chose to use this route.

Ambassador Bowles regarded the Indian buildup problem as 70% political. We had hoped for ten years that India would see the Chicom threat as we saw it. Now the Indians did; indeed they were the only major Asian power which took such a realistic view. Japan did not, for example. Indian help is essential for a non-nuclear balance of power in Asia vis-a-vis the Chicoms. Nor should we make the mistake of assuming that the Indians don't have other options; they are perfectly capable of patching up their differences with China and of getting more Soviet help as an alternative to their current desire for US/UK support. Could we let this happen? We should give the Indians an “emotional assurance” as soon as possible that we are with them; this would buy us a little time. Third, we should think of aiming Indian manpower toward SEA, not just of Indian defense against the threat from the north. This would also ease our problem with Pakistan, because the SEA threat would tend to unite the Indians and Paks.

The President again asked whether we could get the Indians to take the same view of the Chinese threat we do with only $300 million in US/UK support. As we saw it, we couldn't get the Indians to “come down from $1.6 billion to $300 million.” How could we avoid a real clash and disillusionment? McNamara thought that we could; however, we could go to 800,000 men and could probably agree on a $300 million and 800,000 men program in 2-3 months. The President said he was inclined to agree with Bowles that we should go ahead with the Indian program shortly. We had never been able to get the UK to go 50-50 on anything else, so while trying to bring them along, we should not limit ourselves to their pace. McNamara and Rusk both pointed out the Congressional problem, if we tried to go much above $300 million and UK didn't participate.

The President said he couldn't see how we could stop Communist China without India. “Let's not be penny wise about India; let's not let them get into a position where they feel that they can't cope with the Chicoms and Paks on top of their other problems.” Our policy should be not to let the UK restrain us from going ahead. He agreed we should do our best to bring the UK along, but “India is the important thing; not the UK.” We shouldn't settle finally on $300 million just because this is the most we could get on a 50-50 basis. McNamara argued we should separate the UK issue from that of realistic planning. He thought the UK wouldn't even go along with half of $300 million. It was generally agreed this was so.

The discussion turned to the air defense commitment. McNamara felt this had great political value; Rusk agreed it was very important. The President said that if the Chicoms bombed India we would of course become involved, so he didn't see too much risk in giving a prior commitment. He asked when we should give the Indians our decisions on aid. Grant argued that we need to convince the Indians we are really going to help them. An air defense commitment shortly would buy us time to hammer out a realistic MAP program. Rusk contended that shooting at Chicom planes in India would lead almost certainly to the Chicoms shooting at us elsewhere. It would immediately broaden the war. At the President's request, McNamara, Nitze and Komer described the proposed air defense package. McNamara indicated that the only cost would be some $15 million for radar, nothing else. Rusk suggested we not commit ourselves on air defense until he and Sandys returned.

The President agreed, but said let's consider air defense shortly. We want the Chicoms to know what we are going to do so they won't attack. We were sending planes to Saudi Arabia so why shouldn't we go ahead with India? He felt that we should engage in intensive talks with the Indians and attempt to bring them down to realistic levels. But we should keep these talks on the DOD level without State Department participation so we didn't appear to tie the talks too much to political conditions such as Kashmir.

As to a Kashmir settlement, the President thought the chances were almost nil. Rusk agreed unless the UK could manage to move the Indians. Maybe Mountbatten could when he was out in India. The President asked what we should do about Ayub. He felt we must make clear to Ayub we were doing our best on Kashmir but couldn't hold off indefinitely on aid to India. Rusk agreed and said we must tell the Paks we couldn't subordinate our larger interests to their quarrel with India over Kashmir. Bundy suggested that Rusk give a careful oral rebuttal in Delhi to Nehru's accusations about the “elements,” in lieu of the President's replying to Nehru's letter now (especially since Macmillan had already given a written reply). The President thought we should tell Ayub we've got to go ahead with Nehru, while telling Nehru that military aid to him without a Kashmir settlement will cause us all sorts of trouble with the Paks and our own Congress. He asked whether we were likely to get thrown out of our base in Pakistan if we went ahead with aid to India? Rusk thought it would be rough; we might lose our Pakistani base unless the Chicoms attacked again.

The President asked about the consortium problem with Pakistan. Gaud explained the situation. The Paks want from us at least last year's level of $250 million, and a total of $550 million from the consortium as a whole. We just didn't think they needed this much.

The President returned to the air defense problem, saying Komer and others on the staff felt we should go ahead with air defense soon. However, we would wait for Rusk's judgment. Bowles urged that we go ahead on some gesture of this sort. Rusk suggested staff talks with the Indians at a military level about sending the US/UK air defense squadrons as a means of indicating to the Indians our continued interest in helping them.

McNamara returned to the problem of UK participation. We certainly ought to have the UK in. To get Congressional support of our Indian program, one of three conditions would have to be met: (1) a Kashmir settlement; or (2) a realistic program; or (3) the UK going along. He had discovered on the Hill that Congressional opposition to Indian aid was strong. We had also found the British most reluctant to go along with further aid to India at this point. Rusk pointed out that as always the UK had the vulnerability of Hong Kong very much in mind.

The President thought we ought to go ahead on air defense and work on Congress to this end. Congress would be much madder if India went Communist. Air defense was the least expensive move we could make and the least offensive to the Paks. If the UK wouldn't go along, we should go ahead ourselves. We could put the program under the guise of training. He wondered why we couldn't fly squadrons into India for exercises? McNamara indicated this was part of the proposal. It was agreed that if the Paks wanted similar exercises there wouldn't be much problem, since we already had SEATO and CENTO exercises with the Paks. Rusk asked if it made sense for us to have a carrier in the Indian Ocean on a regular basis? McNamara and Anderson indicated that carrier visits would be no problem but that it would over-extend us if we tried to maintain a carrier there on a regular basis. The UK had a small carrier in the area.

R.W. Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings with the President, 4/63. Secret. Drafted by Komer on April 29. The time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is from the President's Appointment Book. (Ibid.) Copies were sent to Bundy and Kaysen.

284. Note From the Department of State to the British Embassy 284. Note From the Department of State to the British EmbassySource

Washington, April 25, 1963.

The Government of the United States proposes to the British Government the initiation of discussions by appropriate military and civil representatives of the two Governments looking toward the possible strategic use of certain small islands in the Indian Ocean area.1

The two Governments share a common concern for an adequate long-term allied presence in the area, and it is thus considered important that there be effective coordination of strategic planning on the matter. To this end the United States Government would like to explore with the British Government the military and technical considerations involved in any such joint effort. It is further suggested that if the appropriate authorities conclude that mutually advantageous planning is feasible, the two Governments might then proceed at a higher level to discuss the political aspects of the availability of locations in the area to support military plans.

Accordingly, the Government of the United States proposes that the inital discussions be undertaken between appropriate military authorities of the two Governments either in London or in Washington and, as necessary, in the area under consideration.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15 UK-US. Secret. Drafted in G/PM on April 18 by Winston Lord.

1 According to an April 25 memorandum from Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs Jeffrey C. Kitchen to U. Alexis Johnson, this note grew out of a recommendation by the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the Department of State initiate discussion with the British on the possible long-term development of base facilities in the Indian Ocean area. The Joint Chiefs cited a need for such bases for possible contingency operations. (Ibid.)

285. Memorandum for the Record 285. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, April 26, 1963.

SUBJECT

The President's Views on India as expressed at 25 April Meeting1

1. In general, we should prepare to go ahead on military support for India. Given the declining prospects for a Kashmir settlement, we should not hold off so long on aid, in order to get leverage on Kashmir, that we jeopardize the developing relationship between the US and India. It is hard to see how we can stop the Chinese Communists without India.

2. As to the magnitude of further military aid, we should try to get the Indians down to a realistic program, but should regard $300 million (including defense production aid) over three years from the US and UK as a floor rather than a ceiling. It will be difficult to bridge the political gap between India's exaggerated hopes for $1.6 billion in aid over this period and our preliminary judgment that no more than $300 million is militarily realistic.

3. While we should make every effort to bring the UK along on further aid, we should not limit ourselves to their preferred pace. It is unrealistic to expect that the British will go fifty-fifty even on a $300 million program. Therefore, our policy should be not to let the UK restrain us from moving to the extent we think desirable.

4. We and the British should engage in intensive talks with the Indians at the DOD and military level to bring more realism into their thinking and to counter any impression that we are stalling on aid. The State Department should avoid participating in these talks so they won't appear to be tied to political conditions, i.e. Kashmir.

5. We ought to go ahead shortly on the air defense commitment, but will reserve final judgment until Secretary Rusk's return from the subcontinent. This commitment seems the least expensive way to reassure India of our continued interest in its defense, while being the move least offensive to the Pakistani. We should try hard to get the UK to join us, but be prepared to do most of the job ourselves if necessary.

6. We must make clear to Ayub that we can't hold off indefinitely on aid to India because of Kashmir. Let's tell Ayub that we've got to go ahead soon, while telling Nehru that if we give him major aid without a Kashmir settlement, it will cause all sorts of trouble with Pakistan and the US Congress.

McGeorge Bundy2

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 4/24/63-4/27/63. Top Secret. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy.

1 See Document 283.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

286. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 286. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, May 2, 1963, Midnight.

Secto 30. Eyes Only for President and Acting Secretary. Following are my first reactions to our talk with Ayub this morning,1 full report of which coming separately.

1. The atmosphere was entirely relaxed and friendly. Ayub sent warm personal message to the President and Mrs. Kennedy and took repeated opportunities to express appreciation for US assistance and for friendship between our two countries. He also expressed understanding of the heavy burdens carried by the US in the total world situation and said that he understood that we would have to make our own decisions in the light of such responsibilities. At no time did he make threats or express any bitterness insofar as US-Pakistan relations were concerned. Indeed, he told us he had rebuked the editor of “Dawn” for his inflammatory and unrepresentative attitude.

2. It is clear that he has written off any further Kashmir negotiations and expects to rest on the status quo rather than accept deep compromises on Pakistan position. This came out in response to my probing as to how he saw the course of events if negotiations completely broke down. His reference to status quo rather than to some wild initiative may be of some significance. He did say that Pakistan public opinion would blame the US, UK and the Government of Pakistan and would say that the government had played the fool in being drawn into the negotiations in the first place.

3. Entire conversation was marked by his deep fear, distrust, and hatred of India and especially the Brahmin Nehru whom he regards as an evil and dangerous man. He said that this was the first time in Indian history that this particular kind of Indian had exercised power; former Indian rulers were like the chivalrous Rajputs with a high sense of honor and responsibility. He is utterly convinced that India not only wishes to eliminate Pakistan but to absorb other neighboring states such as Nepal, Burma, and Ceylon. I told him that we ourselves did not share this view of Indian objectives and asked him, if this were not an Indian policy, what the Indians could do or say to persuade Ayub. He replied that there is nothing India could do, that Pakistan knows them too well.

4. He analyzed his view of the nature of the Chinese military threat to the subcontinent and said that the Chinese could not support more than seven brigades directed against India across the Himalayas. He added that the Chinese had told them that this was their own estimate both with respect to what India could push at China across the mountains and what China could do in reverse. I gave him a brief statement of our own estimates which were somewhat higher.

5. He spent some time on further arms aid to India though none on recrimination for aid already given. He looks upon this as strengthening India against its smaller neighbors and that Nehru is using the Chinese threat as a cloak to build up for other purposes. Thus he argues that the effect of arms aid to India would be to weaken the situation in the general area because of the stresses and strains it would produce. He said that he was almost alone in Pakistan in holding back the flood of public feeling on this subject. I outlined world-wide responsibilities within which our own decision would have to be made but this will be covered in full report.

6. I did raise “in the most tentative fashion” what his attitude would be if the US and the UK were to establish certain air squadrons to offer some defense to Indian cities against Chinese attack and as an alternative to a comparable build-up of the Indian Air Force. He immediately endorsed this idea saying, among other things, that it would help make the Indians behave.

7. Further, he did say if the Chinese again attacked India that we should provide additional emergency assistance and saw this as a full substitute for any military assistance prior to such an attack. He was not impressed with the deterrent role of strengthened Indian forces since he obviously looks upon Indian strength as aimed primarily at himself.

8. He raised his desire to buy some 70 German F86F's which they are willing to sell for $7 million including a substantial number of spare parts, portion of which interchangeable with F86F's. Having consulted Bundy, I told him that we would raise no policy objection but that I urged him as a military man to look at these with a glassy stare in order to be completely sure that he was getting something he wanted other than “white elephant.” I mentioned operational and maintenance problems in his country as compared to highly specialized circumstances central European front. My guess is that he will go ahead with this purchase, but he is in no position whatever to chide us if this proves to be a disappointment. He insisted that he was not intending to augment his air force, except that he wanted some night fighter capability.

9. Regarding Afghanistan, he seems to be in a mood to try to find some agreement on a 50-50 or even “40-60” basis, but remained skeptical about attitude of new government because he does not believe it possible that it could have taken office without full approval of Daud and Naim. I believe we should ourselves proceed on the optimistic assumption that Iranian initiative can work, but should recognize that we may be a long way from settlement.

10. He also made an earnest appeal on Tarbela and gave me some papers to read on which I will report later.

11. Finally, I do not believe we can obtain major relaxation of Pakistan views on relations with India through further reaffirmation of US commitments to Pakistan in the event of attack. Ayub said that on such matters Pakistan will prefer to “do it themselves” and that he could never be certain that in a given situation Pakistan can persuade other governments, “the Congress, the people” of Pakistan's security needs.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Operational Immediate; No Other Distribution. Received in the Department of State on May 2 at 8:54 a.m. Relayed to the White House.

1 Rusk visited Karachi April 29-May 2. Additional documentation on the visit is ibid.

287. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 287. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, May 2, 1963.

McGB:

Re President's desire to freeze any AID announcements on Pakistan because of chilly Pak reception for Rusk, consortium due to announce tomorrow agreement on $400 million 1963-4 aid to Paks (200 ours).

Bill Gaud says hard to see how we could stop announcement since other countries involved. I've noted Ayub was very nice to Rusk (Karachi Secto 30)1 and Paks, who want $550 million won't be elated over announcement so I've ok'd Bill going ahead (I see no other choice).

RWK

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 5/63-6/63. Secret.

1 Document 286.

288. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 288. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, May 4, 1963, 4 a.m.

Secto 40. 1. Sandys called on Secretary late this afternoon. Ambassador, Bundy, Timmons, Gore-Booth and Pickard present. Sandys inquired as to results Secretary's talk with Nehru this morning.1 Secretary said he had impression that if mediation proposal2 can be worked out it is on as far as Nehru is concerned. Secretary added that he talked with Nehru privately today and asked where the Kashmir talks went next. Nehru knocked down idea of independence for Vale, but Secretary felt Nehru used rather desultory arguments. Same true of condominium. Nehru feared as usual that if ceasefire line relaxed, hordes would pour in from Pakistan-held Kashmir and inundate Indian portion.

2. Secretary said he had indicated to Nehru that Sandys had recounted to him Sandys own talk with Nehru, in which idea of mediator had emerged. Nehru said that if Indians proposed this, Paks would turn down. Secretary gave Nehru to understand that idea would be explored with Paks and that we would be in touch with Nehru again. Secretary said that at end of conversation Nehru unquestionably knew what he (Secretary) had in mind doing, and that Secretary was acting on assumption that such a proposal was all right with Nehru. Ambassador pointed out Radhakrishnan had mentioned mediation idea this afternoon at tea for Secretary and party, and had specifically referred to Ellsworth Bunker as possible mediator. Secretary noted Nehru had said this morning it important “not let situation break down,” and that mediation should be explored in lieu of further rounds. Summing up, Secretary said Nehru clearly seemed agree that U.S. should explore mediation idea with Ayub. Secretary seeing Nehru briefly after PM's dinner tonight and this would afford opportunity take final reading.

3. Discussion then turned to question of tactics with Paks. Ambassador suggested line with Paks should be that having sounded Indians out we think we can get them accept U.S. or Britsh mediator; can we go back to Indians with Pak acceptance? Sandys agreed, noting it could be said to Paks that since Indians clearly not ready move forward on any precise proposals, what about mediation? We think we can get GOI to agree. Also noted however that if reluctance encountered might be necessary put mediation proposal more formally to both sides. Secretary thought two stages might be involved. First would be to attempt bring Paks along. If necessary, in second stage proposal could be put to both. Sandys noted Paks would doubtless fear that mediation proposal simply device for spinning things out. Secretary said could be pointed out to Paks that mediation procedure is not something that can go on forever, and that Paks should test to see whether it mere device. Sandys suggested we take stance that proposal good news for Paks since they have always wanted it. U.S. side noted that while Paks have wanted US/UK governmental intervention in negotiations in expectation that this would operate in Pak favor, they might be less enthusiastic about a mediator acting as a private individual.

4. Sandys asked if Eugene Black available. Ambassador said Indians had indicated that difficult accept Black now, as this would mean reversal of earlier decision (i.e. rejection in 1962 of offer of Black's good offices).

5. Pickard asked if question of terms of reference for mediator had come up. Secretary thought it best if mediator worked out his own as he went along, since this not formal mediation procedure. Sandys said he had in mind purely procedural matters, such as that mediator would talk to both sides, explore possibilities of settlement, propose basis for discussion between two sides or with him. Secretary said maximum flexibility should be preserved; therefore thought process should be started by finding appropriate individual and ask him attempt straighten out Kashmir problem. Secretary also noted that more than Kashmir involved. It generally agreed mediator's task would embrace “other related matters.”

6. Discussion also touched on question of time limit. Ambassador said process of modifying attitudes and positions on both sides will take time and Paks must be persuaded of this. While work of mediator moves forward, we must also go ahead with military aid decisions, otherwise political climate here would become intolerable. Sandys agreed no time limit should be fixed, but also noted that since Paks could hardly raise Kashmir in UN while mediation going on, they would not wish give up their freedom of action in this regard indefinitely. This another factor which might impel Paks seek some limit. Secretary noted that in any case the mediator himself would have in mind some general time limit beyond which he would not extend his efforts unless some results in sight.

7. Meeting ended this point in order permit Secretary keep another engagement. Agreed that Secretary and Sandys would have further word after Secretary had seen Nehru tonight.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Received in the Department of State on May 3 at 9:53 p.m. Repeated to Karachi and London.

1 Rusk visited New Delhi May 2-4.

2 Rusk learned in a conversation with Sandys on May 2 that the idea of introducing a mediator into the deadlocked negotiations over Kashmir had been raised by Nehru in a conversation between Nehru and Lord Mountbatten before Sandys arrived in New Delhi. Nehru envisioned someone of international stature, unconnected with the ongoing talks, who would study the Kashmir problem and put forward possible lines for a solution. (Secto 32 from New Delhi, May 2; Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK)

289. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 289. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, May 4, 1963, 11 a.m.

4276. Secretary met Nehru for one hour 45 minutes Friday morning May 3. Ambassador, Talbot, M.J. Desai, Gundevia and R.K. Nehru also present first 75 minutes, after which they withdrew to permit Prime Minister and Secretary to have half-hour talk alone. Nehru detached and remote during Secretary's presentation of broader world issues, responsive on subject of China, and fully engaged when discussion turned to Pakistan issues.

[Here follows discussion unrelated to South Asia.]

Secretary suggested that Chinese may have timed their attack on India last fall with knowledge that Russian build-up was occurring in Cuba. They may have considered that whether the missile plot succeeded or failed, US would be likely to be fully occupied with Cuban crisis and thus unlikely to be able to turn attention to actions in Himalayas. Chinese had had intelligence personnel in Cuba and doubtless knew what was up. Secretary was not nearly so sure that Russians knew about Chinese intentions toward India. Gundevia agreed that later indications, specifically, an accusation by an East German communist leader that the Chinese had mounted an attack on India without consultation with the socialist parties, was further evidence that the timing of the attack had come as a surprise to the European countries.

Turning to Indo-American relations, Secretary assured Nehru that there was not the slightest reason to doubt US sympathy and support to India in its conflict with China.

Pointing out that US not responsible for Kashmir problem, which is result of other peoples' unfinished business, Secretary said in American national interest we must be concerned with security of entire subcontinent. If India and Pakistan should develop close, cordial and cooperative relations, subcontinent would be invulnerable; no nation would dare attack it. If, on other hand, India-Pakistani differences vitiated national efforts it would be difficult to support American efforts to help defend these countries. Thus US has strong and specific interest in settlement of problem just as it does in supporting India against Chinese threat. Emphasized that with a million men in uniform stationed outside the US, every American family is vitally concerned such problems. Nehru referred to Chinese attack on India and to Sino-Soviet relations which he described as not merely ideological, but also reflecting a clash of national interests. He said that “possibly” China would not attack India this summer, but the longer range prospect was more uncertain. He showed that he continues to feel the heavy pressure of further prospective Chinese aggression.

On Indo-Pakistan relations, Nehru embarked on long account of familiar facts of pre-independence Hindu-Muslim relations and of post-independence Indo-Pakistan quarrels. Called Kashmir the result rather than the cause of “anti-Hindu” and “anti-India” policies of Pakistan. Secretary told of concerns he had heard expressed in Pakistan that some Indian leaders do not accept partition, thus not just Kashmir, but the existence of Pakistan itself would seem to be issue between two countries. Nehru accepted that the Indian leaders have been reluctant to accept partition but emphasized in long historical statement that ultimately they had, in fact, done so. Then asked how they can persuade the doubting Pakistanis of this. India, but not Pakistan, has been ruled by popular leaders. Indian leaders had thought the Pakistani hatred of India would die down, and so far as people concerned it has. Nevertheless, it has been kept alive by politicians. Some might say that Kashmir issue keeps it alive. He wanted the Secretary to know that Indians wanted to solve the Kashmir issue, but cannot do so at the cost of other relationships. Trouble is that Pakistanis blame Indians for everything, even their troubles in East Pakistan, though India has nothing to do with that. Nevertheless, Indian leaders are worried because anything that happens in Pakistan affects India. India wants good relations with Pakistan. Secretary suggested that if present hurdles could be got over, new areas of cooperation could be found and maximum frontiers could become less important. He recalled that in western Europe settlement of Saar had made possible almost breath-taking progress in common institutions. Nehru said that Indians had same idea, unless something untoward happens. He assured Secretary that on no account would India upset the partition. Secretary spoke again of our keen interest in relationships with India, looking at the question from perspective of our own burdens and responsibilities. If India is again attacked by the Chinese, the US is and will remain India's friend. No question about that; it has to do with overriding crises of our time. When we see the difference between the safety of the subcontinent if the two countries—India and Pakistan—work together, or if they don't we utter “a cry of anguish” at the present situation.

Nehru said that with regard to Kashmir he believed India might well have come to agreement with Pakistan already but for fact Paks had been encouraged by UK and to some extent by US.

Secretary observed that one point he need not conceal is that our people believe just powers of government derived from consent of governed. With regard to Kashmir or other issues, we can't avoid this at home. He hoped Prime Minister understood that. Nehru said he quite understood then launched into description UNCIP processes culminating with assertion that constituent assembly in Kashmir, elected by people, confirmed Kashmir's accession to India. He said premier Indian [objection?] to plebiscite is that it likely to so arouse Islamic sentiments as to bring trouble to minorities in Kashmir and India generally.

At this stage Prime Minister and Secretary excused other participants for private talk.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Received in the Department of State at 5:03 a.m. Repeated to Karachi and London.

290. Notes by Secretary of State Rusk 290. Notes by Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, May 5, 1963.

Notes on Karachi-New Delhi Visit

1. There is little evidence of a desire in either Pakistan or India to work hard toward a general reconciliation which would involve major concessions on Kashmir. There seems to be somewhat more readiness in Karachi than in New Delhi to make substantial moves away from starting positions, but it is also Karachi which gains from changes in the status quo.

2. It is most unlikely that a Kashmir settlement can be negotiated which would not cause serious difficulties for both governments internally. It would help if such an agreement could be cushioned by far-reaching agreements on other matters in order that the pain of Kashmir could be outweighed by obvious advantages which one or the other might find elsewhere. Nothing less than a Franco-German type of reconciliation is likely to work. India is more ready for this than Pakistan; the latter appears most reluctant to ease pressures on Kashmir by discussing or agreeing on other questions prior to a Kashmir settlement. Further, the absence of such a settlement leaves the two parties in an atmosphere of unreasoning hostility which militates against good results on other issues. This adds up to a difficult, but not insuperable, problem of diplomatic procedure.

3. There is a wide gap between India and Pakistan on the nature of the threat which each faces. Each undoubtedly holds its point of view in good faith, but each also exaggerates for our benefit. India wants large-scale military assistance on the ground that it is being encircled by China: along their common borders, in Nepal and Bhutan, in Burma, in Southeast Asia, and to a degree through the animosity of Pakistan. Pakistan, on the other hand, sees a minimum of threat from China to the subcontinent and thinks that India is determined in the long run to absorb its smaller neighbors: Pakistan, Nepal, Bhutan, Burma and Ceylon. Pakistan adds that this kind of expansionist India would either join the communist bloc or work intimately with it against Western interests.

4. Pakistan pretends to be convinced that India has never accepted partition and seeks the disappearance of Pakistan. This fear is given some support by Nehru's repeated rejection of Jinnah's “two-nation theory,” that is, a rejection of a religious base for statehood. This is easily converted in Pakistan into a rejection by India of the fact of two states in the subcontinent. I spoke to Nehru about this confusion and urged him to take further steps to clarify that he accepts partition as a permanent solution.

5. The United States should clarify its own thinking about the purposes of substantial military assistance to India. The following elements have been mentioned but need refinement and realistic appraisal: a. to deter or meet renewed Chinese offensives along the northern frontiers.

b. to prepare for a military threat from the direction of Burma.

c. to obtain a de facto ally against the Chinese in the event of increased Chinese threats to Southeast Asia or other areas.

d. to consolidate the changes in Indian political attitudes which have been produced by the Chinese attacks of late 1962.

6. The consequences of the types and scale of military assistance to India should be carefully assessed, including the irresponsible courses of action which Pakistan might well adopt. Unfortunately, we cannot rely upon Pakistan to act rationally and in what we might think would be in its own interest.

7. Our military assistance to India might be governed by the following approach: a. In the event of a renewed Chinese attack, we should provide prompt and substantial emergency assistance. We should consider ways and means of rendering this assistance promptly through possible pre-stocking of key items such as ammunition nearer the scene. Pakistan accepts additional emergency assistance for India in the event of a new Chinese attack.

b. We should proceed promptly to prepare the setting for an introduction of U.S. and Commonwealth fighter squadrons into India. This would mean the installation of radar and communications facilities, any modifications of air fields to be used, arrangements for housing, POL, etc., and joint training, including fly-through visitations by such squadrons from time to time. Pakistan approves such a role for U.S. and Commonwealth squadrons in lieu of a comparable build-up of the Indian Air Force.

c. We should press the British hard to bring British-supplied equipment in Indian hands up to maximum operational effectiveness, especially with regard to spare parts for Indian military aircraft. Pakistan would not like this, but could not object to actions inherent in existing or past arrangements between India and Britain.

d. We should help India on improvements in road, rail and communications facilities required to support forces facing the Chinese—facilities which could yield an economic return if not needed for military purposes. This could make a solid contribution to India's strength and would not be inflammatory to the Pakistanis.

e. The Indian armed forces need modernized training for their senior officers involved in war plans, higher command echelons, the employment of combined air and ground forces, logistics, etc. Present Indian military leadership has had little practical experience beyond the brigade level. We and the British ought to get at this as high priority assistance.

f. If we agree that the Indian armed forces require some strengthening in more sophisticated modern weapons of a sort which would unduly excite the Pakistanis, we should let the Indians use their own foreign exchange to purchase such equipment rather than provide it as military assistance. They have for years made such purchases, indirectly supported by our support for their total requirements through economic assistance. Perhaps defense production should be handled in the same way.

g. We should press to assure ourselves that our present emergency assistance is being properly used and is, in fact, adding to the capability of Indian forces in the field.

8. The views indicated above are related to the period of Mr. Nehru's leadership in India. Despite the fact that he is slowing down somewhat, he still dominates the scene on the more important policy questions. I am not sanguine about a Kashmir settlement while he is Prime Minister. Nor do I believe that a heavy investment in Indian defense would cause him to accept defense responsibilities outside India, with the possible exception of Burma. He will remain “unaligned” in an effort to obtain some help from the Soviet Union against China; if this fails the chances are that he would go to considerable lengths to make peace with China. I could be wrong. Post-Nehru, the situation in India could be quite different, both in respect to Pakistan and in East-West relations.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-INDIA. Secret. The notes were not signed or initialed by Rusk, but a notation on the source text indicates that he drafted them. Another copy is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 4/28/63-5/5/63. A May 7 memorandum from Komer to McGeorge Bundy indicates that Rusk prepared the notes for the President. (Ibid., Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert Komer, 3/63-5/63)

291. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 291. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, May 6, 1963, 2 p.m.

2179. 1. British High Commissioner James, Pickard of UK Commonwealth Relations Office London and I saw President Ayub in Rawalpindi late this afternoon to present Kashmir mediator suggestion. Shahi and Shafqat of GOP Foreign Office present. Results were inconclusive but not wholly discouraging. James presented letter from Sandys urging acceptance of proposal (Delhi's 4290 to Department).1 President read Sandys' letter in our presence and said he wished to consider proposal further with his colleagues. He seemed disappointed that Sandys had not pursued in Delhi Ayub's proposal for special status for Vale.

2. President's immediate reaction was that mediator would be ineffectual without authority to make authoritative recommendations to US and UK about military aid to India. He was deeply concerned about recent reports in Delhi on military aid and pressed very hard argument that mediator's efforts would be foredoomed to failure unless US and UK decisions on further military aid to India were made dependent on Indian acceptance his Kashmir settlement recommendations.

3. He argued appointment of one man as mediator would be dangerous and a panel might be needed. He felt that most of mediator's work would need be done in Delhi and that he would not want any GOP action to detract from validity of UNCIP resolutions. He asked whether mediator could not work within framework these resolutions.

4. Ayub deprecated present ministerial negotiations as futile and thought there was no possible utility in scheduled sixth round, which should at least be postponed. He felt sure that no progress would be possible without the exertion of pressure on India.

5. James and I stressed importance of new approach as only promising alternative to sterile current series of ministerial level talks. President admitted situation would be somber if talks collapsed with no new procedure adopted.

6. James quoted from Macmillan's statement in Commons on May 3 and Sandys' statement in Delhi on May 4 in effort to reassure Ayub and I quoted from US official sources as to logic of discussing Kashmir settlement and arms aid to India together. President still seemed to feel deeply that only threat of withholding aid would induce India to negotiate.

7. President said he recognized some good features in our proposal, and he did not refute our observation that Pakistan traditionally has favored interposition of third party into negotiations. He said he of course would not make a final decision on a matter of such moment without reflection and consultation with his advisors. He said he would see Foreign Minister Bhutto in Dacca beginning May 7 and suggested that James and I meet him again in Dacca evening May 8, just before his departure for Kathmandu. He expected to have a reply by that time. In the meanwhile he thought we might wish to talk with Bhutto who is arriving Karachi from Larkana midday May 6.

8. Talbot and I plan to see Bhutto in Karachi shortly after his arrival here. James is seeking separate appointment with Bhutto for Sandys after he arrives from Bombay midday May 6.

9. President's first reaction with us not encouraging; but there seemed to be an element of poker in his attitude toward us and it is possible that after his and our discussions with Bhutto and after further consideration by him our rebuttal of his arguments for putting our military aid program in hands of mediator as a pressure instrument, he may take a more favorable view. The crucial problem remains his concern about military aid to India.

10. In view of Ayub's reluctant attitude which seemed to imply that he would be doing us a favor if he accepted, I said on departure that he should not act on assumption that proposal was advanced primarily in our own interest. Suggestion was put forward because we thought it offered best chance of reaching a settlement by two countries directly concerned. We expected him to consider matter on basis of GOP interest and not US interest.

McConaughy

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and New Delhi.

1 Dated May 5. (Ibid.)

292. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 292. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, May 8, 1963.

SUBJECT

Air Defense for India

In our meeting on April 25,1 you suggested a final review of this question after I returned from the subcontinent. I have undertaken such a review and submit the following recommendations.

Recommendations

1. The United States should commit itself, by executive agreement, to consult with the Government of India, in the event of a Chinese Communist attack on India, regarding the possible use of United States military air forces to strengthen India's air defenses. We would expect the United Kingdom-Commonwealth to assume a similar obligation.

2. The United States and the United Kingdom-Commonwealth should be prepared in the event of such a Chinese Communist attack to deploy three squadrons of air defense aircraft for use in the air defense of the Delhi and Calcutta areas.

3. The United States and the United Kingdom should in support of the squadrons proceed promptly with the installation of permanent radar and communications facilities. In the interim, they should station mobile radars and communications and navigational aids as required in the Calcutta and Delhi areas.

4. The United States and the United Kingdom-Commonwealth should be prepared to conduct intermittent peacetime air defense exercises in India using the forces earmarked for deployment there at times when it is most practicable to do so and when these exercises would least conflict with other interests.

Discussion

1. Our Reasons for Proposing this Course of Action.

a. Some action needed now—India considers its military security against China is largely dependent upon Western support. It has, therefore, been receptive to developing close military ties with the West. The absence of further overt Chicom belligerency, Western reluctance to proceed with military assistance on the scale desired by India, and continued pressure for a Kashmir settlement, have caused the Indians to cool off somewhat from their position of last November. This trend will continue unless we exploit the present situation energetically by giving India some concrete indication of our backing. We must not lose sight of the long-term geopolitical significance of India as the only non-communist country in Asia capable of becoming a counterpoise to Communist China. To make all military assistance contingent on Kashmir in coming months is to risk losing out on the main chance.

b. Inexpensive—The proposed arrangement is essentially a holding operation. It should indicate our support to the Indians and develop our ties with the Indian military. But it doesn't provide what the Indians really want, a modern air force of their own. Thus, it is unlikely either to antagonize the Pakistanis or reduce our net leverage on Kashmir. Financially it is far less costly than providing the Indians with a comparable capability of their own.

c. Timely—It will significantly increase India's air defense capability during the critical period immediately ahead, when India's own armed forces are still weak.

d. Strong deterrent—During the same critical period, knowledge of this commitment will provide an even greater deterrent to Chinese Communist aggression than a comparable Indian Air Force buildup; the Chinese will think twice before risking direct engagement with the United States/United Kingdom air squadrons.

e. Flexible—The proposed arrangement permits graduated responses to various levels of Chinese Communist aggression. We shall not be committed to engage in specific military action. Nor will we be precluded from action against targets of our choice from bases outside India. Prior to making this type of response, we would probably have to provide a measure of air defense for India in any event.

f. Immediate strengthening of India's border defenses—The arrangement will make it easier for the Indians to commit their own air force in any second round for tactical support and interdiction.

2. Possible Disadvantages

a. Indians might reject proposal—but even if they did our offer would serve the important purpose of demonstrating our willingness to stand behind them in the event of another attack. Last November and December Nehru twice asked for an arrangement along the lines of our proposal. But since then, the Indians have shifted their emphasis to building up their own air force. They may, therefore, interpret our offer as a device to defer their acquisition of comparable capability of their own. Our willingness to begin the installation of permanent radars will reduce this Indian reaction.

b. Repercussions within India—The key here is Nehru. If he decides that our proposal is necessary for India's defense and can be reconciled with nonalignment, public opinion will follow his lead, except for the extreme left. But if Nehru rejects our offers, the controversy between rightist and leftist elements over India's evolving relationship with the West is likely to intensify. The fact that the proposed arrangement does not involve a firm mutual defense commitment will help.

c. Repercussions in Pakistan—We shall, of course, have to explain to Ayub what we plan to do before we approach the Indians officially on air defense. Ayub and others recognize that this is a major step available to us in strengthening India against Communist China that does not significantly affect the military balance within the subcontinent. They see such an arrangement as being in lieu of a comparable build-up of the Indian Air Force. Nevertheless, some Pakistanis will react emotionally.

d. Repercussions in Asian neutralist states—The Chinese Communists will use the proposed arrangement in their efforts to discredit India in these states by portraying it as a vassal of the United States. These states, however, are likely to be less affected by Chinese Communist rhetoric than by the demonstration inherent in our proposal of Western willingness to commit its power toward the containment of Chinese Communist expansionism.

3. British Reluctance

We expect the British to hold back. They are worried about the consequences of a direct confrontation between the RAF and Chinese Communist bombers over India—including Chinese reprisals against Hong Kong. They are also worried about repercussions of an air defense proposal for India in Pakistan. And, in any event, they think we should hold off pending some progress on Kashmir.

We think we have good arguments to counter these British reservations. If the Chinese attack India again, the consequences are likely to be far-reaching in any event, and the air defense arrangement will probably decrease the likelihood of such an attack. The air defense arrangement is less costly in terms of Pakistani repercussions than almost anything else we might do for India of military significance. And we can argue at length that if we do nothing at all for India in the near future, our capacity to push the Indians into a reasonable posture on Kashmir may actually diminish.

Next Steps

1. United States Approach to the British

We should make every effort to bring the British to a political decision to move ahead with us. We should try to secure their agreement to provide two RAF squadrons while we contribute one from the USAF. We should also try to persuade the British to work out at least token contributions from Canada and Australia, recognizing that the joint air defense team found that neither of these countries had the resources to provide a major contribution.

2. United States/United Kingdom/Commonwealth Approach to the Indians

Once we have persuaded the British, with or without Canada and Australia, to join us, we should make a joint approach to the Government of India. The tone of this approach would be that we are responding to an Indian request after a careful technical review which indicates that the proposed arrangement provides the only feasible method of providing a significant increase in India's air defense capability in a timely enough manner to be effective during the current critical period. We would indicate that we did not consider the proposed arrangement a permanent substitute for an effective Indian force. We would not, however, discuss how long we expected the arrangement to continue in specific terms, nor would we commit ourselves to providing India with supersonic interceptors of its own at some future date.

3. Technical Discussions

Having reached agreement in principle, the governments concerned would work out the necessary details, including status of forces, facilities, and arrangements for the ground environment. The resulting understandings would be formalized, as necessary. Meanwhile, technical representatives of the respective air forces would consult and lay the groundwork for rotational exercises.

4. Rotational Exercises

These would involve intermittent peacetime deployment to India by designated USAF and RAF squadrons for air defense exercises with the Indian Air Force. The United States element of the joint air defense team found such exercises essential to ensure effective deployment for combat operations during a militarily acceptable period after the outbreak of hostilities.

Dean Rusk2

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1-4 INDIA. Secret. Drafted in SOA on May 4 by Carleton S. Coon and cleared by Grant, Cameron, L, BNA, SOV, FE/EA, NR, and G/PM. An enclosure, a 3-page assessment of the legal implications of the recommendations, prepared by Department of State Legal Adviser Abram Chayes, is not printed.

1 See Documents 283 and 285.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original.

293. Summary Record of the 514th Meeting of the National Security Council 293. Summary Record of the 514th Meeting of the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, May 9, 1963, 5 p.m.

India

Secretary Rusk presented the recommendation contained in his memorandum to the President of May 8, 1963, regarding arrangements for the air defense of India (copy attached).1 He said our problem is that if we give too little we might lose India and that if we give too much we might lose Pakistan.

Secretary McNamara restated the military recommendations, adding that the Joint Chiefs of Staff questioned the military utility of stationing U.S. air squadrons in India. General Taylor summarized the Chiefs' views, emphasizing that in their opinion any commitment to defend India involves a very heavy additional commitment for which no additional forces are provided. The Chiefs are concerned that in deciding on the proposed defense arrangements consideration be given to the broad implications for U.S. strategy in the area. The Chiefs accept the political requirement for air defense arrangements for India but want this problem looked at in the light of defending all Asia against Chinese Communist aggression.2

Secretary McNamara said the recommended arrangements provided for the deployment to India of two mobile radars which would be left there. These radars, taken from our own forces, would be replaced promptly. He asked that any reference in the recommendation to the installation of permanent radar facilities be removed.

The President asked whether the Indians now want the kind of an air defense commitment we are prepared to give jointly with the British. Secretary Rusk responded by acknowledging that there is greater doubt of Indian acceptance now than there was immediately after the Chinese Communist attack. Nevertheless, he is convinced that the Indians would accept our offer. He suggested that we obtain British agreement to a joint commitment for air defense before we informed the Indians of what we are prepared to do.

The President asked whether the commitment “to consult with the Government of India in the event of a Chinese Communist attack on India regarding the possible use of U.S. military air forces to strengthen India's air defense” means that we are really committed to defend India. Secretary Rusk responded that “consult” actually means a commitment to defend.

Secretary Dillon3 noted that the paper did not discuss how the U.S. commitment to defend India would be dealt with domestically. He predicted that Congress would view this commitment as of major importance. He urged that full consultation with Congressional leaders be undertaken in order to forestall criticism of the use of an executive agreement to commit the U.S. Government.

Secretary Rusk commented that possibly the use of “executive agreement” was not necessary and was perhaps overly formal. In his view the President could decide as a matter of policy to consult with the Indians in the event of a Chinese Communist attack.

The President said that it was obvious we would defend India if attacked. He thought that our offer should cover the defense of India's large cities, not the defense of the frontiers of India on the ground. He said that we could argue out this question with the Congress and believed that we should go ahead now with the U.K. and the Indians and talk about our action to the Congress later. If the Chinese attacked India, he predicted that everyone would be in favor of defending the Indians.

Administrator Bell4 pointed out that Congressmen would not oppose our defending India if attacked by Communist China, but they would hammer hard as to whether we should offer such a commitment to India without having forced India to settle the Kashmir question.

The President responded by asking when we should start telling Congress that we doubted there would be any settlement now of the Kashmir question. Secretary Rusk responded by saying that he was making a foreign policy report to a Congressional Committee next week and during his presentation could begin the process of educating Congressmen about the declining prospects of an agreement. He pointed out, however, that even if there is no settlement of the Kashmir problem, we cannot walk away from India if the Chinese Communists attack.

The President noted that it would be unwise for us to make it appear that the failure of the Kashmir negotiations was Nehru's fault. He said we could point to the unreasonable demands made by the Pakistanis.

Secretary Rusk said that we must not think that giving India a commitment on air defense is in lieu of further military aid. He recommended that we ask the British to move promptly to ship spare parts to the Indian air forces. He also hoped that our assistance could be made available to build roads and civil projects in the frontier area—a means of assistance which would not inflame the Pakistanis.

Secretary McNamara responded that only a small amount of money could be spent constructing roads and that such roads would add very little to India's military capability. He believed that the Indians could use profitably no more than $50 million of additional U.S. military assistance. He said that because they had insufficient non-commissioned officers, they could expand their forces so quickly that the overall effect would be to decrease their military capability. The $50 million figure can be justified and there is no equipment in this which would inflame the Pakistanis. The minimum of $10 million should be forthcoming from the British for spare parts. India's transport aircraft capability can be greatly improved by shipping spare parts and increasing the logistic support now available.

Secretary McNamara acknowledged that the essential factor is to increase realism among India's military planners. Some progress has been made. For example, Indian ideas of a force of 1,400,000 has been reduced to 1,000,000. This planning figure should be further reduced to 800,000. The military budget figure of $1,800,000,000 is too high and would endanger India's civilian economy unless it were reduced.

Secretary McNamara recommended favorably peacetime air defense exercises in India as something we can do which is of real help.

The President, noting the importance of discussions with Congressmen, asked that a paper be prepared containing our plans for informing Congress and the Indians. He suggested in passing that possibly we could get the Indians to persuade the British to join us in the air defense commitment. He commented that if the West loses India, no one really could care about the future of Hong Kong.

Secretary McNamara cautioned that we could not expect to get U.K. support for a joint air defense commitment at once. He predicted that the British would stall.

The President asked about the British attitude. Several members responded by indicating that the British were hesitant to antagonize the Communist Chinese because of the effect on the future status of Hong Kong, and, in addition, hesitated to jeopardize their trade with the Communist Chinese by taking a political action which the Chinese would consider hostile.

The President noted that even if the British refused to join with us in making a commitment, we should proceed with U.S./Indian air defense exercises.

Secretary Rusk suggested that we might persuade the Australians to join with us.

Mr. Bundy said he believed the British would be unable to turn down our proposal. Secretary McNamara agreed, but called attention again to the likelihood that the British would stall by saying that we should not make a joint U.S./U.K. offer to India until the Indians are prepared to settle the Kashmir dispute.

Secretary Rusk said we could talk in very tentative terms to Indian Defense Coordination Minister Krishnamachari who will be coming to Washington shortly.

The President asked why we wanted the British to join us in the air defense commitment. Secretary Rusk responded by saying that the American people will insist that others help us in a task which, world-wide, we cannot do all alone. He said we would be criticized if the British did not join us on the grounds that India was a member of the British Commonwealth, and, therefore, the British should participate in its defense. We need, he added, other flags in this effort.

The President asked the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense to prepare a paper for him giving plans covering consultations with the British, discussions with Congressmen, and information to the Indians. He asked that a paper be prepared as to what we would tell Krishnamachari in order that he would not return to India empty-handed.

Secretary Rusk said that we will raise with Krishnamachari the importance of an agreed estimate as to the nature of the Chinese threat and of the Indian military requirements necessary to defeat the Communists. At present the Indians overestimate what the Chinese Communists can do militarily.

The President returned to a memorandum sent to him by Mr. Bowles5 and summarized its main recommendation, i.e. we must agree to defend India in the event of a Communist Chinese attack. This commitment must be made promptly lest the Indians turn from us and make terms with the Chinese Communists.

Secretary Rusk agreed that we must assist India, but it was not necessary for us to make a flat commitment to defend India. The proposal was to agree to consult with respect to the air defense of India in the event of attack.

The President expressed his view that we should consider now a flat guarantee of the territorial integrity of India. He noted that at the time an attack took place we would obviously decide to defend India. Because this is true, he thought that we should go some of the way now toward gaining the benefits prior to an attack of a defense commitment.

General Taylor asked that we take a broader look at the problem. He felt that the basic issue was not the air defense of India but rather how we can cope with Communist China over the next decade. He doubted that it would be possible to deal with the Chinese on the ground in non-nuclear warfare.

The President responded that India would obviously take a firmer stand toward Communist China if we were committed to India's defense. In addition, our commitment would serve as a deterrent to a Chinese Communist attack. He compared the Indian situation to the Korean situation as it existed in 1950.

Secretary McNamara expressed his view that before we gave a full commitment to India, we must take into account the fact that the defense of India will involve the use of nuclear weapons. He mentioned that the Joint Chiefs of Staff were prepared to reduce the size of U.S. and Korean forces in Korea as long as we were prepared to say that the defense of Korea would involve the use of nuclear weapons. He expanded on the necessity of facing the prompt use of nuclear weapons in the event of attack if we were to reduce in peacetime the level of forces in Korea. He stated his view that he preferred the use of nuclear weapons to the use of U.S. forces on the ground in Asia. Secretary Ball cautioned that if we are thinking of shifting our strategy to one calling for the use of nuclear weapons in Asia, then we should be aware of the reaction which might occur in Asia, i.e. we are prepared to use nuclear weapons against yellow people but are not prepared to use them against white people in Europe.

Secretary McNamara made clear that he was not now recommending a change in strategy, but he felt that there is a requirement that we be clear in our own minds about the use of nuclear weapons before we make additional commitments.

The President said if we were overrun in Korea, in Formosa, or in Western Europe, we would obviously use nuclear weapons. If we are prepared to defend Korea and Thailand, he asked why we should not be prepared to commit ourselves to defend India. He again asked whether our guarantees to the Indians would not be a deterrent to a Chinese Communist attack. In his view the air defense is the key to the existing situation. He said he was prepared to proceed with the shipment of the radars and with the air defense training program, even if the British would not join us. He suggested that for now we would conduct intermittent peacetime air defense exercises with earmarked squadrons of air defense aircraft. Later, we could propose a guarantee. He still wondered whether the Indians would consider our offer as it now stands.

Secretary Rusk concluded the discussion by pointing out that our objective is the defense of the Indian subcontinent. Our hope is that we can help the whole subcontinent rather than be obliged to defend countries in the subcontinent, one by one.

Bromley Smith6

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC Meetings, 1963, Meeting No. 514. Top Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House. Additional records of this meeting, prepared on May 10 by CIA Director McCone, and on May 11 by Acting Assistant Secretary of State James Grant, are in Central Intelligence Agency, Job 80 B 01285A, Box 6, DCI Meetings with the President, 1 April-30 June 1963, and Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK, respectively.

1 Document 292.

2 On May 7, the Joint Chiefs forwarded to McNamara their assessment of a draft of the memorandum sent by Rusk to Kennedy on May 8. (JCSM-357-63; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, India 381 (25 Apl 63) Jan thru Sep 1963)

3 Secretary of the Treasury C. Douglas Dillon.

4 AID Administrator David E. Bell.

5 In this 9-page memorandum, prepared on May 4 and sent to Kennedy under a covering letter on May 6, Bowles outlined what he saw as the key issues affecting U.S.-Indian relations, and offered his recommendations concerning those issues. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 5/6/63-5/8/63)

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

294. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 294. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, May 10, 1963.

SUBJECT

Meeting with the President on India, May 9, 1963

1. The President approved going forward with the arrangements on Air Defense for India called for in the Secretary of State's memorandum of May 8, 1963,1 contingent upon UK participation.

2. The Departments of State and Defense should examine how we can best go forward unilaterally, should the UK prove reluctant to commit itself.

3. The Department of State in consultation with other appropriate agencies is to prepare a scenario on steps to carry out these decisions covering: (a) consultations with the UK; (b) appropriate Congressional soundings; and (c) the best means of conveying our decision to the Indians and Pakistani.

4. The President also directed that the State Department recommend what we should say in the talks with Indian Defense Coordination Minister Krishnamachari so that he would leave the United States with a clear feeling the United States wanted to help India.2

McGeorge Bundy

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC Meetings, 1963, Meeting No. 514. Top Secret. The substance of this memorandum is drawn from NSC Action No. 2467, May 9, which is the only record of the 514th meeting of the NSC that has been found. (Ibid.) The memorandum was mistakenly sent to Secretaries Rusk and McNamara as NSAM No. 243. NSAM No. 243 had been issued on May 9 and dealt with a survey mission for the U.S. Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.

1 Document 292.

2 In response to items 3 and 4, the Department of State prepared a “scope paper” for the impending Krishnamachari visit, and a “Scenario for Air Defense Arrangement for India.” The two papers were forwarded to McGeorge Bundy on May 16 under cover of a memorandum from Brubeck. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Krishnamachari visit)

295. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 295. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, May 13, 1963, 10:42 p.m.

6016. Eyes Only for the Ambassador. Following message from President to Prime Minister Macmillan has been relayed to Prime Minister by other channels:

Verbatim Text.

“Dear Prime Minister:

With the return of our delegations from Karachi and Delhi, I am inclined to think we ought to go ahead now on the ‘air defense' arrangements for India recommended by our Joint Mission. These would involve chiefly periodic exercises of say three earmarked Commonwealth/US squadrons, plus temporary provision of certain radars. I would envision our presenting this publicly as joint training missions, though of course our underlying intent would be clear. We have gone into this scheme thoroughly here and my reasoning is as follows:

With a Kashmir settlement now a long way off, and Nehru in an unyielding mood, I believe it would be a mistake to let the Indians conclude that there is little prospect of any further military help in the absence of a Kashmir settlement. I note that you too were careful to counter this impression in your recent parliamentary statement. Indian support is so essential to a satisfactory non-nuclear balance of power in Asia that we don't want to risk unduly any Indian backsliding from their new determination to counter the Chinese Communist threat. They still think they have other options, and if we push Nehru too hard it is by no means inconceivable that he would harden his attitude toward Pakistan rather than the reverse. Indeed he might transfer to us some of his current animosity toward Peiping, attempt to disengage from his confrontation with the Chinese, and rely primarily on the hope, however illusory, of substantial Soviet military help. His current mood and past performances warn us not to push him too hard.

So our problem is how to forestall jeopardizing our new relationship with India, without putting too much strain on our relations with Pakistan, and still retaining some leverage on Kashmir. It seems to me that to signify willingness to go ahead on air defense would best meet this dilemma. This would: (1) lend credibility to our intent to help India if attacked again; (2) be the least expensive gesture we could make, since it involves mostly earmarking our own forces; (3) be the gesture least offensive to the Paks, since it entails no build-up of Indian air; (4) last but not least, buy us time to stall a bit longer on what the Indians really want, i.e., substantial hardware to build up their own forces. In particular, such an arrangement would enable us to go slow on what is likely to be the most expensive element in any US/Commonwealth aid program, developing an all-weather interceptor component for the Indian air force.

I am quite aware of your Government's hesitations over the risks involved in such an arrangement. These we share, though we do not regard the actual likelihood of air attack on Indian cities as very high, even if the Chinese attacked again on the ground. And in the last analysis it is almost inconceivable to me that we would allow an overt Chinese Communist air attack on Indian cities without becoming involved. In fact, I am strongly persuaded by the argument that a visible US/UK/Commonwealth ‘commitment' to the air defense of India is the best means of deterring such an attack from occurring and thus involving us in the first place. To be sure, we would have other avenues of retaliation if an air attack occurred, but certainly defensive action in India would be the one least, rather than most, likely to lead to escalation.

Thus I see many cogent reasons for going ahead on air defense, and feel we should put this matter high on our agenda; hopefully we could say something to TTK when he is here. Incidentally, I look on your efforts to increase the effectiveness of the existing Indian Air Force units as an important complement to air defense assistance, and I am pleased to learn that your plans are now made to move ahead intensively with this program.

I would be much interested in your own views.

Sincerely,

John F. Kennedy“

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-2 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Cameron; cleared with BNA and by Grant, Harriman, William Bundy, and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Rusk. Also sent to Karachi and New Delhi.

296. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 296. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, May 16, 1963, 3:23 p.m.

6083. Eyes Only Ambassador. Following message from Prime Minister Macmillan to the President is transmitted for information:

“May 15, 1963

Dear Friend, As I let you know, the Cabinet has now twice considered the issues raised in your message of May 13 about India.1

Of course, we quite agree that we shall probably both have to give some further military aid to India and we shall, of course, be ready to discuss with you its scale and character. But we have already committed 21 million to Indian defence since the Chinese attack and, as you know, we have a heavy commitment in Malaysia which so far we have to bear on our own. Therefore any further military aid to Indian will have to be pretty limited although we shall do our best having regard to all the aid we are giving on the civil side. I think we should be very chary about holding out expectations of a series of instalments. All this is just tinkering with the problem because no sensible defence of India is possible except as a planned part of the defence of the sub-continent as a whole.

The air umbrella plan, however, raises much more difficult and far-reaching questions. It is true that periodic exercises of a few squadrons of aircraft would be a cheaper way of bolstering the Indian defence and would perhaps be less offensive to Pakistan than any other form of military aid. Nevertheless, we do feel that such an arrangement might involve both of us in very far-reaching commitments. I cannot get out of my mind the situation which confronted this country in 1914 when as a result of what were intended to be only precautionary arrangements the bulk of the French fleet was moved to the Mediterranean and Britain thus became morally committed to the defence of the North Sea and so to war with Germany. The initial object of the squadrons training in India would be to permit a rather similar re-deployment of the Indian Air Force; to let them take up forward positions. So I believe that we must both reflect carefully before we undertake a military commitment, however limited it may be at the outset, which might either involve us in actual shooting with the Chinese or at least enable the Indians to claim that as any Chinese attack developed we were morally committed to increase our active participation in India's defence with all that that might imply both for you and for us. Of course, if China really sets out to conquer India or SE Asia that would be quite another situation and one in which we would both have to react. But what I do not like is the idea of putting ourselves now in a position where we should ultimately no longer have a free choice. Meanwhile, we should have little control or even influence on India's conduct of her foreign relations.

We also have a further difficulty in our minds. In the first moments of panic after the Chinese invasion the Indians seemed disposed to adopt a more realistic attitude both towards the Kashmir dispute and on the subject of ‘non-alignment.' As the danger has receded, so their traditional attitudes have reasserted themselves. Indeed we doubt whether in fact Nehru would now be prepared to agree to the air umbrella. The only thing which would certainly change the Indian attitude would be renewed and acute fear of Chinese aggression. But if the Indians feel that we are already committed to their air defence without any effort on their part to contribute to a common defence policy for the whole sub-continent in alliance with the West, they may well be less and not more ready to take a realistic view.

We shall have to discuss all these issues further when you and I have had our talks with Mr. Krishnamachari. Meanwhile, I hope that we can both avoid any commitment about the air umbrella.

With warm regard,

Yours sincerely, Harold Macmillan“

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 US/Kennedy. Secret. Drafted in the White House by Bundy and approved in S/S by Executive Secretary Benjamin Read.

1 See Document 295.

297. Memorandum for the Record 297. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, May 17, 1963, 1-1:35 p.m.

President's Meeting on India, 17 May 1963

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Secretary Rusk

Under Secretary Ball

Under Secretary Harriman

Assistant Secretary Talbot

Deputy Secretary Gilpatric

Ambassador Bowles

Acting Administrator Coffin

Mr. W.P. Bundy

Mr. R.W. Komer

Secretary Rusk opened the meeting by saying we must go ahead with help to India but do so in a way which would not drive the Pakistanis off the reservation. On the other hand we couldn't give the Paks a veto. We also wanted to bring the Commonwealth along with us. It was not in our interests to “compromise” Indian non-alignment, lest we promote a Soviet-Chinese rapprochement which would greatly up our bill.

Rusk thought we could do a number of things for the Indians to keep nursing them along. He mentioned C-119s, radar and air training. As to defense production, he suggested that we and others might increase our contributions to the Indian consortium so that the Indians themselves could buy more defense production items. Bundy interjected that we would get little political credit for the C-119s since we had told the Indians in April these would be coming. He had explained to TTK1 that we were intensively looking at some way to help India on its air defense problem and had had no negative reaction from TTK on an air defense package.

The President said “if the C-119s were already discounted what are we going to give the Indians to take back?” He further asked “Is it really right that we get more advantages out of non-alignment?” The Soviets might work harder to subvert India under these circumstances but this wouldn't hurt us too much. He agreed with Rusk that perhaps we ought to try and give credits which could be used by the Indians for arms. He asked why we shouldn't have more credit sales of defense items in general. Bundy explained the $100 million revolving fund limitation imposed by the Congress and that any credit sales were a charge against the MAP appropriation. The President thought that next year we should ask to put this limitation up $100 million more.

Bundy returned to his description of DOD thinking on aid to India. As to supersonic aircraft we would have a hard time finding them. We should go ahead, however, on air defense radar because the Indians needed it in any case. Rusk interjected that the real problem was getting the Indians into a position to use MAP aid. They were not really logistically prepared to do so. The President commented that if they ask for $1.3 billion and we give them $50 million, there will be “real disillusionment.” He then asked about the project for rotating US/UK squadrons to India. It wouldn't cost much, it wouldn't give the Paks much pain, so why not go ahead without the UK if necessary. We should do a paper on two squadrons for training exercises plus radar and whatever else was necessary, so that we could get ahead on this matter.

Rusk thought it most important that we have some “Commonwealth flags” in the Indian aid effort. He urged that we give TTK the idea that we were thinking positively and get him to work on the UK to be more forthcoming. Bundy thought that $ 10-20 million a year in subsequent aid was the most we could get from the British. Rusk said this was all the more reason for going ahead with the air defense package. We should try to get other Commonwealth countries in, if we couldn't get the UK. In fact, we should tell the UK this.

Bowles entered a plea that we make the Indians de facto allies instead of de facto associates. It was so important to get India firmly on the side of the West against China that we should not let TTK go away thinking that we were unwilling to really help. The President said we should obviously do the least we could get away with politically, but at the minimum some sort of a substantial response to India was required. Rusk thought that we should tell TTK that we were prepared to “go big” in principle.

Rusk urged that we have one more crack at Prime Minister Macmillan on air defense. The President agreed that we should tell TTK we were thinking about this and were consulting the UK. Talbot urged that we hold off for a month until Kashmir was better sorted out before going ahead on air defense. Rusk, however, mentioned that Ayub did not get mad at the air defense proposition when Rusk talked with him in Pakistan. The President said we should feel out TTK and should tell the Prime Minister that we ought to go ahead together but if they didn't come along we would have to go ahead unilaterally. Rusk said we should keep telling the Indians about the potential consequences for us of shooting down Chinese Communist planes in India. This was a real commitment on our part because it could involve us in a major war.

Harriman commented that TTK must go back with a clearer understanding that the subcontinent was indefensible without the Paks and that our aid would have to be interim in nature until then. The President asked why Harriman thought India indefensible without Pakistan. Harriman's reply was that Assam, the most vulnerable target area, could not be defended effectively without East Pakistan. This was true also of an attack from Burma. He further emphasized the costly diversion of India and Pakistan effort entailed in the Kashmir dispute. The Indians, for example, still kept substantial forces deployed against the Paks. Let's not give the Indians an idea that mediation was just an exercise. So let's press TTK on Kashmir. Let's not forget our Pakistan interests.

The President started to sum up what we were going to tell TTK, and asked Bill Bundy to describe what DOD had in mind. Bundy indicated that we would (1) couple the air defense discussion with an offer on radar and training; (2) underwrite the Ladakh air transport requirement; (3) push ahead with roadbuilding and communication equipment; (4) suggest a joint survey of the ammunition and weapons requirements to support a 16-division force base; and (5) would offer the Indians any training help we could. The President asked how much our support would cost per division. Bundy said a horseback figure would be $5 million in equipment plus several times that in ammunition, depending on the stockage level agreed upon.

Secretary Rusk suggested that it would be good to expose TTK to a movement of our Congressmen; we should talk to TTK about how to handle them. The President asked who was setting up TTK's meetings on the Hill. Ambassador Bowles indicated that he was taking care of this.

RWK

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meeting with the President, 5/63-7/63. Secret. Drafted by Komer on May 23. The time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is taken from the President's Appointment Book. (Ibid.)

1 T. T. Krishnamachari, Indian Minister of Economic and Defense Coordination, arrived in Washington on May 15 for discussions with President Kennedy, as well as officials of the Departments of State, Defense, the Treasury, AID, the NSC, and members of Congress. Krishnamachari was accompanied on the visit by Secretary of the Foreign Ministry M. J. Desai. The visit in Washington concluded on May 23. A memorandum of William Bundy's May 16 conversation with Krishnamachari is in Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 3131, India, 1963. Additional documentation relating to the Krishnamachari visit is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Krishnamachari Visit, and in Department of State, Central Files POL 7 INDIA, POL 27 CHICOM-INDIA, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK, DEF 1-4 INDIA, and DEF 19-3 INDIA.

298. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 298. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, May 17, 1963, Midnight.

2290. 1. As arranged with Bhutto before his departure for New Delhi, I met with him late today to receive GOP reply on mediation proposal.1 Jackson and Sneider accompanied me. (James had previous important engagement in Rawalpindi and will see Bhutto separately tomorrow morning.) I found Bhutto very relaxed and friendly. Discussion, which lasted one hour, was most businesslike.

2. Bhutto informed me that GOP is prepared to accept mediation with certain safeguards. He said GOP recognizes utility of mediation in context of its basic desire for peaceful Kashmir settlement, providing safeguards can be worked out.

3. Bhutto explained desire for safeguards flowed from difficult position faced by GOP. Past experience in Kashmir negotiations with India has led Pakistan to distrust Indian tactics of obstinacy and delay. While Indians during recent negotiations remained unshaken and obstinate, Paks have made concessions. GOP fear there is risk mediator, sensing contrast in Pak and Indian attitudes, will try to get Pakistan to go further and further in making concessions while Indians sit tight. Second and basic problem concerning GOP is that Indians will spin out negotiations and, under cover of mediation and seemingly conciliatory stance it would convey, achieve their objectives of getting long-term military aid from West without having to come to any Kashmir compromise. GOP needs some assurance against such stalling tactics. Without such assurance, Pakistani public would feel GOP naive to accept mediation proposal which would give Indians this opportunity. In effect, GOP faces real problem of justifying to public entering immediately into new effort settle Kashmir question in view unproductive bilateral talks.

4. Bhutto then spelled out four safeguards sought by GOP as follows: A) Time limit for mediation process;

B) “Freeze” on long-term military aid to India during mediation;

C) Terms of reference which would focus mediation solely on Kashmir;

D) Mediation to be in general context UNCIP resolutions.

5. Bhutto, partly in response questions on my part, spelled out these safeguards in following terms: A) Time Limit—Desire for time limit flowed from need prevent indefinite spinning out of inconclusive negotiation by Indians. Bhutto said he had in mind something like 3 to 6 months. He thought six months should be enough for mediator, who would be man of stature and strong personality, to familiarize himself with details and work out proposals for solution. He recognized, however, danger of being completely rigid and that absolute time limit would be construed by Indians as ultimatum. While Paks were open to suggestions on specifics, they wished some formula which would convey to Pakistani public that time limit reasonably brief.

B) Arms Freeze—Bhutto said Pak position on this question not yet final. President Ayub's own view is that mediator should have authority to say how much and what type aid India would qualify for on basis of progress toward settlement. In effect he would thus be both arbitrator on arms aid and mediator on Kashmir. Bhutto said that he is trying to dissuade Ayub from pressing this idea, pointing out decisions on arms aid are reserved to governments and cannot be delegated to mediator. I noted such decision on aid bound to be outside scope of any mediator. Bhutto said he hoped to induce Ayub not to press this point but still needed to work on him.

Bhutto's own view on general relationship between arms aid decisions and mediation process not completely clear. He seemed to have in mind not specific threat to Indians to withhold arms aid but relating administrative and congressional decisions on specifics of arms aid to progress on Kashmir settlement without any publicized specific linkage. He felt something along these lines would also be needed satisfy Pak public opinion. He suggested for example possibility of one or two prominent senators making statements differentiating aid which would be given merely as extension of Nassau Agreement from aid of a different magnitude which might be given if mediation successful. He also recognized that our hands could not be tied in the event Chinese Communists renewed attacks on India. He said “freeze” would specifically relate to new decisions and not to pipeline deliveries or, by inference, limited extension of Nassau commitment. He also did not argue with my point that we could not agree to direct and public linkage of arms aid to Kashmir settlement though these are questions which by nature of prevailing situation, must be considered together. After extended discussion this point I had feeling that GOP, or at least Bhutto, capable of considerable flexibility on details this point.

C) Terms of Reference—Bhutto particularly wanted to avoid broad terms of reference which would permit mediator to go into side issues in Indo-Pak relations. He thought language such as “Kashmir and other related matters” would probably be adequate.

D) UNCIP Resolutions—Inasmuch as India had never formally repudiated her agreement to these resolutions, Bhutto thought that it only proper that there be some reference to them in relation to mediation effort. I had impression however he very flexible on this question. Reference might be in preamble. It clear that Bhutto did not want reference to exclude mediator in practice from working also on basis proposals made during ministerial talks.

6. In response to direct question by me, Bhutto affirmed that on specifics these points GOP is flexible and that there is considerable room for maneuver and further discussion; his basic requirement is formula which would give GOP footing to justify to public that mediation offers reasonable prospect for Kashmir settlement. In this connection, he mentioned plan to brief editors that mediation should not be turned down outright and has value to Pak interests if there safeguards. He also plans spell out beneficial aspects of ministerial talks. He plans give me before his departure for Tehran May 22 written formulation of above safeguards.2 This desired by GOP for purposes of clarity. However, he assured me that reducing these points to writing should not be interpreted as an attempt to freeze them and GOP wishes to work with us to arrive agreed procedure for mediation.

7. I pointed out to Bhutto inclusion of safeguards sought by GOP posed real problems with GOI. He said he recognized this but had impression in Delhi Indians very keen on mediation and were quite disturbed over breakoff of ministerial talks.3

McConaughy

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Emergency; Limit Distribution. Received in the Department of State on May 17 at 3:49 p.m. Repeated to New Delhi and London. Relayed to the White House.

1 Bhutto had just returned from the sixth round of Ministerial talks on Kashmir, which took place in New Delhi May 14-16. At the conclusion of this final round of the talks, Bhutto and Singh issued a joint communique in which they recorded “with regret” that no agreement could be reached on the settlement of the Kashmir dispute. (Telegram 4458 from New Delhi, May 16; ibid.)

2 On May 21 Bhutto delivered to McConaughy an aide-mémoire that constituted the formal Pakistani response to the mediation proposal presented to Ayub by McConaughy and James on May 5. The aide-mémoire was drafted along the lines outlined by Bhutto on May 17. A time limit of 3 months for the mediation effort was stipulated, and Pakistan took the position that it was necessary to link mediation “effectively, if not formally” to the flow of Western arms supplies to India. (Telegram 2321 from Karachi, May 21; ibid.)

3 Komer sent a copy of telegram 2290 to President Kennedy on May 18, under cover of a memorandum in which he offered his assessment of the Pakistani response to the mediation proposal: “The Paks clearly see little hope in mediation, but would like to use it to forestall further US/UK aid to India.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Kashmir, 5/63)

299. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 299. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, May 18, 1963, 3:10 p.m.

4053. Secretary used long talk with T.T. Krishnamachari and M.J. Desai May 17 to sound Indians out on air defense arrangement. Recalled India had been reluctant to use combat air arm when Chicoms attacked last fall because of concern over possible Chicom retaliation on Indian cities. Question now was what to do in future. First task is to get existing Indian Air Force into best possible operational condition. British are working on this. Then there is problem of radar. We have been examining coverage of Delhi and Calcutta areas and believe we can arrange for mobile radars for this task pending installation permanent radar, for which lead time is up to 18 months. There is also communications and training requirement. We are prepared to start right away on training.

Secretary then said there was one possibility, which had major international and internal political implications, which he wanted to mention quite tentatively: whether US and Commonwealth squadrons should take part in the defense of Indian cities. Said we did not have Commonwealth agreement and had not come to final conclusion but believed this important way in which we could reinforce India's military. Noted that fly through of squadrons for training would give signal to Chicoms and have deterrent effect. Also noted this arrangement might give Indians political problems.

At first TTK replied only briefly and then turned to another subject. Said Indians had made “suggestion” of air defense arrangement when Chicoms attacked. They had thought visits of Western squadrons might be camouflaged as joint US-UK-India training exercises. TTK then moved on to argue India's case for three squadrons supersonics.

Subject came up briefly again when TTK mentioned his consultation re air defense with Australians in same manner as he had previous day. Secretary inquired whether there was possibility that Australian squadrons might come to India in event of attack. TTK replied that Indians might discuss this; proximity of Australia to India would be advantage.

Secretary returned to subject at close of conversation. Said we are now thinking about possibility of external air squadrons assisting India in event attack. Asked if this would give India political problems.

TTK replied it would be better if arrangement camouflaged so that squadrons visiting in peacetime would appear be on joint training exercises. If attack actually came, people would welcome arrangement. M.J. Desai inquired if we would provide communications equipment before arrival of squadrons on exercises. Secretary replied that we would have to start with radar and related communications equipment. We can begin this now. Question is whether we go on with squadrons.

M.J. Desai said he had raised this question with Nehru. M.J. had told him that before visit of squadrons, communications equipment would be in position. M.J. considered that with this physical evidence of assistance to India's effort to defend itself, there would be no objection to arrangement. Said it would be better if it understood that during interval between Chicom attack and arrival external squadrons India must rely on own resources for air defense. For this purpose India needed assistance in building its own air force (three supersonic squadrons). If it were known that arrangement was cooperative plan designed at least in part to build India's capacity defend itself, then there would be no political problem. If, however, external squadrons merely assumed India's air defense burdens, then would be problems.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1-4 INDIA. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider, cleared by Talbot, and approved by Rusk. Repeated to London and Karachi.

300. Memorandum for the Record 300. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, May 20, 1963, 5:45-6:30 p.m.

PRESENT

The President

Mr. P. Talbot

Mr. R.W. Komer

Minister T.T. Krishnamachari

Foreign Secretary M.J. Desai

Ambassador B.K. Nehru

Conversation Between the President and Indian Defense Coordination Minister T.T. Krishnamachari

TTK began by expressing India's thanks for the spontaneous US response to India's appeal when it was attacked. He also brought personal regards to the President from Prime Minister Nehru.

The President inquired why the Chinese had attacked. What was the Indian estimate? In response TTK gave him a written brief1 prepared by M.J. Desai which the President read and said was extremely good. As TTK saw it, Chinese hostility toward India was a matter of long standing but the exact time of the Chinese attack was related to Cuba. The Chinese probably anticipated a “free ride” if Cuba flared up. TTK went on to describe other evidences of Chinese infiltration since the cease-fire. He pointed out that there were a number of Chinese in Nagaland disguised as mule drivers. In North Burma there were 40-60,000 Chinese settlers.

The President asked TTK what he thought was the objective of the Chinese Communists in Asia. TTK responded as far as India was concerned the Chinese probably sought to create a number of small satellite states around India's borders, e.g. Nepal, an independent Assam, Burma. Chou En-lai had implied this objective to Bhutto and Ali Sabri when they were in Peiping. Burma in TTK's opinion was “too far gone.” Ne Win, however well-intentioned, could not control Tin Pe and the Commerce Minister who were making over Burma into a Communist state.

The President asked about the Indian view of the future of non-alignment. TTK rejoined that India hoped to remain non-aligned; basically, it didn't like to expand the area of conflict with China. Rather, the Indians wanted to localize this conflict and to deal with it themselves, “rather than to drag our friends into the fray.” Second, the Indians hoped through this policy to stay on the right side of the Soviets, and not push them back into helping Peiping. TTK did not expect any further Soviet military aid to India, but hoped that Indian policy could forestall such aid to China as well.

The President switched to the question of Kashmir. He said we had heard gloomy news about the prospects for settlement. This was one of our problems, as was that of Pakistani fears of India. However, apparently there was some feeling in India that in pushing Kashmir “we were taking advantage of a friend in her hour of need.” This was not so, but we had real problems with the Paks. We had important intelligence relations with them, and we did not want the Paks in a “moment of violence” to destroy CENTO and SEATO. Also there was much sentiment in Congress that Nehru could easily settle Kashmir if he chose. But the President felt that we must go ahead with India regardless of these differences. The question was how we should go along from here. He saw value in sending some US/UK air squadrons on training exercises, though we'd have problems here too. We should get Commonwealth participation. Then we could put in the necessary radar and communications. This arrangement could be superseded later, but in the meantime it would deter Chinese Communists. After all we had deterred the Chinese Communists from attacking Quemoy and Matsu for some time. So we should both consider the air squadrons. TTK felt that the best way to introduce them was a part of a training scheme. The President agreed, indicating to do so would be quite helpful. It would also make clear to the Chinese Communists our intention to help India if attacked.

The President then asked about the apparent US/Indian disagreement over the size of the Indian force buildup. TTK said that they hadn't gotten very far into this yet. He had explained the need for supersonic fighters and the US had explained some of its difficulties, but this was where the matter rested. On transport aircraft the C-119s might not be adequate, so perhaps a squadron of C-130s was needed too. There was some discussion of when we planned to withdraw the US squadron from India. The President was sure that if needed we would keep the C-130s there. TTK then commented on the size of the force Mountbatten had said India would need, i.e. 1,020,000 men in 17 divisions. India's own estimate was 1,019,000 men in 21 divisions, so there was little difference. Anyway, it would be 18 months from now before the Indians got to the problem of recruiting and equipping those divisions beyond 16, so there was no need to decide this yet. He went on to say that the third matter discussed had been defense production. India could not keep importing ammunition. He understood a surplus ammunition plant was available. Fourth, there was some difference over the proper Indian air force strength. The Indians were considering whether they should add a new Canberra squadron or one of heavy bombers. J.R.D. Tata was here working on the problem.

The President asked what TTK thought of Pakistani fears that a change in the “arms balance” would be a threat to Pakistan. TTK's response was that it all depended on Indian intent. “We are not going to attack,” he said. “In fact, we have moved all of our troops away from the Pakistan frontier.” He mentioned inter alia that most of the cantonments for the Indian army were normally in the Punjab, so their previous deployments were not really against the Paks. TTK could not understand why the Paks would think India would ever attack. In fact, a substantial group of Indian politicians favored a settlement with Pakistan. India was much interested in the stability of East Pakistan, which had a major bearing on Indian ability to meet an attack through Burma. India wished Ayub well for this reason. It favored a “no war” declaration to resolve Pak fears. TTK told the President “you can underwrite India's good behavior. We won't attack Pakistan.” But no Indian leader could afford to make snap decisions on a Kashmir settlement.

The President asked how strong the group in India favoring settlement was. TTK did not answer directly but said it was essential to have a politically palatable settlement. One couldn't have 100,000 refugees coming down from Kashmir and upsetting the 45 million Moslems in India, who were now integrated into Indian body politic and happy with their role. At present, India had gone as far as it could, but gradually people were coming to realize that “Pakistan is a problem, not an enemy.” TTK said that he personally would have advised Nehru to take Black as a mediator in 1961.

TTK then commented that India had two problems. First, it must convince the Southeast Asians that India couldn't be licked. This was important for their morale. Second, it must seek a solution of Kashmir. But the GOI couldn't tell the Kashmiris what to do. They had autonomy in local affairs; the GOI, for example, couldn't instruct Bakshi Ghulam Mohammed to let Sheikh Abdullah out of jail. Let Pakistan create a similar autonomous state in its part of Kashmir and then we could have free movement between the two areas and develop other ties. Perhaps this way a settlement could be reached. Nehru had told Galbraith he would rather have a plebiscite than give up the Valley via a political decision.

The President dwelt on the problems which Kashmir dispute created with Pakistan. If we could settle these it would be in India's interest as well as ours. It would make it easier for us to be of help. We wanted to help in any case but in ways causing the least trouble with the Paks. We should go ahead with radar, we should keep the C-130s there if necessary. We would consider what we could do toward providing equipment for 16 divisions and defense production aid. We would also try to get the Commonwealth to come along on the air squadrons; if they didn't it wouldn't in the last analysis deter us, but we would try to get the Australians or someone in if the UK was reluctant.

TTK thought it was best for the US to keep in touch with the Paks so they wouldn't go too far. India would agree to mediation and would like to solve the Kashmir problem if only “to avoid embarrassment to our friends.” He assured the President that Prime Minister Nehru was completely sure of “U.S. good will toward India.” The President said “maybe no satisfactory solution can be reached on Kashmir but let's keep people on both sides working.” He said the British thought that there was real danger of a Pak blowup. TTK responded that the UK attitude had an historical basis. They had “other interests” which affected their position. So the Indians hoped that US help would not be completely tied to that of the Commonwealth. He said the Canadians and Australians wanted to help India but they were small countries. The President thought that Australia ought to do more. It was only spending 3% of its GNP on defense. TTK said that the British had yet other problems; “The Hong Kong lobby is a strong one in the City of London.” The President replied that it was not very strong here.

Commenting that the Indian Consortium prospects did not “look good,” the President urged TTK on his trip to Western Europe to try to get more money for the Consortium. The Germans ought to do more, the Canadians were not doing enough, so the Indians should work harder on them. The President said “India has a lot of friends; I am one of them. Let's be clear that we are going to help India. We have a lot of problems, but we will go forward in ways which will best deter the Chinese Communists.”

TTK stressed the possibility that if China attacked again, air might come into play. The Indians would use air but this might bring an attack on Indian cities. If India were unable to cope with this attack, it would have a disastrous effect on Indian morale. TTK thanked the President for his sympathy and understanding of Indian problems. As the visitors left, the President again complimented TTK on his memorandum explaining the motives behind the Chinese attack on India. He asked to keep it, saying that he wanted to send it to various key Congressmen such as Mansfield and Fulbright (TTK gladly agreed).

R.W. Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Krishnamachari Visit. Secret. Drafted by Komer on May 22. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.)

1 Not found.

301. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan 301. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AfghanistanSource

Washington, May 27, 1963, 7:12 p.m.

330. Ambassador should deliver following message to King Zahir at earliest opportunity:

“Your Majesty: I have just received a report from Ambassador Holmes in Tehran1 regarding the discussions there between your representative and the Pakistan Foreign Minister being held under Iranian auspices.2 According to Ambassador Holmes, the two sides have reached agreement on every substantial point. The only question outstanding is the wording of the final communique which will spell out the nature of the agreement that has been reached. As I understand the situation, Pakistan has agreed to a complete resumption of normal relations as they were before September 6, 1961, including the reopening of Afghan offices in the former Northwest Frontier Province of Pakistan. Pakistan understandably wishes reassurance that the two sides can expect one another to agree to refrain from actions against the maintenance of friendly relations, and the Iranian Foreign Minister has proposed language incorporating this thought for inclusion in the communique.3

I am taking the unusual step of communicating with you directly on an urgent basis in order that this opportunity for the honorable resolution of your transit difficulties with Pakistan not be lost. I would hope Your Majesty would consider authorizing your representative in Tehran to accept the language proposed by the Iranian Foreign Minister and to agree to the issuance of the joint communique.

We are looking forward to Your Majesties' visit this September. With warm regards, Sincerely, John F. Kennedy“

Ambassador should inform Tehran on urgent basis that message has been delivered. Ambassador Holmes then authorized inform Aram and Bhutto of nature foregoing message.

Rusk

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Subjects, King Zahir Correspondence, 1961-1963. Secret; Emergency; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Gatch, cleared with GTI and by the President, and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Tehran and repeated to Karachi.

1 Telegram 1035 from Tehran, May 27. (Department of State, Central Files, POL AFG-PAK)

2 In telegram 1012 from Tehran, May 20, the Embassy reported that prospects for an agreement to end the transit dispute between Afghanistan and Pakistan had improved as a result of Iranian mediation to the point of agreement on Ministerial negotiations in Tehran. Pakistan was represented by Bhutto in the negotiations, which began on May 24. The Afghan representative was M.Q. Rishtiya, Minister of Press and Information. (Ibid.)

3 At issue, according to telegram 1035 from Tehran, was the question of propaganda. The Afghan delegation initially accepted the language proposed by Foreign Minister Aram, but after consulting with Kabul, refused to accept it.

302. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of State 302. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of StateSource

Tehran, May 28, 1963, 3 p.m.

1038. I concluded telecon with Steeves ten minutes ago in which he reported that after two and a half-hours with Afghan King,1 he was unable to move him beyond agreement to give Paks confidential assurance of good behavior with Afghan wording reported in Embtel 10352 “each side would endeavor to bring about an atmosphere of good understanding, friendship and mutual trust” or to delete all reference to the matter in the communique.

On telephoning Foreign Minister for appointment to convey our latest information, he told me that a few minutes earlier agreement had been reached as result of another concession by Paks to accept confidential assurance of good behavior.

There will be a joint meeting at five o'clock local time to finalize agreed text of communique which will not be made public before tomorrow. Aram elated and asked me to celebration dinner this evening.

I recommend immediate dispatch messages of congratulations on successful outcome from President to Shah and from Secretary to Aram.

Holmes

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AFG-PAK. Confidential; Operational Immediate. Repeated to Kabul and Karachi.

1 Steeves reported on his conversation with King Zahir on May 28 in airgram A-522 from Kabul, June 2. (Ibid., POL 32-1 AFG-PAK)

2 See footnotes 1 and 3, Document 301.

303. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 303. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, May 29, 1963, 8:23 p.m.

6401. Eyes Only for Ambassadors. Following is text of message from Prime Minister Macmillan received by the President.

“May 29, 1963.

Dear Friend,

We had another long discussion in Cabinet yesterday about air defence of India. The Cabinet were still worried about a military commitment to defending India for the reasons which I explained in my message of May 15.1

However my colleagues were much relieved at the way in which you restated your position in your message to me of May 23.2 It was also very helpful to have the account which you kindly sent about your Government's discussions in Washington with Krishnamachari.3 The Cabinet also had very much in mind the importance of keeping in step with you on this great issue. They felt that the position was much clearer than it had been and that we ought to be able to get the advantages of the joint exercises with the Indians without the dangers which we had foreseen.

I was able to persuade my colleagues that the plan which you put forward in your message of May 23, for occasional visits to India by two fighter squadrons, one American and one British, with the radar and ground equipment provided by you, would serve a useful purpose without involving us in dangerous commitments for the future. If such exercises can be planned with some Indian participation, our visits could indeed be of real value not only in familiarising our own squadrons with the terrain but also in increasing India's air defence capacity.

Naturally such training arrangements with the Indians would not escape the notice of the Chinese. But as you recognised in your last message I think that this effect will result from the facts and need not be underlined by any public statement. Equally Indian acceptance of and participation in these training exercises would in itself indicate a significant and desirable shift in India's traditional policy of non-alignment; but in the present state of Indian opinion I do not think they would like this aspect to be too much emphasised. We think therefore that it would be wise in any public statement which we may ultimately have to make about joint air training exercises in India not to give any indication of any more far-reaching purpose. I trust that you will be able to agree to this method of presentation.

The Cabinet have authorised the Commonwealth Secretary to speak to Krishnamachari about air defence on the basis that joint exercises by British and U.S. fighter squadrons might be possible without any commitment to come to India's assistance in the event of further Chinese attacks. They also agreed that we should now make detailed plans with your staff for these periodical exercises in India. Perhaps you would let us know what you think would be the most practical way of making these detailed plans.

I am so glad that we seem to have found the right answer to this problem.

I am sure that our co-operation in this field can be very important for the future.

With warm regard,

Harold Macmillan“

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1-4 INDIA. Secret. Drafted in S/S by Grant G. Hilliker, cleared by McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Hilliker. Repeated to Karachi and New Delhi.

1 See Document 296.

2 The text of this message, in which Kennedy reported on his discussion with Krishnamachari and argued again for proceeding with the proposed U.S.-U.K. air defense program for India, was transmitted to London in telegram 6250, May 23. (Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 204, Kennedy Correspondence with Macmillan, 1962-63)

3 A summary of the Krishnamachari visit to Washington was sent to London in telegram 6295, May 24, with instructions to convey a copy to the British Government. (Ibid., Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-INDIA)

304. Memorandum of Conversation 304. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, June 3, 1963, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

Visit of President of India1

PARTICIPANTS

Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, President of India

H.E. B.K. Nehru, Ambassador of India

H.E. Mrs. Lakshmi Menon, Minister of State for External Affairs

Mr. S. Dutt, Secretary to the President

Dr. S. Gopal, Director, Historical Division, Ministry of External Affairs

President Kennedy

Secretary of State Rusk

The Hon. Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

The Hon. John Kenneth Galbraith, Ambassador to India

The Hon. Chester Bowles, Ambassador-Designate to India

While the two Presidents were speaking privately in President Kennedy's office, Secretary Rusk raised with the rest of the group the question of Laos.

[Here follows discussion of the situation in Laos.]

At this point the two Presidents joined the group.

President Kennedy said that he and President Radhakrishnan had discussed the types of assistance we hope to give India, that President Radhakrishnan had commented on the needs of India, and that the two had discussed the problem of Pakistan's relations with India and the effect of those on the United States.

In response to a question by President Kennedy, Dr. Radhakrishnan advanced the thesis that China had attacked India for both military and political reasons. Militarily, the Chinese intention was to show that India was not strong enough to stand against China, a lesson that would be observed in Southeast Asia as well. On the political side, the Chinese probably thought they could disrupt the Indian democratic way of life. If they could succeed, then other countries would give up their struggles for democracy and go China's way. Also, the Chinese might have believed that the impact would be felt on Australia, which is sparsely populated while China is full. The thesis of empty lands and hungry mouths could tempt China to move in the general direction of Australia. He expressed the view that the democratic experiment will work only if there is a strong grouping in Asia, taking Australia, Malaysia, and India together. The stabilizing factor in Asia is the success of India's democracy, as it was India's weakness that tempted the Chinese to come in. A basic point is that the Himalayas have ceased to be a barrier, just as the Atlantic Ocean ceased to be a protective barrier for the United States. In the Himalayan region roads and other communications now make penetration much easier than before. The Chinese could enter India again, and are prevented only by the consciousness that India could get the strength to repulse the attack. India has wanted to raise its eleven divisions to about 21 which in numbers of troops comes to the same as Mountbatten's 17. He was sure that India has to build up its strength, to give confidence to its own people and to its neighbors.

Turning to the subject of Pakistan, President Radhakrishnan said that the Indian leaders had made a special offer at the sixth and concluding round of ministerial talks on Kashmir and related matters. These included the offer of a no-war commitment, full disengagement of troops from the India-Pakistan border, no freezing of the present Kashmir situation, and continued effort to find a solution to the problems between India and Pakistan. The Pakistanis did not accept this. On Kashmir, it should be remembered that both the ruler and the National Front of Sheikh Abdullah had wanted accession to India, so it was not correct to say that the state had not been consulted. In addition, India has now spent crores of rupees on development in the state.

President Kennedy asked whether the same factors that moved the Chinese last fall would cause them to attack again or whether they had been largely satisfied by their successes in 1962. In response Dr. Radhakrishnan observed that the military weakness of India would continue to be a factor in the situation until overcome.

He said that the Chinese had now turned back 3,900 prisoners to India of whom ten had been brainwashed. Gurkhas were included in the returned prisoners.

Dr. Gopal, explaining the situation on the ground, said that India has sent its civil authorities right back to the McMahon Line. The Assam Rifles are back from the line and the Army farther back. Since September the Chinese have withdrawn from NEFA but elsewhere are holding 2,500 square miles more than before, mainly in Ladakh.

President Kennedy observed that we desire our aid to help India both economically and militarily and that we want a point short of causing a real crisis in Pakistan. Our aid, including the presence of our forces, radar assistance, etc., are all factors China will take into account. The program we have in mind would give the substance of alignment without the fact of it. If India and the U.S. were to move on this, the result should give India more security without heavy cost in terms of our relations with Pakistan. We are as anxious as any country could be, almost as anxious as India, that India should be prepared to defend itself, and we are prepared to move in the direction of helping it.

President Kennedy expressed the view that Pakistan has always been interested in U.S. aid as a way of balancing its power not against Russia or China, but against India. We have an interest in Pakistan and in giving it assistance for several reasons, including our ties with SEATO and CENTO and some items of sensitive importance. The Secretary added that it is possible to think that Pakistan looks on its Chinese relations primarily as a factor of its relations with India.

Mrs. Menon asked whether the U.S. had had advance knowledge of the Pakistani decision to sign a border agreement with Communist China. The Secretary responded that we had known something about it ahead of time and had told the Indians. But he could not say there was advance consultation in the usual way between allies. Mrs. Menon observed that the Indonesian Foreign Minister had said he had been told by the Chinese Communists that their only interest in Ladakh was to keep the U.S. from getting a base in the Gilgit region. Both the President and the Secretary reassured her, should there be any possible doubt in her mind, that the U.S. has no interest whatsoever in such an arrangement.

The President noted that the only check he could see against a fresh Chinese attack was the prospect that it would spark a major conflict. This was the effect of the prompt American aid given last fall and this explains the importance of working out training programs for air defense now. The greater the evidence of U.S. interest, it would seem the more restrained the Chinese Communists will be. Then, in time, India could build its own defenses.

President Kennedy asked what would be the effect on India when the Chinese exploded a nuclear bomb. Dr. Radhakrishnan said that until now India had said it does not want to produce a nuclear bomb. He does not think India's policy would change. However, Dr. Bhabha has said that if India should want the bomb it could get it within twelve months. Of course, if China should explode the bomb the general fear of China would doubtless increase.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Subjects, Radhakrishnan Visit. Secret. Drafted by Talbot and approved in S on June 18 and by the White House on June 20. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House.

1 Radhakrishnan made a State visit to the United States June 2-11. He spent June 2 in Williamsburg, Virginia, and visited Washington June 3-5. After leaving Washington, he traveled to Philadelphia, Cape Canaveral, Florida, Denver, Los Angeles, St. Louis, and New York before returning to India.

305. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 305. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, June 18, 1963, 6:55 p.m.

4364. After his return to New Delhi we know Ambassador plans to review his visit to US with Nehru. We assume he will wish to describe climate here regarding military assistance and the progress which has been made during the visits of Bhoothalingam team, TTK, and President Radhakrishnan, details of which already familiar to Ambassador. It would be desirable, however, to reflect theme we have developed during these visits, i.e., we are determined to assist India to build her defenses but we do have problems. In particular, manner in which India handles its relations with Pakistan will have much to do with extent, type, and pace our assistance.

We are somewhat concerned that members of Radhakrishnan party may return to India with impression most of heat from US on Kashmir is off. Lack of movement on our mediation proposal may also have created this impression within the GOI. We hope Ambassador will use occasion of describing mood of Washington to make it clear we continue attach great importance to resolution Kashmir problem and to getting mediation started; we will be in touch with Indians soon on this.

Most important word Ambassador will have for Nehru will probably concern military assistance. Ambassador authorized to convey following subject to appropriation of funds and conclusion of implementing arrangements which will permit obligation of funds in fiscal year 1964: (1) We are working out a proposal with the British for joint training exercises with the Indian Air Force. We will be discussing this with the GOI soon.

(2) We have made decisions on several items of military aid on which we gave general undertakings to T.T. Krishnamachari. We will, therefore, be making arrangements with the GOI for the following types and amounts of assistance: Additional Air Transport Support—$2.7 million

Road Construction Assistance—$5.6 million

Training for Army and Air Force—$4.7 million

Air Force Communications System—$8.0 million

Radar and Associated Communications—$8.1 million

In presenting the last two items, you should make clear that these plans for installing permanent radar include immediate training of Indians and are responsive to TTK/Desai indications that air defense arrangement should include such measures as part of package. At same time, you should stress that communications project, which will be discussed fully with IAF, goes well beyond limited purpose of air defense and provides comprehensive and lasting solution to IAF communication and command problem. USMSMI should discuss with IAF questions of timing, rehab, etc. on radars.

(3) We have also made initial decision on defense production. We will provide India with two production lines of St. Louis Ordnance Plant. The cost to the US of providing this equipment to India is $2 million although its original cost was $5.6 million and its reproduction cost would probably be $7-8 million.

(4) In addition to the above firm commitments, USMSMI will initiate discussions immediately on additional projects which we view as next priorities and on which we wish get Indian views both generally and in detail. We believe we will be able to fund these, tho possibly not till fall, but cannot commit ourselves categorically and in any event wish Indian views before making final lists. Projects are: Engineer Equip. for Corps Troops—$425,902

Completing Equip. for two “Nassau” Corps and Supporting Forces—$3,721,624

Modernizing two Mountain Divisions—$11,250,888

Weapons Systems Support—$2,490,000

Air Ground Control Radios—$366,030

Ground Control Approach Radars—$1,078,999

(5) After appropriations process is completed next fall (probably October) we will be prepared to discuss additional items. FYI. Specific projects in list1 passed Amb in Washington not now authorized for discussion. End FYI.

During course of presentation Ambassador should convey impression that items in numbered paras one through three represent major decisions and not merely minor installment on FY 1964 MAP, and that final decisions on numbered para four will mean greatest part of FY 1964 program then committed. As to force levels, you may of course note that numbered para four involves possible extension of assistance base by two mountain divisions, but you should continue to keep clear distinction between the 16-division force goal we are prepared to accept as reasonable basis for judging Indian defense production priorities, and the lesser number of divisions we are now supporting through end items. It might also be useful to describe how appropriations process makes step by step procedure in military assistance necessary.

As to dollar values, presentation should avoid dollar figures, and say that full detail of actual items will be provided through USMSMI. If Indians ask what dollar values are, you may give general orders of magnitude of actual MAP costs by project, and may also point out that many items (radar, production line) in fact worth far more than costed at. You should urge Indians not to think too much in dollar terms, and in any case not to publicize dollar figures but rather substance of items. This follows our normal practice in MAP (Nassau an exception we don't wish to repeat), and is well justified by reason of security. You should also mention any release of figures, especially if exaggerated, would complicate Pakistan problem and certainly not help matters in Congress.2

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-INDIA. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider and William Bundy; cleared with L, BNA, AID, and by Harriman and Komer; and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Karachi, London, Ottawa, and Canberra.

1 Not found.

2 Galbraith met with M.J. Desai on June 20 and conveyed the substance of the military aid program outlined in telegram 4364. In doing so, he indicated that, while not laying down conditions for the aid, the United States expected that India would recognize the sensitivity of the issue in the Congress and in Karachi. Accordingly, Galbraith requested that India pursue a conciliatory policy toward Pakistan, support the United States in opposing Chinese aggression elsewhere in Asia, and work with U.S. officials on planning and procurement to improve the Indian Army. Desai expressed understanding of the first request and agreement with the other two. (Telegram 5019 from New Delhi, June 22; Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-INDIA)

306. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 306. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, June 19, 1963.

Despite my parochial viewpoint, I see an increasingly strong case for maintaining a small task force in the India Ocean. This perennial Navy request has been pooh-poohed in the past largely because of fears that it would grow like Topsy into a whole Indian Ocean fleet and involve expensive new bases. But a less ambitious project might be quite useful, especially if the Navy could settle for a protected anchorage or use of UK bases.

It is simple fact that our greatest lack of conventional deterrent power lies along the broad arc from Suez to Singapore. While our forces in the Europe/Mediterranean and Far East areas might even be termed excessive, the reverse is true in the area from the Red Sea to the Bay of Bengal, which also happens to be the farthest away from the US (thus complicating our problem of strategic lift). And we can't even fit our big carriers through Suez.

We have traditionally left the defense of this region to the British, yet their strength is waning at a time when we face a potential show of force or actual combat needs ranging from Saudi Arabia to the Persian Gulf and Iran through India and Burma to Malaysia. Mobile, sea-based, air power could be a real asset to us here, e.g. in carrier demonstrations like the one we almost ran in the Bay of Bengal during the Chinese attack last fall. It would also minimize the need for expensive on-shore base rights, which would be politically difficult to obtain.

What also makes an Indian Ocean force more feasible is that as we deploy Polaris to Atlantic and Mediterranean waters, the need for substantial carrier air is reduced. Given our substantial fixed investment in the carriers, deploying a few of them to where we are weakest might make sense. It would give quite a fillip to the Shah, Faysal, Ayub, Nehru and others at the least and lend more credibility to our statements we could support them effectively if the need arose.

In sum, if we want to beef up our capabilities in the Indian Ocean/Persian Gulf/Red Sea area, a carrier force with conventional fire power (which I understand could reach far enough inland to cover most threatened frontiers) might be a good way to buy new flexibility by redeploying assets we've already got.

R.W. Komer1

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Robert W. Komer 6/63-11/63. Secret. The source text is a copy that Komer sent to Bundy with a handwritten note which reads: “Mac—I put my ideas here down in writing at Taz Shepard's request. Am giving original to him, in case he and you agree to suggest hitting Macmillan for an anchorage at Diego Suarez.”

1 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

307. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 307. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, July 10, 1963, 8 p.m.

143. Embtels 1351 and 136.2

In order that Department may have exact final text of signed note which was delivered to MEA July 9, it is quoted below in full:

Begin Text. New Delhi, July 9, 1963. Number 15

Excellency:

I have the honor to refer to the agreement between our two Governments effected by an exchange of notes signed at Washington November 14, 1962,3 regarding assistance to the Government of India for the purpose of defense against the outright Chinese aggression directed from Peiping against India and the request by the Government of India for assistance under that agreement to strengthen India's defenses against possible air attack on the Delhi and Calcutta areas. I further have the honor to propose the following understandings with respect to this request: 1. The United States Government will send to India two mobile radar installations, with related communications equipment. Title to these installations will be retained by the United States and they would be subject to possible removal in the event of urgent need elsewhere. These installations will be located in the Delhi and Calcutta areas and will be manned by United States military personnel. Properly trained Indian technicians would, as mutually agreed, progressively undertake responsibilities in the operation and maintenance of these installations.

2. The United States Government is prepared, subject to the availability of funds, to initiate at an early time the training of Indian technicians in the operation and maintenance of mobile and fixed radar installations and related communications equipment. The Government of India will undertake to make available Indian personnel for this training. Such training, if funds are available, could be continued until the end of the United States fiscal year 1964 at which time the United States Government would give sympathetic consideration to a request by the Government of India for additional training assistance.

3. The United States Government is prepared, subject to the availability of funds, to deliver to the Government of India within a period of 12 to 18 months from the entry into force of the present agreement the equipment for 6 permanent radar installations, again with related communications equipment, for air defense in the western and eastern sectors of India centered on Delhi and Calcutta. These installations will be designed to replace the mobile installations described in Paragraph One above.

4. The United States Government will join the Indian Air Force in such intermittent peacetime training exercises as may be mutually agreed. Such exercises shall be designed to improve the effectiveness of India's air defenses against bombing attacks on the Delhi and Calcutta areas. In connection with such mutually agreed exercises, the United States would be prepared to send fighter aircraft manned by United States military personnel to India on a temporary basis. It is understood that during periods of joint training exercises, over-all responsibility for the air defense of India will continue to remain vested in the appropriate India commander. It is the understanding of the Government of the United States that the United Kingdom has indicated its willingness to participate in such joint training exercises.

5. The United States Government will consult with the Government of India, in the event of a Chinese Communist attack on India, regarding possible United States assistance in strengthening India's air defenses.

6. Any assistance furnished by the United States Government under the present agreement shall be subject to the agreement effected by an exchange of notes signed at Washington on November 14, 1962. The financial terms agreed or to be agreed between the United States Government and the Government of India for military assistance furnished pursuant to the above mentioned agreement of November 14, 1962, shall apply to assistance furnished under Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the present agreement. The Government of India will accord personnel sent by the Government of the United States to India pursuant to the terms of this understanding the same treatment accorded members of the United States military supply mission in India. The Government of India will provide the necessary local construction, including accommodations for United States military personnel, for these projects.

If the foregoing understandings are acceptable to your Government, this note and Your Excellency's reply concurring therein shall constitute an agreement between our two Governments which shall enter into force on the date of your reply.

/S/ John Kenneth Galbraith.

His Excellency.

Jawaharlal Nehru, Prime Minister of India.

End Text.

Galbraith

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 INDIA. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Canberra, and Karachi.

1 In telegram 135 from New Delhi, July 9, Galbraith reported that he had presented the air defense proposals to M.J. Desai that morning. The proposals were put forward in the diplomatic note quoted in telegram 143. The note was accompanied by a letter from Galbraith to Nehru, dated July 9, the text of which was agreed with the British Government in advance. (Ibid.) The text of the July 9 letter was transmitted to Washington as an attachment to airgram A-106 from New Delhi, July 20. The letter stated that the United States and the United Kingdom were prepared to assist in strengthening India's defenses against possible Chinese air attacks. To that end, the two governments were prepared to authorize occasional visits by fighter squadrons of their respective air forces, to join in training exercises with the Indian Air Force. (Ibid., DEF 1-4 INDIA)

2 Telegram 136 from New Delhi, July 9, transmitted the text of a talking paper containing the points made orally by Galbraith in presenting the two documents to Desai that constituted the air defense proposals. (Ibid., DEF 19 INDIA)

3 See Document 197.

308. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 308. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, July 11, 1963, 2:35 p.m.

80. Following summary for information only and contents should not be disclosed to foreign officials. It is uncleared and subject to amendment upon review.

Ambassador Ahmed made farewell call on President July 9. Ahmed initiated conversation by covering now familiar territory. He remarked that situation on subcontinent gloomy verging on tragic. GOP acknowledged US was trying hard resolve Kashmir problem and undoubtedly had given consideration to Ayub's view that military aid to India be withheld until Kashmir and other issues settled. However, US, at time when Chicom threat receding, had now decided move beyond emergency aid and Nassau without taking into account recalcitrance of India on Kashmir. Long term aid imperils Pak security and by not tying this aid to resolution Kashmir, US had in effect written off Kashmir settlement.

Ahmed observed that he is not clear how US views future of subcontinent. US officials admitted security subcontinent depends on rapprochement India and Pakistan. On other hand same officials have said we cannot let Kashmir settlement determine our policies. In his view, he said, US policy inconsistent. There can be no security without rapprochement; yet rapprochement impossible without Kashmir settlement.

President commented that US has been taking Pak interests into account; we have very definitely not been indifferent to Pak concerns. Our aid to India was far less than India desired; we have not given India planes and have instead arranged air defense exercises which will be much easier for Pakistan. Also, we are deeply involved in trying help resolve Kashmir; this effort is in Pak interests. Ambassador Galbraith had practically worn out his welcome in New Delhi by his pressure on Indians on Kashmir. Trouble is that Pakistan and India still far apart on Kashmir and this compounds our difficulties. Withholding aid to India, in our view, is not way to get settlement; it would not work just as we realized year or more ago that this type of pressure would not have caused Pakistan settle its problems with Afghanistan. Contrary to what Ambassador said, US believes Chicom threat, existing and potential, is still great. Collapse of India is neither in US nor Pak interests. Chicoms must be contained throughout Asia. Yet, the President continued, Paks display little appreciation of this primary concern of ours and instead apparently feel impelled move towards Chicoms and away from us because Pak concern about India. In last few months Pak press has exceeded all but Chicom in its attacks against us. One would gather from Pak press, which is closer to GOP than ours to USG, that US was enemy number one.

Ahmed replied that US should not believe Paks are moving toward Chicoms. GOP, of course, wishes avoid antagonizing China, particularly with hostile USSR and India as neighbors, but this not same as drawing closer to Chicoms. GOP-Chicom border settlement was in US interest, as well; Paks had defused potentially dangerous situation. Air link with Communist China is purely commercial deal forced on Paks by UK denial of rights in Hong Kong. With respect Pak press, Ahmed remarked that it is problem for GOP as well; US should realize that attacks against US are, in fact, aimed as much at President Ayub who responsible for policy of close association with West. When reading Pak press US must realize Pakistan has suffered severe blows in recent months: arms aid to India, failure of bilateral talks on Kashmir, and refusal of US and others support Tarbela.

In conclusion President said he hoped that Ambassador in his new position would bear in mind that US has one basic interest—prevention of control over Europe by USSR or Asia by Chicoms. Pakistan should understand this outlook since it accepted responsibilities of alliance with us. We believe alliance has been of real benefit to Pakistan, as it has been for us. We value close alliance relationship. On our part, further military aid to India will be given with clear eye to Pak interests. We realize Paks have bone deep feeling about India. There are currently some divergencies in our immediate interests; let us work hard together in reducing abrasive effects these differences.1

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Naas, cleared by Komer, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

1 Printed from a copy that has no signature.

309. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 309. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, July 13, 1963, 3:51 p.m.

99. Joint State-Defense-AID. We are now giving priority consideration to possible three-year MAP commitment ($143.9 million) for Pakistan. CHMAAG Pakistan has probably discussed preliminary details since his return Karachi. In presenting program we would make clear arms supply is in context of a continuing alliance relationship and would also make point continued military aid conditional on Congressional appropriations which in turn will be affected by Pak-Chicom relationships. In bilateral relationship with Pakistan, we see several advantages as well as some potential disadvantages in changing from present year-to-year practice. We would appreciate your views and recommendations on substance and timing at earliest convenience.

Possible Advantages

1. In present strained political climate US-Pak relations three-year program may be important ingredient in slowing down further deterioration. GOP leadership would have concrete evidence that Pakistan remains high priority in US policy and that US has confidence GOP's continued adherence to alliance relationship. In particular, top military officers who influence Ayub would, perhaps, be somewhat less concerned by moderate program for India.

2. US would be in better position dissuade Paks from seeking nonessential or incompatible equipment from third countries if Paks had long-range commitment.

3. Even if we continued on year-to-year basis we would probably have to face problem this year of discussing replacement F-86F's. GOP would justifiably be very concerned if we continued avoid discussing this aspect our general commitment to modernize; supersonics are major prestige factor and serve as benchmark for GOP when viewing US military policy in area. Three-year program providing two additional squadrons (total 24) F-104A/B's with first increment delivered in mid-1965, permits us handle supersonic problem with greater ease and effect.

4. Impact of our current program probably somewhat vitiated by its piecemeal nature. Three-year program would also help counterbalance some unfavorable aspects our future plans, e.g., decision not to provide destroyers, and possible provision fewer M-1 rifles.

5. On purely military terms, integrated multi-year program presents both US and Pakistan with fewer administrative and logistic problems and permits more rational military planning.

Potential Disadvantages

1. Three-year program could serve as beginning point for negotiations, with Paks seeking additional materiel as part over-all package. This particularly true in light open-ended nature of our annual India program. (Could we in fact expect 3-year program would remain firm ceiling?) Indeed, GOP might view three-year proposal as evidence that its pressure of last few months had forced us make this conciliatory effort thereby encouraging GOP continue these tactics.

2. Three-year program would be “all eggs in one basket” and psychological impact might rapidly lose force.

3. Multi-year program would have tendency tie our hands in presently fluid situation regarding Pak intentions toward Chicoms and USSR; for this or other reasons we might wish change content program within three-year period. Would be harder to retreat from firm commitment than present open-end commitment.

4. Since program does not represent increase our arms aid beyond Aide-Memoire commitments, Pakistan leadership might conclude we were not very forthcoming, were perhaps trying place low ceiling on Pakistan program, and were essentially motivated by desire gain elbow room in dealing with India.1

For New Delhi

Since our military aid program to Pakistan is old hat now in India, three-year program would appear, with probable exception of F-104's (as you know Paks already have 12 F-104's), cause relatively few problems. Three-year program would involve no greater expenditures than would three one-year programs. Ambassador's recent conversations with M.J. Desai, B.K. Nehru, and TTK indicate some Indian leaders now have more sophisticated understanding of contribution our aid to Pakistan makes to stability and security of subcontinent.

Provision of additional supersonics to GOP would, of course, create some problems. In present context Indo-US relations these may relate more to prestige factor and domestic political repercussions than any actual fear of Pakistan. Additionally, Indians would probably consider we were guilty of reverse logic. In their view India has immediate need for supersonics and we have refused; Pakistan has no urgent problem, is in fact courting Chicoms against whose threat we are supposedly allied, and yet we are giving F-104's. Our answer to this argument would be that our alliance relationship with Pakistan is still valid, and its purposes place certain requirements on both Pakistan and the US which must be fulfilled in large interest of Free World. However F-104's would not be scheduled for delivery before mid-1965. Within next one-two years we and UK will need to work out ways of meeting Indian requirement for aircraft; decision would possibly cause less reaction in Pakistan if Paks had prior intimation their needs being met.

Would appreciate your views.2

For Bonn, London.

Above info strictly FYI.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-PAK. Secret. Drafted by Naas and Laise; cleared with NR, BNA, GER, G/PM, DOD/ISA, and AID; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to New Delhi and repeated to Bonn, London, and CINCEUR.

1 In telegram 243 from Karachi, July 31, the Embassy responded that the proposals contained in telegram 99 represented a positive step forward in putting the military assistance program for Pakistan on an orderly basis, and that a helpful impact upon U.S. relations with Pakistan could be expected as a result. (Ibid.)

2 On July 30, Bowles, who replaced Galbraith as Ambassador to India on July 19, warned that the proposed military assistance program would have a “highly unfavorable” effect upon U.S. relations with India. He argued that a decision to provide more advanced weaponry to Pakistan at the same time that such weapons were being refused to India constituted a decision of pivotal political importance, and he urged that it be reconsidered. (Telegram 476 from New Delhi, July 30; ibid.)

310. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 310. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, July 16, 1963, 3 p.m.

246. Rangoon for Ambassador Bowles Only. Embtel 245.1 Herewith full text of FonSec Desai's letter to me:

Begin text

[This letter has not been declassified by the Indian Government.]

Timmons

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 7/16/63-7/19/63. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and Rangoon.

1 In telegram 245 from New Delhi, July 16, Timmons reported that he had received a letter from M.J. Desai indicating that the Indian Government had decided to proceed with the proposed air defense arrangements. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1-4 INDIA)

311. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 311. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, July 17, 1963.

McGB:

I hear that USIB will press Special Group tomorrow to review our Pak/Indian policy, and at least give more MAP to Paks, for obvious reasons. USIB naturally runs perennially scared, but I find it hard to judge how much Paks running power play on us vs. how much real trouble is ahead.

I too feel we should be more active in both reassuring Paks and reminding them of how much they'd lose if they went too far. But I doubt whether another Iranian style panic offer of more MAP is the solution. Paying this blackmail would not be enough to stem the tide, yet get us in a costly ante-raising posture where every time we gave “X” to India Paks would expect “Y.”

Much more interesting is WPB's idea of revealing privately to Paks our 3-year MAP intention, with strong caveat that this not a commitment but assumes continued good alliance relationship. This would do more to reassure Paks we weren't switching to India than anything else. Chief problem is that program includes two squadrons of F-5A's for 1965-68. If this leaked (as it would), it would fire Indian desire for supersonics. But Indians will try to get supersonics anyway sooner or later, if not from us then from Soviets. In fact, F-5's for Paks would help cover giving them to India.

I also feel need for revived high-level dialogue with Paks (McConaughy acts mostly as a mailbox). Perhaps JFK should write Ayub again; we ought to have a public statement too; I got State to whomp one up for today, but I see it got scrubbed.

In sum, I see many ways to handle Paks without being unduly defensive—which would only sharpen Pak appetite. And keep in mind that throughout recent strain on US/Pak relations, they've not raised even a finger about Peshawar.1

Bob K.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 7/63. Secret.

1 A handwritten note by Bundy on the source text next to the last paragraph reads: “OK. 5412 agreed.”

312. Note From the British Embassy to the Department of State 312. Note From the British Embassy to the Department of StateSource

Washington, July 29, 1963.

No. 284

Her Britannic Majesty's Embassy presents its compliments to the Department of State and has the honour, upon the instructions of Her Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom, to communicate the following in reply to the Department's Note of the 25th of April1 proposing discussions by appropriate military and civil representatives of the two Governments about the possible strategic use of certain small islands in the Indian Ocean area.

2. Her Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom agree that the two Governments share a common concern for the effective defence of the whole area against Communist encroachment. In principle, therefore, they welcome the American initiative for exploratory discussions, as a first step, on the understanding that these do not commit either Government in advance to any particular course of action. In principle also Her Majesty's Government agree that high level talks might usefully follow these exploratory exchanges. However, in Her Majesty's Government's view these preliminary discussions should take political and economic as well as purely strategic considerations into account.

Her Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom therefore would be glad to welcome in London United States representatives for preliminary discussions with the aim of clearing our minds as to objectives, and in the light thereof to produce agreed terms of reference for the United Kingdom/United States Military Planning Group, which is already in existence and provides a convenient forum. Her Majesty's Government would be glad to welcome representatives of the American Government at any time but it would be appreciated if a paper could be communicated in advance giving the preliminary views and suggestions of the United States authorities.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15 UK-US. Secret.

1 Document 284.

313. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 313. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, July 30, 1963, 10 p.m.

474. Mediation Proposal. The problem of Kashmir and the timing of the mediation proposal have been much on my mind since I arrived here, and as Department is aware I have been endeavoring to get a more intimate feel for this situation.

Prospect for mediation must be viewed in the light of current developments which in terms of US-Indian relations are now highly colored by uncertainty over VOA agreement, speculation on possible effects of such a reversal on US support for Bokaro, and current Chicom threat with possible Pak support which is now being highly publicized in Delhi press. The atmosphere here is profoundly unsettled, to put it mildly.

Before attempting to inject a mediation proposal into such an environment, we should be clear with regard to our intentions and expectations. The hard core question is this: do we seriously expect within a reasonable time to bring India and Pakistan into meaningful negotiations to resolve their difference over Kashmir, or are we simply playing out to its logical conclusion a theme we initiated several months ago? Put another way, does anyone believe that there are any predispositions on the part of the Indians and Pakistanis to reach a settlement at this time, or indeed to do anything more than attempt to secure a tactical advantage enabling one to embarrass the other?

My conversations with Indians, with country team in New Delhi, and also with my British colleague, plus my own assessment of the possible effectiveness of a mediation proposal from us at this time, lead me to conclude that it would be futile for us to proceed with this venture now. The following factors are relevant: 1. FonSec told me informally on 26th that in his view any mediation proposal made in this highly charged period would hinder the future prospects for a settlement of the Pak problem rather than help them. Although Desai agreed on the value of mediation per se, and stressed that the suggestion had originated with GOI, he pointed out relations with Pakistan had sharply deteriorated since the original proposal as a result of Bhutto's speeches hinting at Sino-Pak mutual defense agreement, and that many sober Indians were now seriously persuaded Paks would join Chicoms should latter renew aggressive action against India. In short, Desai, a reasonable man, was as adamant as Gundevia on this question.

2. Gore-Booth, for whom I have the highest regard, is resigned to playing out our previous theme if this is deemed necessary by his Govt for some tactical reason, though in a frank discussion this morning he emphasized that at this juncture we are probably up against a stone wall.

3. In my opinion US interest would best be served by our reaching the following conclusions: A. If we were unable to force a Kashmir settlement under the relatively improved circumstances of last year, we are even less likely to succeed now.

B. Under the best of circumstances our association with the British on this question gravely undercuts whatever effectiveness we might otherwise have on this issue and our capacity to shape Indian views will be limited until we operate more independently. The depth of suspicion which the GOI feels toward the British Govt in regard to Kashmir is not fully understood.

C. A serious effort to ease the Pak-India conflict must start with the key element of timing, and this is definitely not the moment. Indeed to press forward now is likely to destroy our chances of reaching an agreement on such a proposal later.

4. We must also consider the likely effects of an unsuccessful mediation effort at this time on US attitudes, especially congressional, towards both India and Pakistan. A further demonstration of the inability of these two countries to reach a settlement would damage the image on both, and create even greater difficulties for the Administration in implementing its aid policies.

5. I realize that one argument for pressing the mediation proposal now is the hope that this might dissuade the Paks from another effort to revive the fruitless discussion of Kashmir in the UN. However at best this only postpones the issue as far as the Paks are concerned. It does not move the problem closer to a solution.

Finally may I add that to place me at this stage in the position of whipping a horse which although presently unconscious may be revived with sensitive care is to decrease my effectiveness on other issues on which I may be able to move our interest forward and to jeopardize whatever chance I may have to produce a fresh approach to the Kashmir question at a later date.

Therefore I strongly urge the Department to resist pressures from the UK on this subject and to table plans for mediation until a more propitious moment, when it can be said that both sides are to some extent predisposed seriously to discuss their differences.1

Bowles

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and Karachi.

1 Rusk responded on August 1 with a cable sent personal for Bowles. He indicated that he did not underestimate the difficulties involved in pressing forward with the mediation proposal, and he recognized that circumstances affecting the probable success of the proposal grew less propitious every day. Nonetheless, because Kashmir was the central issue affecting the security of the subcontinent, Rusk concluded that it was a matter of overriding U.S. interest to move ahead with the proposal. (Telegram 275 to New Delhi; ibid.)

314. Summary Record of the 516th Meeting of the National Security Council 314. Summary Record of the 516th Meeting of the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, July 31, 1963, 4:30 p.m.

Chinese Communist Intentions

[Here follows discussion relating to China, India, Korea, Vietnam, Ceylon, and Sino-Soviet relations. The record of this discussion, except for the brief reference to Ceylon, is printed in volume XXII, Document 181.]

The President asked Mr. McCone about the situation in Pakistan, noting that he had read the recent reports about Pak officials refusing to cooperate with us in connection with our reconnaissance bases. Mr. McCone said he was worried about the situation and felt that it was very important for us to do something about it promptly. So far our reconnaissance activity had not been halted, but negotiations for a badly needed expansion of our base structure have been stopped. He noted that criticism in Pakistan of the U.S. has been increasing and he felt that some immediate action, such as sending a high-level representative to talk to President Ayub should be undertaken immediately.

The President responded by saying that we could not leave the Indians to face the Chinese Communists alone, but that the result was a psychotic reaction on the part of the Paks. He did not know whether we should attribute the Pak reaction to any actions on our part. Mr. McCone commented that we got no credit for our efforts to promote assistance to Pakistan by means of an international consortium.

The President suggested that we relate the things Mr. McCone wants from Pakistan to other aspects of our policy toward Pakistan. Mr. Talbot replied that all current efforts were to keep our relations with the Paks from continuing down a slippery slide. As soon as our relations ceased to deteriorate we could then examine our policy on the basis of a stabilized situation. Secretary Rusk added that we had not tied our economic assistance to Mr. McCone's requests because up to the immediate past Mr. McCone had been having no difficulty in getting what he needed from the Paks while we were having problems getting our aid program for Pakistan approved by Congress.

[Here follows discussion unrelated to South Asia.]

Bromley Smith1

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC Meetings, No. 516. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Bromley Smith.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

315. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 315. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, August 8, 1963, 7 p.m.

307. Embtel 274.1

1. I met with President Ayub at Quetta on August 7 as scheduled to discuss trend of US-Pak relations and to put forward our proposals for Under Secretary Ball's visit to Pakistan and for Kashmir mediation. (Latter reported separately.) MEA Director General Shahi and Sneider also present. Ayub confined to bed due fever which had forced him cancel all his public engagements for past 24 hours. Despite illness he was most cordial and prolonged interview for 45 minutes to amplify his own concern over current drift in relations. We had fuller and more useful exchange than I had anticipated under circumstances. His warm response to President's proposal for visit by Mr. Ball likewise reflected this deep concern with recent developments.

2. I opened meeting by setting forth as instructed Deptel 2192 the President's serious concern with deterioration in our relations and his decision send Mr. Ball along with senior military official to Pakistan to examine full range of US-Pakistan problems in extended conversations with Ayub in effort place our alliance on more solid basis. As reported Embtel 295,3 Ayub quickly warmed to proposed visit and after reviewing his schedule suggested dates August 19-22 or from August 26 since he committed to Lahore visit August 23-25. He particularly asked that I convey his personal gratitude to the President for initiative.

3. In underscoring our concern with current drift in US-Pak relations, I made point as instructed that while we welcomed assurances given us by Bhutto on non-existence of special Sino-Pak ties or understandings, we wanted to make clear earnest US desire to avoid being forced to take unpalatable choice between our wish to continue support Pakistan and our obligation to discharge global responsibilities. I told the President he knew that nothing could be allowed to prevent us from meeting our obligations to the Free World as we saw them. The meeting of this commitment was in the ultimate essential interest of Pakistan. During conversation I took other opportunities to highlight our concern pointing out Pakistan's immediate national interests should be in line with our broad policy. I pointed out inevitable adverse reaction in US as was already happening to some extent if it appeared Pakistan working with enemy of US and serious view we must take of any actions Pakistan might be tempted to take which would seek to limit our freedom to take action necessary for global security. I also stressed our intention back up Indian resolve to keep Chicoms and their influence out of Indian territory, regardless of Pak views. This did not mean we necessarily endorsed Indian policies, but that extension of Chinese influence over India would be an unacceptable threat to all free interests including those of Pakistan.

4. Gist of Ayub's response was contained in message he asked me to convey to President that he too was greatly concerned about current developments but he continued to be convinced Pakistan needed US and that US needs and will need Pakistan more and more as time goes on. He felt it would be a great misfortune if we drifted apart through “force of circumstances.” He reaffirmed that last thing Pakistan wanted was to get militarily or politically involved with Communist China, “unless Pakistan is forced to the wall.” Nevertheless, he elaborated and reiterated this thesis; Ayub made clear there is risk of this eventuality coming as result of so far unallayed Pakistani fears that its security will be irretrievably undermined by continuing Indian military build-up. Ayub urged we do not allow situation to develop where Pakistan driven involuntarily to “do something not acceptable” to US.

5. Ayub reiterated and expanded on this thesis throughout our conversation, making following points: A. Not only does Pakistan need US but US will need Pakistan as ally on subcontinent in future, since Ayub is convinced of prospect of increasing close ties with India and USSR and gradual elimination of present favorable US position in India. He foresees Indian-Soviet ties growing as result psychological—not ideological—factors, particularly many years of anti-Western indoctrination of Indian public which makes ties with US difficult to justify, and as a result greater sense of security gained by India against Chicoms if USSR underwrites its security. Ayub sees US links with India hindered by latter's non-alignment policy which associated with anti-West spirit and mutual Indian and Soviet adherence to “liberation” theme—which essentially liberation from Western influence. Thus aid and influence of USSR, which is in part an Asiatic power, are easier for Indians. Ayub pointed to recent Indian repudiation of VOA transmitter agreement as substantiation his point about Indian non-receptivity to new role for US. (In this context, Ayub incidentially castigated neutralism as “threadbare” policy with nothing to it.)

B. Ayub indicated he was under no illusions about Chicom motives in cultivating Paks. He not only reaffirmed Bhutto's assurances that there is no Sino-Pak mutual defense arrangement but questioned Bhutto's statement to Assembly on grounds that, if India-Pakistan engaged in war, China would act only in its own, not Pak, interests since India and China vying for dominance of Asia. Paks could not control Chicom reaction and Chicoms do not need Pak encouragement to resist anything which involves expansion of Indian influence. (I challenged Ayub on Indian ambitions for all Asian dominance but this is unshakable element of Ayub credo.) When I pointed to magnitude Sino-Soviet rift and possible implications of extension of their contest to subcontinent, Ayub acknowledged seriousness of rift more explicitly than in past, or in earlier part of this conversation but interestingly commented Chinese not cultivating Pakistan much and not making any gestures of serious type. He still believes two great communist partners could and probably would close ranks when all chips down.

C. Ayub throughout stressed reality and justness of Pakistan fear of threat to own security as result buildup of Indian forces. Ayub cited in this connection arms and assistance to ordnance factories being supplied not only by US but by UK, Germany, USSR and others. He reiterated his well-known lack of trust in India, which views Pakistan as enemy and he cited, as symptom of inner Indian animosity, its position on Kashmir which has no overriding economic, political or symbolic importance to India. Pak public much alarmed by Indian military buildup and in this inflamed condition vulnerable to irrational impulse to do all sorts of things which not reasonable.

D. Ayub urged that situation not be allowed to develop where Pakistan driven to this point, since it has great warmth for US. I pointed out US had given assurances to Pakistan against Indian threat, which stood as a protection. Ayub felt these were not sufficient and Pakistan needed confidence it could with its own forces “hold off” Indians. He broached then US support for a Pak “containing force” sufficient to hold off communist or Indian threat. Strength of such force would be worked out by military. Ayub stressed increased Pak forces would not only reassure Pak public and stem current adverse drift in US-Pak relations but serve as “stand-by” force for our common use in other areas.

6. Main theme on each side came out again at end of meeting when Ayub solemnly enjoined me on his behalf to urge President “not to drive us to the wall” and I adjured him not to take any action which would have the unnatural effect of putting Pakistan's immediate interests out of line with US discharge of its regional obligations. Ayub manifestly understood and did not challenge our right or need to act on this basis if this painful point were ever reached. Clearly he hopes we will never have to make such a choice. He also hopes that US recognizes full scope of his deep concern about Pak security and the inevitable primacy of this factor in ultimate Pak foreign policy decisions.

McConaughy

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/BALL. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and New Delhi.

1 In telegram 274 from Karachi, August 3, McConaughy reported that he had an appointment to see Ayub in Quetta on August 7. (Ibid., POL PAK-US)

2 Telegram 219 to Karachi, August 5, also sent to New Delhi as telegram 300, informed McConaughy and Bowles of President Kennedy's decision to send Ball to the subcontinent for a series of in-depth discussions with Ayub and Nehru. The two Ambassadors were instructed to discuss Ball's proposed visit with Ayub and Nehru, and consult about the timing for the visit. (Ibid., POL 7 US/BALL) According to an August 6 telephone conversation between Ball and McGeorge Bundy, Bowles objected, via a “private wire,” to Ball's visit to India. He felt that it would hurt his prestige in India if his successor as Under Secretary turned up in New Delhi shortly after his arrival. (Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Subjects, Pakistan, 1961-1963) Accordingly, the Indian portion of the Ball trip was cancelled.

3 Dated August 7. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/BALL)

316. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 316. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, August 9, 1963.

We're heading for a tricky confrontation with Ayub, in an attempt to bring him around to reality before it's too late. George Ball is to make the hard sell, but several issues need to be sorted out first. We hope to discuss these with you at 5 p.m. Monday.

Ayub's latest talk with McConaughy (Karachi 307 attached)1 suggests that he sees Ball's trip as showing nervousness on our part and may think his pressure tactics on us are working. We'll have to disabuse him on this score, but his line to McConaughy shows how hard this will be.

After letting us think it was all squared away, the Paks have started stalling on our crucial Peshawar expansion. The intelligence people are all worked up, and seem to favor a simple trade with Ayub—more supersonics (as part of 3-year MAP offer) for Peshawar acreage. State feels, and I quite agree, that to succumb to such blackmail would be folly. Instead we must get across to Ayub that if he doesn't play ball with us, our whole aid program will be at risk.

Ball inclines toward doubting that we should offer anything to the Paks just now. Let's wait and see instead how they come around under our pressure. Harriman argues that we should tell Ayub flatly he can't hope to defend himself against a much larger India, and that China can't supply him, so that his only recourse is to us. But Averell thinks we should lend credibility to our assurances by telling Ayub we'll put some carriers in the Indian Ocean or by doing some joint planning with the Paks.

Other issues are how hard to keep pushing Kashmir mediation, and how to handle India if we offer the Paks more supersonics.

Preliminary State/Defense thinking is in attached position paper,2 but many of us feel that the tone is too soft to move Ayub, while there are too many goodies offered to make the tough talk believable. Ayub is trying a hard line on us, while letting his own domestic situation get out of control. Unless we jar him out of these tactics, he'll lose and so will we.

Latest word is that Ayub may not be available till later than the 20th, which will give us more time to devise our pitch.

R.W. Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 8/1/63-8/14/63. Secret. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Taken from Pres. weekend reading dtd 8/9/63.”

1 Document 315.

2 Entitled “Scope Paper for Mr. Ball's Mission to Pakistan;” not printed.

317. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy 317. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President KennedySource

New Delhi, August 11, 1963.

Dear Mr. President, Ambassador Chester Bowles and the U.K. High Commissioner Sir Paul Gore-Booth jointly handed over for the consideration of the Government of India a draft joint communique to our Foreign Secretary on the evening of the 7th.1 It is proposed that this joint communique, stating that we have agreed to seek the services of a mutually acceptable mediator to reach a settlement of the differences between India and Pakistan, should be issued by President Ayub Khan and myself. They said that a similar document was being handed over by their counterparts to the Pakistan Foreign Office at the same time.2

You have been in touch with developments in Pakistan during the last few months and must have seen statements made by responsible members of the Pakistan Government which are not only rabidly anti-Indian and aggressive, but which hold out threats of acting in concert with China against India. We do not know how Pakistan authorities will react to this U.K.-U.S. joint proposal, but we cannot understand how one can completely ignore the militant and aggressive attitude of Pakistan and proceed to make proposals for a mediatory effort for the consideration of the two Governments as if nothing had happened. Any move for a mediatory effort of this kind must have essential pre-requisite of a peaceful climate between the two countries. When there is absolutely no desire of any kind on one side to consider a peaceful approach and there is actual talk of war, a move like this towards peaceful processes cannot succeed merely because it is based on a delicately balanced and carefully drafted communique. As a matter of fact, hurried or forced move of this sort, in total disregard of the prevailing atmosphere and without the essential preliminary of preparation of the right climate between the two countries, would make things worse.

We are quite clear that the Chinese are making a bid for leadership not only in Asia but of the Communist world and this too only as a first step in their bid for world leadership. Chinese hostility to the U.S.A. and to the Western countries generally has been known for a long time and they have been trying to isolate the U.S.A. while offering attractive trade terms to other Western countries. The Chinese had hoped that the U.S.S.R. will play their game and assist in Chinese internal consolidation and industrialisation while at the same time containing the U.S.A. and Western countries generally. This hope did not materialise and internal differences which first arose in 1957 have now come out in the open. Though they have assumed the form of ideological differences, it is obvious that fundamental national interests are involved in these Sino-Soviet differences.

The latest Chinese campaign against the recent Test Ban Treaty is yet another illustration of their grand design. They detest any accommodation or understanding between the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. or any easing of international tensions which comes in the way of their Asian and global ambition.

The Chinese want people in Afro-Asian and Latin American countries to adopt militant, aggressive and revolutionary attitudes and are against democratic evolutionary processes under stable regimes. They have been exploiting local quarrels between the countries in various regions all over the world to maintain an atmosphere of tension and conflict. In Asia, which is their first target and where India is the chief obstacle, they are playing very heavily with Pakistan against India and also playing to the extent possible with Indonesia against the other countries in South East Asia.

So far as India is concerned, the Chinese aim is not acquisition of territory in the border dispute. The border dispute raised by China formally for the first time towards the end of 1959 has come in as a handy excuse, but the real aim is to force on India a political settlement which will involve India re-orienting its policies to suit the pattern of Chinese global policies. Failing this, China would like to put all possible pressures on the Indian Government and cause internal disintegration as China regards India as the main obstacle in its plans of domination over Asia, because its democratic patterns of internal policy and its friendly and peaceful external policy have been accepted and welcomed by most of the countries of the world.

In the context of the Chinese global and local aims and the Chinese pressure on our borders, the joint mediatory move, in the current climate of Indo-Pakistan relations, will actually hinder our defence efforts against the Chinese threat. We have to devote all our energies to building up an adequate defence potential so that we do not have to negotiate with them from weakness or to submit to a political settlement of their dictation. We have, at the same time, to see that our development plans go ahead and we do not lose by back door what we are trying to save by protecting the front door. Your Government have been helping us in both these tasks handsomely and generously, but there is a great deal more to be done yet. Above all care has to be taken to see that the people in India who are making a monumental effort to meet the crisis they are facing are not discouraged or disheartened in any way. The draft joint communique of the type given to us for consideration by Ambassador Chester Bowles and High Commissioner Sir Paul Gore-Booth is not only not practical politics in the context of Pakistan's current attitudes, but would only result in irritating the people in India and in dampening their ardour and keenness to face the Chinese threat.

As I have said repeatedly, we want friendly and cooperative relations with Pakistan and we would like to do whatever we can to reach this objective by exploring all possible avenues of settling our differences with Pakistan in a peaceful manner. Last May when Secretary of State Dean Rusk was here, we also suggested the quiet good offices of an eminent person acceptable to both parties to help in resolving all our differences. Since then much has happened and Pakistan is now practically lined up with China. Mere pushing ahead of institutional arrangements for a mediatory effort, regardless of the current climate, is no solution and might even make the situation worse. The necessary preparatory work by quiet diplomacy to get the appropriate atmosphere has to be put in first. We have, therefore, to face facts and wait and work for a better climate.

I am making a statement in Parliament on 13th August on the recent Indo-Pakistan Minister-level talks and on Indo-Pakistan relations. I am asking Ambassador B.K. Nehru to give you, for your advance information, a copy of the statement along with this message.

With kind regards,

Yours sincerely,

Jawaharlal Nehru3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 4/1/63-8/31/63. No classification marking.

1 Bowles reported on this demarche in telegram 608 from New Delhi, August 8. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK)

2 McConaughy reported on August 8 that he had presented the joint U.S.-U.K. mediation proposal to Ayub on August 7, and that U.K. High Commissioner Sir Morrice James was presenting it to the Foreign Ministry on August 8. (Telegram 308 from Karachi; ibid.)

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Nehru signed the original.

318. Memorandum for the Record 318. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, August 12, 1963, 5 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Department of State

Secretary Rusk

Undersecretary Ball

Governor Harriman

Asst. Secretary Talbot

Administrator Bell, AID

Turner Cameron, NEA

Department of Defense

William Bundy

Brig. General Charles Johnson

CIA

John McCone, Director

James Critchfield

White House

McG. Bundy

R.W. Komer

Meeting with the President on Pakistan

Secretary Ball described his mission as being to tell Ayub where we are going and to find out where he is going. The core of the problem is that Ayub can't defend himself against India so has to rely on us. Our problem is to reassure him that our commitment to defend him is credible. The question is what we can do to make our assurances more credible. Ball suggested we might talk about a possible Indian Ocean carrier task force, joint exercises, extending planned airlift demonstrations through Turkey to Pakistan, etc. He wasn't talking of joint planning—this would create real problems with India—but of things we could do short of this. We had given Ayub materiel; what was lacking was evidence we would back him if attacked.

Bill Bundy explained some of the complications involved, e.g. it took three carriers to keep one on station. There was also the problem of where to base them in the area. Joint exercises might be feasible, and we had earlier offered one to Ayub. It might also be possible to demonstrate our airlift capability, though probably with a smaller unit than we were planning to send to Turkey. The President said we should “talk with McNamara“ before mentioning any carrier task force; otherwise we might upset our present carrier plans. At this point we should just talk about how fast we could get carriers there if necessary. Bill Bundy felt that best gambit would be joint exercises against the contingency of an attack through Afghanistan, which would implicitly show the Paks how we could support them against India too. Rusk felt planning against Afghanistan was hardly a good noise, just at the time when things were going our way, and the Afghan King was coming here. Talbot interposed that what Ayub really wants is less reassurances against Indian attack than that we will not help India militarily.

At the President's request, Bill Bundy explained what military aid we were currently giving India and planning over the next two years. The various tranches added up to $75-100 million in FY 1964, depending of course on the appropriations outcome. On the Pak side we had made a big delivery push this year, amounting to about $58 million. In fact we delivered more firepower to Pakistan than to India. Over the next few years our military aid ought to balance out at about 2-1 in favor of India over Pakistan. The President wondered what Ball could say about comparative aid to India and Pakistan; Ayub wouldn't like a 2-1 ratio.

Harriman thought the real problem was that Ayub wants to take care of the Indian threat himself. We have got to convince him he can't but must depend on us. This is why credible assurances are necessary. In fact, the Indians are now fearful that the Paks will attack them, so India wants reassurances too. Thus the nub of the problem is how to convince Ayub we mean what we say. If we demand that Ayub stop his flirtation with China, we must give him confidence we will protect him. The President queried whether Ayub was really trying to use us to solve Kashmir. What could Ball say to him that would be helpful? Harriman's answer was to tell Ayub he couldn't get along without us. While we can't go to joint planning against India, we can give credible evidence of our ability to support Pakistan.

Talbot said that Ball's job was not just to reassure Ayub against Indian aggression but to stress our primary interest in the threat to the north, which demanded Pak/Indian reconciliation if it was to be met effectively. McCone thought it would be difficult to keep Ayub off the track of worrying about India.

The President doubted that Ayub was worried militarily about the Indians. He wanted to use us against the Indians on Kashmir and we couldn't give this to him. So what could we offer him? There wasn't much for Ball to say except to repeat our position. We weren't getting much from the Pakistani either. About all the alliance was worth to us was the intelligence facilities. He asked about the apparent slow-down in negotiations. McCone explained that since 15 June the Paks had been stalling on the final agreement for Peshawar expansion, amid growing criticism of the US. McCone feared that the next Pak move would be to cut back on existing facilities which he stressed were far more important than the expansion. In response to Rusk's question, he saw no alternative option elsewhere to expansion of Peshawar. It gave us a 30% increase in efficiency, much better coverage of China, and a more flexible arrangement.

The President reverted to what Ball could say that would convince Ayub. Ball replied we could warn him about coming trouble on the Hill, citing the Broomfield Amendment which almost passed. McGeorge Bundy felt that simply to say “disagreeable words” was worth the effort. Harriman adverted to the thought that the Paks were genuinely worried about an Indian attack, so we should study how we could reassure them. Rusk proposed the tactic of asking Ayub some direct questions. For example, did he want US military aid to continue? Did he want US support in event of an Indian attack? We should try and put the monkey on Ayub's back. Komer added that what Ball didn't say would be just as important as what he did. The Paks were mounting a pressure campaign on us, and to the extent that Ball did not respond by promising them additional aid, it would be a warning that such tactics wouldn't work.

The President seemed unsatisfied by these rejoinders and again asked “what precisely do we want to get from Ayub.” We know each other's arguments, so the best we can do is remind them we don't like the Chicoms, get them to call off their distasteful press campaign, and tell them that Peshawar is vital to us so that if they don't play ball, we will give our aid to someone else. The President said he understood Ayub's arguments and could see his point of view. As seen by the Pakistani, India was a threat to their interests. However, we were right too in our position, so the best we could get was a “standoff.” Ball rejoined that the Paks needed us more than we needed them. Ayub would pull back from his China gambit if we pressed him hard enough.

The President still didn't think that Ayub was really scared of India. What would the Indians get out of attacking Pakistan? They'd lose a billion dollars in Western aid. What Ayub was really worried about was that he was losing the capability to attack India successfully or at least to get his way vis-a-vis India. Rusk interjected that the Pakistani must know we could pulverize India with nuclear weapons. The President simply doubted that we could or would use nuclear weapons except if forced to against the Soviets. Bundy pointed out that this illustrated the value of an Indian Ocean task force with conventional capabilities. This would give us a little cushion out in the area. Rusk indicated he was dubious about any cut-back in our carrier force. For just this sort of reason he would want to take a close look at any such proposals. The President said he'd asked McNamara about an Indian Ocean squadron.

Talbot felt the real point was for Ball to make clear that Ayub's “gamesmanship” is now getting out of bounds. But the President asked why we were so worried about how far Ayub went with China? He couldn't be really serious about this. Bill Bundy indicated that while we wouldn't really be ready to talk about carriers for awhile, we could give Ayub some dope about how fast we could get out there if he were attacked. We could describe, for example, what we could do with the CASF. DOD would provide some ammunition to Mr. Ball.

In response to the President's query as to whether Ball would say anything about MAP to Ayub, especially F-104s, Ball replied it was preferable to hold off any such discussions and make his mission a strictly political exercise. There was some discussion about giving supersonics to Pakistan and India. Bill Bundy pointed out we have to face this issue in the next MAP program in any case, because the Paks expected modernization of their air force. It was pointed out that the Soviets might give supersonics to India. The President's view was “Let's not give supersonics to the Paks if we don't to the Indians or vice versa.” This led the President to ask again what Ball realistically expected to achieve. Ball answered that we would at least clarify to Ayub our views on his China gambit. The President asked how we would respond if he countered that the Indians were playing with the Russians. Ball felt we could argue this was different—we have an alliance with the Paks and not with the Indians.

Komer raised the question of what Ball might say on Kashmir. Ball felt we should not “disengage” on this issue, partly because of the repercussions on the Hill. Rusk recalled that the Indians had agreed to mediation, but Komer pointed out they had recently changed their tune. McGeorge Bundy wondered whether the Paks were really much interested in mediation at this point. If the Paks raised the issue in the UN, we could use the President's new policy of “abstention.”

Talbot asked about press treatment. When news of the trip got out he favored as neutral a press guidance as possible. We should simply say that Ball was going out at the President's request to discuss US/Pakistani relations. Ball agreed that neutral treatment was best, although both the Paks and Indians were going to speculate widely on his purpose.

RWK

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings with the President, 8/63-11/63. Secret. Drafted by Komer. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.)

319. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 319. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, August 15, 1963, 9:17 p.m.

393. Eyes Only Ambassadors. Deptel 394.1 There follows text of message from the President to Prime Minister Nehru which you are requested to deliver urgently.

“Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

I must confess that your letter2 and statement in the Lok Sabha3 took us by surprise. Though I can understand your irritation with Pakistani behavior, I still regret that you feel compelled to make such a negative statement on mediation at this time. It will certainly complicate our own efforts to help India.

You know that we are determined to assist India to the fullest in building a free society, a task now rendered more difficult by an obvious external threat. To this end, we have sought to provide India with far more assistance than any other single aid recipient. I might add that I personally intervened with the Germans, Japanese, Italians, and British to get this year's consortium contributions up to the level finally achieved. But the setback to mediation will inevitably have an adverse impact on our efforts to obtain Congressional and popular support for economic and military aid to India and Pakistan. I must tell you quite frankly that it is hard to counter the mounting resistance in the Congress against aid programs which seem destined to aggravate disputes between two nations, both of which we regard as friends. This is not anti-Indian sentiment; it is a ‘plague on both your houses' attitude.

The only way we see to counter this resistance, recognizing that Kashmir and other issues are not susceptible of easy and quick solutions, is to demonstrate that sincere and determined efforts are nevertheless underway to solve them. Here is where we had counted heavily on the mediation effort you proposed.

We entirely share your appreciation of Chinese aims vis-a-vis India. We too are also concerned at Pakistan's developing relationship with Communist China, and intend to do what we can to arrest this trend. But we regard it as even more in India's interest than in ours to forestall a Pakistan-China accommodation. However emotionally the Pakistani are behaving, and whatever the temptation to reply, surely a further heating up of the atmosphere between your two countries aggravates rather than diminishes this risk. We do not see a mediatory effort as weakening you against China, but as a move to lessen pressure on your flank, and hopefully to lead toward a reconciliation which will greatly strengthen India's position.

In the last analysis, it must be primarily the task of Indian statesmanship, in seeking to strengthen India against Chinese Communist pressure, to forestall aggravation of this threat via closer Pakistani-Chinese ties. We want to help, but to do so effectively we must know more clearly what you propose to do. As I see it, you do not rule out mediation but suggest the necessary preparatory work be done by quiet diplomacy. An atmosphere must be created, but how is this to be done? We wonder what steps you plan to reestablish communications. Once we know what course you contemplate, we will do what we can to help bring Pakistan to the mediation table, which we still believe is the course best calculated to serve your larger interests and to permit us most effectively to help.

Sincerely,

John F. Kennedy“

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Schneider and Komer and cleared and approved by Grant. Repeated to Karachi and London.

1 Telegram 394 to New Delhi, August 15, instructed Bowles to deliver Kennedy's letter to Nehru in person if possible. Bowles was instructed to discuss the letter with Nehru at the earliest opportunity and elaborate upon and emphasize the themes laid out in it. (Ibid.)

2 Document 317.

3 In telegram 644 from New Delhi, August 12, the Embassy transmitted the text of an advance copy of the speech Nehru intended to make on the following day to the Lok Sabha, the lower house of the Indian Parliament. In the speech, Nehru reviewed the history of the Ministerial talks with Pakistan on the Kashmir issue. He attributed the failure of the talks to Pakistan's determination to achieve a settlement entirely upon its own terms, or to continue the existing deadlock over the issue. Nehru then turned to the mediation proposal that followed upon the failure of the Ministerial talks. As with the talks, Nehru stated that India approached the mediation proposal with the hope that it would lead to a fair and equitable settlement to the dispute, but he concluded that the terms of reference proposed by Pakistan for the mediation exercise made success impossible. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK)

320. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) 320. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)Source

Washington, August 16, 1963.

SUBJECT

Feasibility of Deployment of a Carrier Task Force in the Indian Ocean

In connection with the discussion at the White House last Monday, concerning measures that might be taken to convince Pakistan of our capacity to respond effectively to an Indian attack (or vice versa if the case should ever arise), the State Department has particularly raised the question of possible deployment of a carrier task force to the Indian Ocean, either as a temporary measure or eventually as a permanent deployment.

I therefore request that the Joint Chiefs of Staff review this question, comparing the feasibility, effectiveness, and comparative costs of deployment of a carrier versus alternative methods of bringing U.S. power to bear in the area. This question may be considered as part of your response to the generalized request for courses of action that would serve to convince Pakistan of our capacity to respond, or you may if desired wish to take it up in a broader framework.1

Robert S. McNamara2

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, India 381 (10 Jul 63), Indian Ocean Task Force 63. Secret.

1 In a September 25 memorandum to McNamara, the Joint Chiefs responded that the intermittent deployment of a carrier task force in the Indian Ocean was feasible if politically desirable. (JCSM 735-63; ibid.)

2 Printed from a copy that indicates McNamara signed the original.

321. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 321. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, August 17, 1963, 7 p.m.

721. Deptel 394.1 PriMin received me 6 pm Aug 16 in his small Parliament House office just off floor of Lok Sabha. I gave him President's letter2 which he read with care.

As he looked thoughtfully out of window I remarked that I had last talked with him in this office in late June 1952, to report on a conversation with Pak PriMin Nazimuddin in Karachi; oddly enough it was on precisely same subject—how do we settle Kashmir.

Nehru remembered questions involved in previous discussion accurately and remarked on long weary course of debate and subsequent negotiation.

I then said that before he commented on President's letter I wished to make two or three personal observations: 1. Pres Kennedy, who is himself old hand at facing political pressures, was aware of personal difficulties PriMin faced at this particular moment; Chicom attack last fall, continued concentration of Chinese troops along border, high taxes, rise in prices, shortfalls in the five-year plan, and emergence of strong non-communist opposition had combined to bring about first no confidence debate in Lok Sabha since independence.

2. We could justify adding explosive Kashmir question to his already difficult agenda at this moment only on basis of most unusual and pressing circumstances. There were in fact two urgent questions which in my opinion provided such justification. A. In US the Kennedy Administration was now facing serious problems regarding aid program which would be debated in House of Representatives next week; this plus heated discussions over VOA agreement and conflict over Bokaro were creating grave uncertainties about our efforts to support India in way we are anxious to do. If we are to win legislative strength at home, we badly need at least some progress towards easing tension in subcontinent.

B. In Pakistan situation was explosive with a strong note of irrationality which concerns us. Indeed we are seriously considering sending high-level US official to Rawalpindi within next two or three weeks for frank, forthright discussion of Pak attitudes toward China and related subjects.

If progress could be made towards agreement with Pakistan on wording we proposed last week (or on some other wording), a powerful moderating influence could immediately be brought to bear in Karachi. Since it would take three or four months to select a mediator and allow him time to do his homework, and since our proposal did not contemplate a report for another six months after that, we could secure nine or ten months of relative calm on an intensive divisive and explosive subject.

In this atmosphere Pakistan would be less able to embarrass India in event of Chinese attack, as some nervous Indians thought she might do; she would also be inhibited from renewing embittering and unrewarding dialogue in UN. However our strong support for mediation at this time should not be interpreted as device to sweep difficult subject under rug. In the more moderate atmosphere we felt could be created by genuine effort of mediation, the conflict could be discussed in calm confidential setting with no need for publicly adding up the score at regular intervals as during the six rounds of talks last winter.

3. Although we regretted political circumstances which compelled him make his strongly negative statement in Lok Sabha Tuesday, we were encouraged by restraint which he had demonstrated since then, namely: A. Instead of reading his provocative speech in Lok Sabha which would have given fire-eaters an opportunity to introduce embittering questions he had cabled it, thereby keeping the question in lowest possible key.

B. On Independence Day before crowd of 100,000 at Red Fort he had rejected opportunity for applause-getting demagoguery over Pakistan in favor of temperate presentation of India's problems.

C. In Lok Sabha this afternoon he had emphasized that door was open for mediation of Kashmir at an opportune moment.

Impressed that while all of this was helpful an additional move by GOI was now urgently required which, taken in present context, might enable US persuade Paks to adopt equally moderate approach which in turn could lead to beginning of mediation process.

PriMin's response both to President's letter and to my presentation was moderate.

He first emphasized his understanding of difficulties Pres Kennedy faced in Congress and also in dealing with Pakistan. He added he was grateful not only for substantial aid American Govt had given India, but for way in which Pres Kennedy, ever since he first sat in Senate, had personally supported India's efforts and had demonstrated an understanding of India's problems.

However as I myself had recognized he was now faced with an extremely serious political predicament. As I could see balance of political forces within India had changed radically in the ten years since last served here. Opposition now calling for his downfall was mostly group which could not agree on anything. Nevertheless its ill disguised appeals to communal emotions were dividing country while its irresponsible attacks were threatening tax and other programs which are essential to growth of Indian economy and to military security vis-à-vis China.

C. Nehru said there was no question of closing the door in regard to Kashmir. Indeed, regardless of what Paks might say or do, door would remain open for discussions when there was reasonable hope for sober conversations and possible agreement.

Even taking into account difficulties we faced at home and in Karachi, he questioned that this was an opportune time for mediation. Again he wished make clear this did not mean he was turning his back on mediation concept. As he said in May he thought mediation would be most hopeful way to approach issue which had divided India and Pakistan for so many years.

However, if he were now to appear to be bowing to US-UK pressure (and everyone knew that he was under such pressure) he was fearful of reaction from irresponsible opposition group which was ready to seize on any sign of Congress Party weakness.

I said it was not question of one-sided US-British pressures. Our Amb in Karachi was pressing hard on Paks and as I had pointed out we were now considering additional pressure in near future. Fact of matter was that we are deeply and genuinely worried and if this were not the case present conversation would not be taking place. In my opinion I said, time is running out. Would he therefore agree to make further moderate statements in Lok Sabha and to assure US privately, that provided angry comments could be prevented in Karachi, he was prepared—say at close of Lok Sabha session—to proceed seriously to negotiate basis for meaningful mediation arrangement? We are already striving against great difficulties to keep situation quiet in Karachi and this would give us something tangible to go on.

Although Nehru did not respond directly, he looked thoughtful and after few moments said he would reply to President; in meantime would carefully consider what I had said. I asked when we might expect some word. He replied he was now urgently concerned with organization of government's case for debate early next week on no-confidence motion, first he had faced in his long years as PriMin. He would be in touch with us as soon as he had chance further to consider this complex problem coming at inopportune time.

Comment: Since previous two meetings there has been striking change in PriMin's appearance and attitude. Nehru looked and acted much as he did ten years ago. His face was expressive, he was full of bounce and had much of his old charm and humor. Gore-Booth commented to me on same phenomenon.

Undoubtedly explanation lies in fact that during last few days he has been doing what he most enjoys—debating, planning, and maneuvering for high political stakes within Indian political system—much as he may complain about it.

Although we face uphill struggle I see glimmer of hope that with restraint in Karachi as well as Delhi we may conceivably get mediation operation under way. From point of view here best development for next two or three weeks would be benevolent silence in Rawalpindi. If Paks refuse to go ahead we will of course face a new impasse. If they suddenly rush to embrace US-UK proposal GOI will feel it is being deliberately embarrassed and even if Paks go along mood may not be constructive.

We must be realistic about mediation effort itself. Its most immediate contribution in India will be to paper over our own present difficulties with AID bill, VOA, Bokaro, etc. Beyond this expedient result, it will serve to moderate divisive and embittered actions in both countries thereby reducing tensions. The major hope would be that it would create some modus vivendi acceptable to both countries which over a period of years could gradually evolve into a permanent solution.

Bowles

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Karachi and London.

1 See footnote 1, Document 319.

2 See Document 319.

322. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 322. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, August 20, 1963, 8:21 p.m.

423. New Delhi's 476,1 info Karachi 213, London 189; Karachi's 243,2 info New Delhi 78, London 56. We are keeping in forefront our minds your views on 3-year MAP program for Pakistan during our consideration this problem. You will agree that achievement of our objectives on subcontinent as a whole requires us take very hard look at full range of actions which might be of use in straightening out our relations with Pakistan. As we proceed with this examination we shall, of course, be alive to Indian reactions.

As you aware, we are considerably disturbed over current state US-Pak relations. Should Paks enter into alliance with Chicoms, Indians would be flanked and entire subcontinent endangered. We would, therefore, expect Indians to share our concern over trend in US-Pak relations and show sympathy toward US efforts to rectify situation. Indeed, conversations with TTK, M.J. Desai and B.K. Nehru, as indicated Deptel 131,3 suggest there some appreciation of this within GOI. Beyond our broad strategic interests in security subcontinent, we derive special advantages from our relationship with Pakistan which our interests require we protect.

There follow further clarifications of our thinking about 3-year program under consideration.

1. Three-year MAP proposal would be largely continuation of existing military assistance commitments. The program, including the F-104 A/B aircraft (the Paks, as you know, have one such squadron now) is more of the same which Paks have been receiving since 1955, and of which the GOI is well aware. Incidentally, the F-104 A/B is not the same aircraft that the GOI has requested.

2. We must at the very minimum indicate to Pakistan scope of MAP program at least for FY 1964. While normal timing for other countries would call for such disclosures after appropriations voted (probably November this year), we have what approaches a tradition with Pakistan of earlier disclosure, at least of principal elements. This was done with Ayub personally in July, 1961 and September, 1962 and odds are that he would press key issues himself again this year, particularly the question of fighter aircraft.

3. Three-year rather than one-year proposal has general advantage enabling us to assure Ayub that we intend to continue our special relationship with Pakistan over a period of time despite the changes in our policies with regard to India. It would also enable us to attach virtually explicit conditions that fulfillment must, of course, depend on continuation generally satisfactory US-Pak relations over period of time as well as satisfactory cooperation in special areas. Believe we would have better leverage over Paks if we have given them reassurance of our strong friendship through this sound projection, indicating at same time its fulfillment dependent on their reasonably good behavior.

4. Fighter aircraft, of course, key abrasive item vis-à-vis India, since no other element in package differs materially from on-going programs. Replacement of their F-86F fighters, which are becoming rapidly obsolete and are unsupportable beyond FY 1968, is covered under our general 1960 modernization commitment. Both in 1961 and 1962 Paks pressed us hard for indication our replacement plans, with closest possible indication these must be supersonic to be acceptable. We would almost certainly have to bite the bullet on this one in the course of presenting an FY 1964 program, whether on a one-year basis or as part of three-year package. By putting proposal into three-year framework, we can postpone delivery dates, with deliveries beginning in July, 1965, in increments of six every six months. Initial delivery date gives us time to look at Indian needs. Our present thinking is along these lines. We continue to believe that the installation of radar, the training of Indian technicians, and improved Indian performance in the handling of their present fighter inventory should come first. When these things have been accomplished, the US believes India should be able to obtain a limited number of such aircraft, probably in the mid-1965 time frame from Free World sources. This would leave open the question whether the supply of advanced aircraft should be by the UK or the US. These thoughts have not yet been conveyed to the Indians nor should they be at this time.

5. The F-104 A/B, although superficially glamorous because of its Mach 2 speed, is in fact purely day fighter-interceptor with very limited bomb-carrying capacity; its range is so short that without effective intercept control (which Paks do not have) it has only limited intercept capability and considerably lesser capability to bomb Indian bases effectively. GOI sought all-weather F-104G.

Three-year proposed program is, as noted, based on prior commitments and valid military requirements. It is substantially same as we planned to do in three one-year installments, and about $18 million less than sum of previous three years. Our commitment to it would have two key goals: (1) reassurance of continuing US support at key psychological moment in terms Pak policy examinations, and move towards elimination Pak stalling many areas of importance to US; and (2) hopefully getting us off hook on prior commitment which we are unable to fulfill—replacement of obsolete destroyers. In short, the three-year package would not be major new undertaking with Pakistan but rather minimum acceptable continuing program. Further, it would not be unprecedented in area, for we have five-year commitment with Iran completed last September, and Paks almost certainly know of this in view close Pak/Iran military ties. Also, since we must announce our plans now for the F-104 A/Bs, even though we do not plan delivery until mid-1965, our MAP programs for the next three years (FY 1964-65-66) are, in poker parlance, clearly an ace, a ten and a five. If we play the ace, without simultaneously playing our other two cards, we (1) lessen the initial impact and (2) are left holding a poor hand in FY 1965 and FY 1966. Consequently, MAP as a political tool can best be used now.

The long and short of it is that, while we recognize our opportunities in India, we must also be mindful of our interests in Pakistan. We have responded in India's time of need and are continuing to do so. The Indian MAP program receives greater attention, and her needs get a higher priority, than any other MAP recipient in the world, with the possible exception of Vietnam. Since the Chinese attack the US alone has already given, or is planning to give $110 million in military aid, not to mention, as you so rightly point out, our past economic assistance, for which we have not sought the very tangible quo's that we do elsewhere, particularly in Pakistan. We feel that the GOI can be persuaded of necessity for our meeting our commitments to Pakistan in continuation of existing programs in interests of stable Pakistan oriented to Free World. Although we are committed to integrated, subcontinental approach to our problems and opportunities in South Asia there is presently serious danger of an imbalance which could undermine our position on subcontinent. Surely, Government of India does not expect it is in our or India's interest that as we assist India we divorce ourselves from Pakistan.4

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-PAK. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted on August 8 in DOD/ISA by R.J. Murray and in SOA by Schneider; cleared with NR, BNA, FE, G/PM, DOD, and AID; and approved by Grant. Repeated to Karachi and London.

1 See footnote 2, Document 309.

2 See footnote 1, Document 309.

3 Printed as telegram 99 to Karachi, Document 309.

4 In telegram 771 from New Delhi, August 23, Bowles vigorously reiterated his opposition to the proposed military assistance program for Pakistan, as detailed in telegram 423. He noted that if Pakistan were offered a 3-year program including additional supersonic aircraft, he did not see how the United States could maintain its position in India unless the Indian Government was also offered an assurance that the United States would respond to its request for supersonic aircraft. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-PAK)

323. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 323. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of StateSource

Karachi, August 23, 1963, 9 p.m.

421. Embtel 412.1

1. In handing August 23 Kashmir aide-mémoire to me, Foreign Secretary Aziz Ahmed said that GOP had given most mature consideration to issues involved, recognizing great importance of matter and appreciating US willingness to give GOP all the time needed. He said President had participated in all deliberations and had personally reviewed each of the three successive drafts of aide mémoire. He had expressly approved document as now delivered.

2. After quick perusal of aide-mémoire I said I would of course not voice definitive USG reaction at that moment. However, as interim reaction, I could not refrain from voicing US disappointment that aide-mémoire did not move in direction of definite agreement to mediation proposal. I did not construe it as flat rejection, but the various non-concurring positions taken by the GOP would necessarily lead to further negotiation and possible complications. I said that at outset I must question numbered paragraph three of aide memoire, to effect that none of concessions asked for on May 21 by Foreign Minister, with one partial exception, had been accepted by USG. I noted that we had made a major effort to accommodate the essence of the Pak views, not only on duration of the mediator's mandate, but also on mention of the UN, identification of Kashmir as the principal issue to be dealt with by mediator, and scope of the terms of reference. We felt that our proposed text met the basic requirements of the 30, and indeed went so far we would have difficulty in inducing the Indian Govt to agree. We doubted if there would be any hope whatever of winning Indian acceptance of any language which went farther to meet Pakistani desires. I expressed the hope the GOP would look to the practical significance rather than the verbal dressing of the text. From this standpoint, we were convinced that the essentials of the GOP viewpoint had been protected.

3. Foreign Secretary said GOP view was that terms of our proposed joint communique were “far too imprecise.” It was necessary for mediator's terms to be nailed down very explicitly. This might require an agreement of some sort, rather than just a joint communique. In absence of well-defined terms of reference, there would be ambiguity, uncertainty and unpredictability. Indians would put many pressures on mediator to get off the main Kashmir track and to make recommendations on matters which would not have any direct bearing on settlement of Kashmir. If framework within which mediator would operate not firmly established, his work would be delayed and he might come up with irrelevant recommendations or judgments, which would be embarrassing for Pakistan.

4. Foreign Secretary dwelt emphatically on imperative need for evidence that GOI is now receptive to an equitable and honorable Kashmir settlement. Said GOP increasingly convinced that Indo-Pak relations too fragile to stand shock of another Kashmir failure. It would be dangerous to buildup expectations of Pak people again, only to dash their hopes. Government would be subject to heavy criticism for leading people down illusory path once more and govt would be dangerously vulnerable to the assaults of the opposition. GOP saw no shred of evidence of any disposition on part of GOI to give an inch on Kashmir. In fact attitude of GOI had conspicuously hardened in recent weeks as evidenced by tone of Nehru's recent public statements and the withdrawal of imaginary “concessions.” Assessment of GOP is that deliberate action of GOI in arousing people of India against Pakistan and against the idea of conciliation on Kashmir constitutes positive proof that GOI had no intention of budging at all. Obviously GOI would have to prepare public opinion well in advance for concessions on Kashmir and record of govt in doing just the opposite amply verifies the absence of any intention to seek an accommodation. Estimate of GOP is that only a correlation of Kashmir settlement with continuation of the defense assistance program for India will soften the Indian attitude on Kashmir.

5. As to terms of reference, Foreign Secretary asserted GOP convinced specific references to UNCIP resolutions as basic guidelines for mediator is essential. UNCIP Resolutions have been accepted by UN as a whole, by US and UK, by Pakistan, and by India, although India in recent years has been making vigorous effort to resile from its commitment to the UNCIP resolutions. The idea of self-determination inherent in UNCIP resolutions is only basis for workable solution. It is the only settlement principle which Govt of Pakistan can justify to its people and it is the only basis on which the Govt of India can win the support of the people of India for a solution. Principle of the peoples determination of their own destiny is one which all mankind intuitively recognizes as fundamentally and inherently just and right. No nation can really rise in indignation against it because it is in accord with deepest human instincts, whether admitted or not. If verdict of Kashmir people should go against Pakistan, GOP can reconcile Pak people to this outcome. In same way people of GOI would abide by verdict of the people of Kashmir. On other hand any partition formula which might be devised would open up divisive controversies and recriminations. Each govt would be accused of treasonable forfeiture of area surrendered.

6. As to limitation of mediation effort to Kashmir, Foreign Secretary thought that inclusion of “other related matters,” would open up arguments, and make it difficult for the mediator to concentrate on the business at hand which was Kashmir, and only Kashmir. He argued that traditionally in diplomatic history the assignment of a mediator has been to one and only one carefully defined dispute. He saw no reason for departing from this tradition. GOP was convinced that vague general directive, with the extent of mediator's brief not sharply delineated would not work. He was aware that “Kashmir and other related matters” was the language of the agreed announcement of November 29, 1962. But he argued that this broadening out of scope was more appropriate for direct bilateral discussions between representatives of the two Govts than it would be for a mediator. Govt representatives had to be prepared to take cognizance of various issues involving their country. But this was not the case with a mediator who did not represent either country. It was not practicable or appropriate for him to deal with anything more than the specific international dispute which brought his role into being.

7. Amplifying my preliminary reaction, I pointed out clear necessity for constructive move of some sort on Kashmir since GOP felt it could not permit issue to remain static. We were trying to help Pakistan to overcome the existing inertia on the question and there was obligation on GOP to help us in our effort to help them. Mediation effort was only constructive move we could see on the horizon. I invited him to name any alternative procedure which held promise. This he did not do.

8. I said of course we could not make any finding that GOI was now likely to agree to a Kashmir settlement which would be acceptable to Pakistan. No one would have temerity to make such official prediction. If India would agree to our draft formulation, this was the most we could hope for before the mediator started his work. No one could say what might come out of the mediation. It was our hope that the mediator's work as he progressed would enable him to shape up his own terms of reference and perhaps open up hopeful settlement possibilities not foreseeable at the outset. A good mediator would carve out his own role for himself and he might be able to bring about a solution which would constitute a near miracle. At least the effort needed to be made. My govt did not think the risks involved in failure of a good effort were as great as portrayed by the Foreign Secretary. Even if the risks were appreciable, the dangers of hopeless inaction seemed greater.

9. I noted that traditionally “the war is on” the more violent forms of propaganda by tacit agreement between Pakistan and India during the course of a Kashmir settlement effort. The worst invective and diatribe are “out” for the duration of the negotiation and this in itself is a considerable, albeit temporary gain, at least in a negative sense.

10. I further urged that even if the mediator's efforts should unhappily prove to be stillborn, his recommendations would be almost bound to have some nourishment in them for the Pakistan point of view, and Pakistan would not lose by keeping unsullied its record of cooperation and compliance with all responsible international moves looking to a Kashmir solution.

11. As to the Foreign Secretary's argument that every abortive effort on Kashmir resulted in a serious political setback in Pakistan, I noted that Foreign Minister Bhutto himself had just set forth in a speech before the National Assembly that there were modest but important gains for Pakistan growing out of the ill-fated six rounds of ministerial level meetings on Kashmir from December to May. The Foreign Secretary had no effective rejoinder to this and he smilingly said the Foreign Minister had to make this speech for internal political purposes, pretending there were gains in order to protect himself from opposition attacks.

12. I told the Foreign Secretary that the attitude of India on Kashmir and on Pak relations in general remained one of various factors we were taking into account in determining the nature and pace of our defense assistance program. It was a complicated equation and of course our evaluation of the Chinese Communist threat had to be the largest single factor. But Indian policy toward Pakistan was not outside our area of consideration. The Foreign Secretary said he knew this factor had not been entirely ignored but his govt was eager to see it given much greater weight and to be told more about it. He conceded we could not disregard the dimensions or the imminence of the Chinese Communist military threat on India's northern borders.

13. The Foreign Secretary ended by saying that his govt had made an earnest search for some additional initiative which would assist us in our search for a useful approach to the Kashmir problem. The GOP did not want to add to US burdens. Accordingly the GOP was now suggesting that the US might wish to consider the possibility of informally dispatching an acceptable prospective mediator for preliminary and exploratory personal conversations in Rawalpindi and Delhi as to the outlook for a successful mediation effort. The nature of the visit would not be divulged. The visitor would be as close to incognito as possible claiming merely a tourist status if questioned. The Foreign Secretary granted my point that this status would be exceptionally difficult to maintain, since the individual would be an outstanding personage. Foreign Secretary said that if the designee made a finding that the prospects for mediation were favorable, “we could proceed from there.” I said that I would prefer not to express any reaction to this final thought, since it would need to be studied. Foreign Secretary said President Ayub had again mentioned ex-President Eisenhower as representing the type of individual of world stature that he had in mind.

14. Foreign Secretary said he would give British Acting High Commissioner Hunt the same aide-memoire he had given me, with the deletion of numbered paragraph seven regarding the stature of the mediator, which did not directly concern the UK.

15. I told the Foreign Secretary I felt that the dialogue on the aide-memoire, which we had already usefully begun, would need to be continued. I hoped it could be carried considerably further before Under Secretary Ball's arrival.

16. Analysis and comments follow in separate telegram tomorrow.2

McConaughy

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Received in the Department of State at 6:37 p.m. Repeated to London and New Delhi.

1 Telegram 412 from Karachi, August 23, transmitted the text of an aide-mémoire of that date, which constituted the Pakistani reply to the proposed joint communiqué presented to Ayub by McConaughy on August 7 (see footnote 2, Document 317). The aide-mémoire noted that the mediation proposal contained in the joint communiqué took little account of the specific terms of reference stipulated by Pakistan as essential to a successful mediation effort (see footnote 2, Document 298). Pakistan insisted that the mediator's terms of reference be agreed in advance, and that the scope of the mediation be confined to the Kashmir dispute. The conclusion drawn in the aide-mémoire was that, in light of the attitude of the Indian Government as reflected in the statement by Nehru in the Lok Sabha on August 13, any mediation effort would inevitably fail. (Ibid.)

2 In telegram 429 from Karachi, August 24, McConaughy concluded that the Pakistani reply to the Kashmir mediation proposal was disappointing but not tantamount to a rejection of mediation. His assessment was that Pakistan had apparently decided to bring the Kashmir mediation proposal to a head at the time of Ball's visit, placing pressure on the United States and India to produce meaningful progress toward a Kashmir settlement. (Ibid.)

324. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 324. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, August 23, 1963, 8:16 p.m.

1272. Ref: Deptel 274 to New Delhi,1 198 to Karachi, 42 to Colombo.

1. Reftel on need for communications station in Indian Ocean area being repeated to you.

2. Despite technical desirability of surveying alternative sites, present political-military relations with India, Pakistan, Ceylon rule out approaches to those countries at this time. This leaves only Diego Garcia for consideration.

3. As you know (ref Dept. A-82, July 30),2 British have responded affirmatively to our proposal for exploratory talks concerning Indian Ocean defense matters; and Diego Garcia is major link in JCS concept of possible US-UK small island base complex. (DOD is now preparing draft, for State clearance and transmittal, of preliminary paper that British have requested before talks begin in London.)

4. We had planned to include this specific communications station requirement in these forthcoming Indian Ocean discussions with British. However, given the political and economic factors that the British wish discussed from the outset, it will probably be some time before way is cleared for substantive discussions and subsequent survey visits to the area.

Meanwhile DOD has reiterated its urgent requirement to survey at least one possible communications site. (The proposed station, while primarily for military purposes, would enhance entire U.S. communications capabilities in Indian Ocean area.)

5. DOD has therefore requested we seek permission from UK for visit of site survey team to Diego Garcia at earliest opportunity. DOD and State have considered possible tactical drawbacks of approaching British on one element in Indian Ocean base concept while we are preparing to discuss with them in near future the over-all area. We nevertheless conclude that urgency of this communications requirement justifies such an approach at this time. (FYI, and for your approach to the British if you consider it useful: DOD has necessary funds in hand to move ahead immediately on construction of communications station.)

6. Survey party would consist of about nine members, including three military (civilian dress) and a State or Embassy representative if desirable. Team would need approximately 12 days and would bring transmitter-receivers, recording and metering devices, generators, cameras, camping equipment. Survey would of course be carried out without UK commitment on future acceptance of station, and if results of survey favorable, establishment of station could become part of forthcoming broader discussions in London.

7. Accordingly, unless you see serious objections, request you approach the British soonest for their approval of the survey team visit as herein outlined.3

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 21 US. Secret. Drafted in G/PM by Lord; cleared with BNA, RPM, FE, SOA, UNP, NR, OC, AFI, and within G/PM by Colonel Robinson; and approved by G/PM Director of Operations Howard Meyers. Repeated to New Delhi, Karachi, and Colombo.

1 Telegram 274 to New Delhi, August 1, informed the Embassy that the Secretary of Defense had approved a recommendation from the Joint Chiefs of Staff for the establishment of a communications station in the Indian Ocean area. The Department of State's preliminary assessment, based on political considerations, was that Diego Garcia was the most suitable location for such a station. (Ibid.)

2 Airgram A-82 transmitted to London a copy of the British note of July 29. (Ibid., DEF 15 UK-US) The July 29 note is printed as Document 312.

3 The Embassy in London reported on September 5 that the Colonial Office was reluctant to concur in the request for approval of a U.S. survey team to visit Diego Garcia until the Governors of Mauritius and Seychelles had been consulted. (Telegram 1087 from London; Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15 UK-US)

325. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy 325. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy

New Delhi, August 27, 1963.

[Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 4/1/63-8/31/63. No classification marking. This letter has not been declassified by the Indian Government. In his biography of Nehru, Gopal summarized the letter, which dealt with the Kashmir dispute, as follows: “If Britain and the United States could persuade Pakistan to adopt at least a neutral, if not a pro-Indian attitude in the conflict between India and China, then mediation could be considered.” (Gopal, Jawaharlal Nehru, Vol. 3, p. 261)]

326. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 326. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, August 28, 1963, 12:43 p.m.

349. Karachi's 429 to Dept,1 info New Delhi 163, London 122; New Delhi's 773 to Dept,2 info Karachi 332, London 289. As we view Kashmir mediation problem on basis your thorough explorations, we seem to have reached impasse on both sides. Neither one has rejected mediation out of hand but each has imposed conditions which make early initiation of mediation impossible. Furthermore both sides seem to have rejected in advance various possible compromise plans for settlement. Nehru seems to have eliminated all but readjustment of cease-fire line. Pak insistence on self-determination “inherent in UNCIP resolutions” limits possibilities for compromise.

Under these circumstances we believe we should restate the basis on which we have intervened in Kashmir dispute, indicate that positions taken by parties have prevented us from assisting them seek solution, and for the time leave task of suggesting workable manner of launching mediation to them. This should give us time to proceed with more deliberate pace. Immediate problem is, of course, manner in which Under Secretary will handle Kashmir question in Pakistan. Our preliminary views on tactics both there and in New Delhi follow. Before we can definitely settle question of tactics, however, we need statement of Indian position which we assume will be contained in Nehru's letter to President.3

Tactics in Karachi

We should tell Paks we have been surprised at steps they have taken which have lessened prospects for Kashmir settlement which they agree would be so much in their interest. First during bilateral talks they took actions re Chicoms which gave Indians the tactical opportunity to question benefit to them in form of improved Indo-Pak relations of any Kashmir compromise. Second, after detailed discussions between our governments, Paks have apparently rejected formula for mediation which we believe reasonably takes their interests into account.

We assume that Paks still want a Kashmir settlement and it is to their interest to have this problem disposed of on a reasonable basis. However, since they apparently are not prepared to accept our formulation for mediation, what useful ideas can they suggest that are not merely a replaying of old phonograph records? Quite frankly the US is unwilling to invest substantial continued effort and prestige in trying to bring two recalcitrant parties to amicable settlement of their differences if Paks give us no help. Moreover, Paks must understand that if they are looking toward strengthening their position through a new round of exercises in the UN they cannot expect the US support that we provided in the past.

FYI: Under Secretary tentatively plans follow this line in his discussions in Pakistan. We see no need for Embassy to reply to Pak aide memoire before Mr. Ball arrives.

For Embassy London: Please urgently advise CRO of above course.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider on August 26; cleared by Cameron, Grant, and with BNA; and approved by Ball. Also sent to New Delhi and repeated to London.

1 See footnote 2, Document 323.

2 In telegram 773 from New Delhi, August 23, Bowles reported that he had met with Foreign Secretary Desai on August 21 to discuss the mediation proposal. In the course of the conversation, Bowles stressed the points he had made in his discussion of the proposal with Nehru on August 16. Bowles described Desai's reaction as more moderate than in previous conversations. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK)

3 The Embassy received a copy of Nehru's August 27 letter to Kennedy from the Foreign Ministry on August 29, and transmitted it to the Department. (Telegram 840 from New Delhi, August 29; ibid.)

327. Memorandum of Conversation 327. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, September 5, 1963, 4:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Ass't Secretary Phillips Talbot, NEA

Ambassador John M. Steeves

Angier Biddle Duke, Chief of Protocol

William S. Gaud, Ass't Administrator for NESA, AID

Edwin Wright, Interpreter

His Majesty Mohammed Zaher, King of Afghanistan

His Excellency Ali Mohammed, Court Minister and Chief of the Royal Secretariat

His Excellency Abdullah Malikyar, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance

His Excellency Dr. Abdul Majid, Ambassador of Afghanistan

His Excellency Sayyid Kasem Rishtiya, Minister of Press and Information

The Honorable Zalmai Mahmud Ghazi, Director, International and UN Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

After an exchange of greetings the President asked His Majesty if he would like to comment on the relations between his country and the USSR and Pakistan.

His Majesty replied that Afghanistan's geographical position necessarily exerted a strong influence on its security and on its relations with the two countries in question.

As for the U.S.S.R., Afghanistan had achieved its independence at about the time the revolution was going on in Russia. The new Soviet regime had been one of the first nations to recognize Afghanistan. This action laid the basis for the friendly relations between the two countries which have continued to the present time.

Afghanistan's relations with Pakistan have always been difficult and will probably continue so for some time. Prince Naim, said His Majesty, had undoubtedly explained to the President last year that Afghan-Pakistan relations did not have a purely political basis, but were influenced by other factors. The Durand Line must be viewed not merely as a line on a map, but in human and ethnic terms. His Majesty expressed gratitude for the keen interest the President had taken in Afghanistan's difficulties with Pakistan, and declared that the messages and letters he had received from the President on this subject had been helpful and gratifying.

Afghanistan's most recent difficulty with Pakistan had resulted from Pakistan's decision to bring economic pressure to bear on Afghanistan. Pakistan had closed Afghanistan's Consulates in Pakistan. This made it impossible for Afghanistan to use its customary routes to the sea. Afghanistan accordingly decided it was no longer useful to maintain diplomatic relations with Pakistan. There followed the long period of no relations and a closed border.

At the Tehran Conference this Spring, agreement was reached to re-establish diplomatic relations and reopen the Consulates. An Afghanistan Ambassador is now in Karachi and a Pakistani Ambassador is expected to arrive soon in Kabul. But this does not mean that the basic problem has been solved. The attitude of the Pakistani Government toward the tribal areas remains a vexing problem.

In these areas Pakistan has been threatening a status quo which has existed since the days of British India. The Durand Line divides peoples of the same ethnic strain—even of the same family. When Pakistan takes or threatens action on one side of that line, the results are felt equally on both sides of the line. Emotions are strong. Tribal representatives in Afghanistan turn to the Government of Afghanistan, which feels obliged to state the facts on its radio. This is not, said His Majesty, a question of territorial claims or expansionist policy, but a matter of giving moral support to a people to whom the Afghans are attached by both tradition and blood.

His Majesty declared that there had been no particular difficulties in the tribal areas since Tehran. The Pakistanis had done nothing to cause a deterioration of relations and his own Government was carefully watching the tone of its broadcasts—not resorting to propaganda but limiting itself to factual reports of occurrences. In reply to the President's comment that the manner in which events are reported can be significant, His Majesty replied that his Government was doing its best to preserve an atmosphere of goodwill and that he knew of no complaints from Pakistan in recent months.

The President then reverted to the subject of Afghan-Soviet relations. He described U.S. relations with the USSR as variable—better now than previously, but subject to change in the future, although he hoped they would not change for the worse.

His Majesty said that prior to the signing of the border agreement in 1948 there had been numerous difficulties along the Afghan-Soviet border. There were disputes over some of the islands in the Oxus River, and incidents had arisen as the result of individuals and animals straying across the border. Since 1948 no such problems had arisen. Indeed, there was now no issue on which there was a divergence of views between the two countries and no points of friction between them.

On a broader level, His Majesty went on, he believed that the future of Soviet-Afghan relations depended on events which could not now be foreseen, including the whole trend of events in Asia.

In reply to the President's question as to Soviet policy objectives toward Afghanistan, His Majesty replied that if one took the long view it was impossible to ignore the Soviet ideological outlook and that Afghanistan was always conscious of the problem created by the Soviet's broad policy objectives.

The President said that it was his impression that the Soviets had not pushed their ideological views on Afghanistan, and that he had always been curious as to why they had not tried to obtain more control over that country. Did His Majesty feel that the Soviets were interested only in being friends with Afghanistan or did they hope ultimately to control Afghanistan?

His Majesty declared that to date the Soviets had made no effort to infiltrate Afghanistan. This was due, he believed, to the Soviet's desire to show other Asian countries that the USSR had no ulterior designs on Afghanistan and, inferentially, on other countries in Asia. Should the Soviets make an effort to infiltrate or penetrate Afghanistan, he continued, Afghanistan would react with every means within its power. This was a situation which Afghanistan kept constantly under study in order to be prepared for any eventuality.

The President noted that a number of reforms and changes had taken place in Afghanistan in recent months and asked His Majesty if he would care to comment on internal economic and social conditions in Afghanistan.

Afghanistan's first Five-Year Plan, His Majesty replied, had run into many difficulties but at the same time had been fairly successful. He had more hope of accomplishing the objectives of the second Five-Year Plan because Afghanistan had now had more experience in development and more trained personnel. Economic development is of course a relative matter but in his opinion Afghanistan is making substantial headway.

Economic development in Afghanistan is proceeding hand in hand with social development, His Majesty added. He then asked Minister Rishtiya to describe some of the changes that are taking place.

The Minister said that Afghanistan's first preoccupation after obtaining independence was the security of the country. Now, with a new generation on the scene, there is an opportunity to move forward on the social front. His Majesty had separated the Government from the throne and for the first time given Afghanistan a government of commoners. A new constitution is being prepared, new electoral and press laws are being drafted and Afghanistan is to be given a more up-to-date democratic government in which the people will have a greater share in public affairs. This transition is being accomplished quietly and smoothly after many years of preparation. In this effort Afghanistan needs the encouragement and cooperation of its friends.

His Majesty remarked that his people desired greater freedom, and that their desire for independence is particularly strong. Afghanistan has always had a democratic tradition. The new reforms are based on a recognition of the nation's traditions and capabilities.

The President commented that the key is equilibrium—that it is extremely difficult to maintain stability in a free society. President Ayub, he remarked with a smile, had had some trouble on this score.

His Majesty remarked that in his country as in others change was inevitable. In Asian countries in particular there existed a real danger that leftist tendencies would take over if the inevitability of change was not recognized by those in authority. He asked the President which was better: to make changes on a calculated basis or to wait until they are brought about by other factors.

The President replied that it is always hazardous for a single group to retain all power, and particularly so if this group holds its power by inheritance. In his opinion, His Majesty had acted wisely. It is particularly important to keep in mind the religion, geography, tribal traditions and basic philosophies of a people when effecting social changes. This His Majesty seemed to have done. Consequently, his program was more likely to succeed than the program in, say, Morocco.

His Majesty stated that he himself was very hopeful of the outcome in Afghanistan. The cooperation of the Afghan people had been most encouraging. Their readiness for change is illustrated by the fact that whereas he had expected it to take three years to emancipate women, this had been accomplished in six months. In his judgment the basic character of the Afghan people is such that the reform program will be successfully and peacefully realized.

The meeting broke up after the President's expression of pleasure that he and His Majesty would have further opportunities to discuss these and other matters in which they were both interested.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Visit of King and Queen 9/63, 1/63-9/63. Confidential. Drafted by Gaud on September 6 and cleared by Talbot and Komer. The King and Queen of Afghanistan made a State visit to the United States September 4-16. They visited Washington September 5-7.

328. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of State 328. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of StateSource

Tehran, September 5, 1963, 11 p.m.

236. Eyes Only for the Secretary. There follows report on final conversation between President Ayub and Under Secretary Ball September 5.1 Since this was the summation and the result of three days of trying to evoke a clear definition of the Pakistani position, Ball requests that it be brought to the immediate attention of the President and the Secretary.

Also participating were Foreign Minister Bhutto, Foreign Secretary Aziz Ahmed, MEA Director Salman Ali, and Ambassador McConaughy, Lt. General Quinn, Richard Sneider and Turner Cameron.

Ayub began the meeting by reading from a prepared statement which he said was designed to summarize the positions of the two governments as they had emerged during the previous discussions. His manner was serious and deliberate.

FYI. We know from General Quinn's conversation later at lunch with Brigadier Nawazish, Director of Military Intelligence, that Musa, Nawazish and probably Foreign Office officials met with Ayub early Friday2 to prepare for 10:00 am meeting. American party arrived on time but meeting was delayed ten minutes while paper was being typed for Ayub. Clear from what Nawazish said and actions of Bhutto and Ahmed at start of meeting that this paper was result of earlier conference and represented rather hasty formulation of inchoate government position which up to this time had never been explicitly stated, although strong resistance of US military aid to India was already a clearly established government policy. End FYI.

He said as he understood it the US position was as follows: (1) Arms aid to India will continue; (2) A settlement of Kashmir cannot be linked to military assistance to India; and (3) Certain measures had been suggested to increase the credibility of US assurances to Pakistan. These included (A) Restatement of US assurances against an attack including an attack from India; (B) Joint staff talks about the communist threat but not about the threat from India; (C) The possibility of stockpiling military equipment; (D) Combined joint exercises in Fiscal '65.

Ayub then said the Pakistan position could be summarized as follows: (1) Any military aid to India beyond the Nassau program was unwarranted by military considerations. If it continues, judging by India's past conduct, the threat to small neighboring countries, especially Pakistan, which has already increased, will be augmented further. (2) China has no intention of attacking India nor can India attack China because physical and climatic barriers will not permit it. If a clash occurs, it will be only of a very, very limited nature. (3) To meet that limited threat the Indian Army, even before American military assistance started, was more than enough. (4) The additional armed forces India has created and intends to expand further with the use of its own resources and those provided by friendly powers, will impose a crippling economic burden on Indian economy. There are already signs of the Indian peoples acute resentment against this diversion of resources. If this goes on, it may well be a prelude to disintegration and strife on a large scale. Such a situation can only be to the advantage of the Communists. (5) Indians are doing all this with their eyes open. If they cannot bring this force to bear against the Chinese—which they cannot—then they will have to justify its creation by showing military gains elsewhere. So from whatever angle one looks at it, expansion of Indian Armed Forces was a mistake and any further support from outside cannot be justified on military grounds. (6) Pakistan understands and appreciates US desire to protect the subcontinent from Communist aggression. (7) The only logical way of bringing this about is a rapprochement between India and Pakistan through a just and honorable settlement of Kashmir problem so that a disengagement of India and Pakistani forces can be brought about. If this occurs the two nations will then be free to face their respective second fronts. (8) In view of the unprecedented increase in Indian Armed Forces and the resultant increase of the threat to Pakistan's security, “it has become imperative for Pakistan to bring down its political and military liabilities within its means.” This can be achieved only if we “normalize our relations with as many of our neighbors as possible.” This has been the basis of Pakistan's approach to China, and Pakistan hopes it can bring about some form of understanding with the Soviet Union as well. In that connection the attempt to normalize relations with Afghanistan is the first step. (9) Pakistan does not see any alternative open to it except this. If there were a power prepared to underwrite part, Pakistan would not hesitate to undertake them. [sic] But in the absence of that, the course Pakistanis are adopting is the only one rationally open to Pakistan. Ayub then said that he would like to comment on the following points which Mr. Ball had raised in the previous meeting:3 (1) Kashmir mediation; (2) Joint planning against communist threat but not against India; (3) Stockpiling of military equipment; and (4) Combined joint exercises in Fiscal Year 1965.

Ayub said that he would first comment on the military problem. As he understood it Mr. Ball had suggested joint planning against the communist threat. As Pakistan sees it that threat can only come from the Soviets because physical barriers prevent a threat from the Chinese. If that is the case the Soviet threat will not be just against Pakistan. The Soviets will move for bigger aims, the least being the domination of the Middle East and Persian Gulf ports from Karachi west. This would mean that not only Pakistan but Iran, Iraq and Turkey would be affected. In fact this would amount to a state of global war. There is already, said Ayub, a forum, i.e. CENTO, for such planning. In these circumstances bilateral planning would not be meaningful. In any case Pakistan is immediately threatened by India. Things like stockpiling and joint exercises have to flow from a precise military plan to have meaning. Since the composition of a stockpile and the development of a plan must be directed towards a particular threat from India, the things suggested by Mr. Ball seemed to be useless.

Ayub then turned to the Kashmir mediation problem. He said he respected the good intentions of the US and realized that we have limitations and were working within them. He also recognized the fact that the acceptance of mediation would have a good effect on Pakistan's image in the Congress. He said that he and his advisors had given the matter much thought. They had concluded that if Pakistan accepted mediation on current terms this action would lead to disturbances in Kashmir and disruption in Pakistan itself. In a democratic form of government you could expect the people to indicate strongly their feelings. The opposition would bitterly attack the government as they had fourteen times before.

Ayub then read from a recent Nehru statement in the Raja Sabha in which Nehru said that any alteration in the status of Kashmir would be disastrous for the people of Kashmir, India and Pakistan. In face of this, Ayub says, Pakistan sees no future in mediation at this stage. Although he did not believe that Nehru would change he thought the US should attempt in Delhi to see what possibility there was of movement towards a Kashmir settlement. Ayub recalled that during President Eisenhower's visit to Pakistan he had said that he hoped to see whether he could get countries together. Eisenhower didn't succeed. Later President Kennedy worked on Nehru with no success. Most recently Secretary Rusk tried but didn't get very far. Duncan Sandys was more aggressive but he had no more success with Nehru than the others.

These were all in effect mediators—none of them got very far. It is illogical to think that Nehru, who is now assured of continued military aid from the United States, even in the absence of a Chinese threat, has any compulsion to move on Kashmir. Ayub said the time for this is past, and opportunity had been lost. He added, “our relations with India are already bad. Don't let them get worse.” He said that it was necessary to wait for a more propitious moment but frankly he didn't see this in the future. He realized that the US was perhaps doing its best but he believed that there was no possibility of movement towards a Kashmir solution at present.

Mr. Ball said he was grateful for the clear and comprehensive presentation by Ayub after two days of useful discussions in which there had been a full exploration of the views of both governments. He told Ayub that he would report these conversations fully to President Kennedy probably next Monday. Mr. Ball then commented on Ayub's remarks. Ayub's presentation and Mr. Ball's other talks in Pakistan had shown that, while there is fundamental agreement on the type of world US and Pakistan would like to see and on the broad objectives of their policies, there remain significant differences between them based on different analyses of world US and Pakistan would like to see and the effects of specific policies and the tactics appropriate to achieve the common objectives. He was struck and concerned by Ayub's statement yesterday and again today that Pakistan saw no alternative but to proceed toward normalization of relations with Communist China and ultimately with the Soviet Union.

He asked what normalization might mean in specific terms. The work might be interpreted to mean that Pakistan intended to move away from being an effective ally against the common threat of Communism in the discussion of neutralism. If this were Pakistan's objective, Mr. Ball asserted, it was neither a viable nor a necessary policy alternative for Pakistan for three reasons.

First, the US is providing military aid to India on the basis of only a limited program tailored in conformity with its appraisal of Chicom capabilities and intentions and surrounded by—hedged in by—a number of safeguards. In explaining the safeguards, Mr. Ball pointed out that, by being the main HQ of supply of arms to India, the US was in a position, where in the event of an Indian attack on Pakistan, could terminate its assistance abruptly in a manner severely reducing Indian military capabilities. Furthermore military aid to India was being furnished under specific conditions that took account of such a contingency. Our arrangements explicitly limited the use of the materiel we supplied to defense against Communist aggression.

Secondly, the US has given Pakistan straightforward assurances on coming to its aid if it should be attacked from any source. The US does not make such promises lightly and the whole of our national history shows that we keep our promises. The suggestions that he made yesterday, Mr. Ball continued, for joint planning, stockpiling, and joint exercises were intended to give an additional quantum or material reality to this assurance. Mr. Ball said that President Ayub had pointed out that in his judgment these suggestions did not meet Pakistani requirements if planning were limited to the Communist menace and did not encompass an attack from India. However, we had a different view. We felt that the military staffs of both countries could get together for joint planning, a joint appraisal of the Communist threat, and the appropriate response. The determination of the response against a Communist threat would assure Pakistan of our capabilities to move quickly to defend it against any aggression since it would involve a full discussion of our ability to move men and supplies quickly into Pakistan. This should provide a basis for greater confidence and assurance on the part of Pakistan. Furthermore the stockpiling of equipment in advance would provide further security that necessary materiel would be available. Mr. Ball urged that President Ayub continue to give consideration to these proposals.

Third, a policy of neutrality or neutralism was not a viable policy option for a country such as Pakistan which is surrounded, as it is, by real danger on two sides from vast communist powers and that finds itself next door to the vast Indian nation. Given Pakistan's relative scale of resources, any attempt to find security by moving toward neutralism or even non-commitment against the Communist bloc would be illusory. It would result in the inevitable erosion of Pakistan's independence and a loss of the values Pakistan cherishes.

Mr. Ball said that, in all seriousness, the US feels that the future of Pakistan lies in a closer working relationship with the US. However any movement by Pakistan in a contrary direction would result in a new situation. It would inevitably require an adjustment of policies on both sides and a very close re-examination of current US-Pak relations.

Mr. Ball could not believe this is what Pakistan desired. He hoped, instead, that the US and Pakistan would continue to explore ways and means to develop a course of action that would give Pakistan the sense of security it desires within the framework of present policy.

Mr. Ball assured Ayub that he would report fully and objectively on his visit and that President Kennedy and the US Government would take these reports into full account. However, he could not, in all honesty, say that there would be, as a result, a major shift in a US policy that was very fully considered before we took steps to assist India militarily. He hoped that US and Pakistan could agree to focus their efforts on an exploration of actions within the framework of continued but limited military aid to India. We felt that within this policy it was possible to provide an adequate measure of security for Pakistan.

The US continues to feel it important to work closely with Pakistan and maintain an honest friendship since the two countries have strong common interests. If, on the other hand this is not possible, we both face serious problems. Mr. Ball again stressed that he could not tell Ayub how US policy could be adjusted to meet such a new situation. Up to now we have proceeded on the assumption that the close alliance to US would persist and we would far prefer to continue on this assumption.

In concluding, Mr. Ball said that at this point he frankly felt the next step was for him to make a full report to the President since Foreign Minister Bhutto would be coming over to Washington soon and frank and comprehensive conversations could be continued. He assured President Ayub again that the US very highly valued its relations with Pakistan.

Mr. Ball then again said that he was puzzled by the word “normalization” and asked that Pakistan intentions be elucidated. He said that “normalization” suggested to him a move toward neutrality or neutralism.

Ayub replied that it was natural for any country to want normal relations with its neighbors. Pakistan has problems with these neighbors and he could not see how Pakistan could exist without normalizing relations with Communist China, Russia, and even with India. He pointed out that Pakistan, as an ideological state, had major differences in its philosophy of life from the Communists and the Hindus. It has no intention of permitting these neighbors to overwhelm Pakistan. It just wants to “keep them on their side of the line.”

Ayub then castigated neutralism as a gross form of opportunism which he looked upon with contempt. He assured Mr. Ball that Pakistan had no intention of turning to neutralism unless “absolutely compelled.” He said compelling circumstances had not yet arisen. On the contrary the basis of Pakistan foreign policy is friendship with the US. He said that we feel we need each other.

Ayub felt Pakistan did, however, have cause for complaint against its friend. It did not complain about Soviet action since it expected no better from the Russians. It expected much more from its best friend. Pakistan's interests have been hurt and its security jeopardized against all reason and logic. But Pakistan still places high value on its friendship with the US. Ayub urged that the US should not further aggravate an already difficult situation.

Ayub then challenged Mr. Ball's statement that we would cut off aid to India in event of aggression. He pointed out that over years the United States had taken no steps to diminish aid to India in spite of Nehru's constant criticism of US policy and support of Communist China. He doubted whether circumstances would ever arise that would lead us to cut off aid. We would be compelled to continue aid and play into the Indian hands. As he had mentioned yesterday the Indian game is to get what she can from the US and then slowly, not very suddenly, eliminate US influence. He thought it would not be easy to shut off the tap and that there were grave limitations in our ability to squeeze India.

Summing up, Ayub again urged that we not aggravate Pakistan's problems. He asked that we review our appraisal of the military threat to India and the justification for its military buildup. He urged that we save India from moving to the point of disintegration. Don't jeopardize our interests, Ayub said, and we do feel that the United States is jeopardizing them. Finally, Ayub reiterated that normalization of relations with the Communist Bloc did not mean neutralism, which is not the solution to Pakistan's problems, but keeping them on their side of the line.

Mr. Ball pressed Ayub further to indicate the areas where normalization would take place. Ayub replied that Pakistan wished to reduce its military and political liabilities. Pakistan doesn't want war with its neighbors but if aggression comes it is prepared to fight. Mr. Ball asked whether Pakistan intended formal withdrawal from its alliance relations since normalization and a defensive alliance were not necessarily compatible. Ayub retorted “are we so mad to withdraw from defensive alliances since they give us peace?” Ayub then argued that by normalizing its relations with the Communist Bloc Pakistan would be reducing US commitments since it would be reducing the risk of a conflict. He mentioned, for example, the normalization of the Pak-Chinese border.

Mr. Ball thought it difficult for a nation to reduce its military vulnerability by “normalizing” relations with an enemy without making a basic change in its attitude or its conduct, which would put into question its basic fidelity to its own institutions and traditions. He said that normalization of relations was a loose term. It could mean, for example, merely increased commercial ties or greater cultural exchanges. These in themselves increased rather than reduced the influence of other states. Ayub agreed.

Ayub then said that Pakistan had nothing to surrender to Communist China once its boundary was demarcated. On trade, Ayub said, Pakistan was entering into a manufacturing stage, producing primary and even some advanced products. However, it anticipated that the common market would raise its external tariffs while reducing internal tariff barriers, and that while the United Kingdom was not now in the common market, the common market would ultimately be extended over the advanced countries. Ayub pointed out that Pakistan cannot sell its textiles in any quantity to the US and UK or Western Europe due to high tariff barriers and quota arrangements. Pakistan must find other places to sell its goods in order to be in a position to pay back the US for its economic assistance—which it intended to do. In searching for other markets it has made small barter deals with Communist China and Russia. These do not put Pakistan under any obligation to the Communist states. Ayub pointed out, in this connection, that the US is also trading with the Soviet Union, which Mr. Ball acknowledged but said this trade was limited.

Mr. Ball commented that the US had never asked its allies to restrain their trade with Communist states except with respect to strategic items, although we did urge them to avoid building up trade to a point of great dependence on the Communist Bloc.

Ayub assured Mr. Ball that the Communists cannot get an economic hold on Pakistan given the very small amount of trade between them and Pakistan. Ayub said that the Russians have also been pressing them for cultural exchanges pointing out that even the US has such cultural exchange with Russia. Ayub said that he told the Russians if they want to assist them they should come up with something concrete.

Ayub concluded that Pakistan wants to remain friendly with the US unless the US drives it away. He ventured that India was not a country that the US should rely on to act as its agent in Asia. He asked Mr. Ball to thank the President for his great concern for Pakistan's problems. He had opened his heart to Mr. Ball and had spoken in all frankness. Pakistan wants to retain its friendship with the US and wants American influence to remain in Asia. Ayub urged that US not compromise the position of its friends. He assured Mr. Ball that what he had said did not mean that Pakistan intended to do anything “stupid.” However he warned that should US policy change, and should we seek to squeeze Pakistan, there would be difficulties. Pakistan, he said, “may be poor but it is proud.” Pakistan is not stupid, however, and not in a hurry to lose its best friend. Ayub urged that we reconsider our policies and look at both India's and Pakistan's records over the years.

Mr. Ball commented that relations with India and Pakistan have represented two different orders of American policy, since one country was an ally and the other a neutral. In India we had sought mainly to maintain an influence useful for everyone.

Ayub concluded by requesting that President Kennedy look at Pakistan's arguments. Pakistan doesn't urge a radical change in US policy but putting a “safety limitation on our assistance to India.” Mr. Ball assured him that the President personally would give consideration to Pakistan's position. Ayub said he wished to keep the dialogue going through further talks in Washington and in Pakistan.

Holmes

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/BALL. Secret; Immediate; Limit Distribution. Received in the Department of State at 7:23 p.m. Repeated to Karachi. Passed to the White House.

1 The conversation took place in Rawalpindi. Ball reported on his conversations there on September 3-4 with Ayub, Bhutto, and other senior Pakistani officials in telegram 10 from Rawalpindi, September 4, and in telegrams 16, 17, and 18 from Rawalpindi, all dated September 5. (Ibid.)

2 The text is in error. September 5 fell on Thursday rather than Friday.

3 Reported in telegram 17 from Rawalpindi.

329. Memorandum of Conversation 329. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, September 6, 1963, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

Afghan King's State Visit

PARTICIPANTS

The President

The King of Afghanistan

Mr. Zalmai Ghazi, Member of King's Official Party

Mr. Edwin Wright, FSI Interpretor

The King: I am grateful for an opportunity of a private talk with the President. I shall speak frankly because we have confidence in your friendship and we wish to explore some points of genuine concern—and we would like equally frank comments in return.

The President: The United States of America would like nothing better than a large number of friendly and independent nations and it greatly jeopardizes this aim if there are difficulties among its friends. In this connection, our sincere wishes are for good relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan.

The King: This question of Afghanistan-Pakistan relations is both important and difficult. It has grown up during the past seven or eight years into a clash of seeming principles. Behind it is some reality, much emotion and heated propaganda in which all are to blame—including the Government of Afghanistan. It has created hopes and aspirations in both countries which cannot be ignored because of internal sympathies aroused and a hardening of attitudes. We have inherited this legacy at a time that calls for something else—a series of reforms that call for the unity of all forces in order to bring them to a successful conclusion. Now the reforms are the basic issue. They will brook no further delay. Negative elements could seize the offensive and destroy any plan to use logic and reason. The administration is being transferred to new elements such as Dr. Zahir who was here last month. A successful development would not only benefit Afghanistan but have important influence in regions throughout Asia or Africa.

The previous administration pushed the Pushtoonistan issue to the point of violence and twice our borders have been closed. What is of primary importance to the new administration is how it can best carry out internal reforms in a stable manner. In allowing more freedom of expression, an irresponsible opposition could pick up the foreign issue and by demagoguery inflame passion so as to destroy the new plans for reform. The government must retain the confidence of its people and cannot ignore popular attitudes that have been too long intensified. It is therefore the determination of this administration to live within the Tehran agreement, refer to events as merely reports (without comment) and hope that Pakistan will carry out a similar policy, so that in the matter of time, the issue can be left in silence. We would be quite satisfied if Pakistan would reciprocate with similar actions.

This raises a second question mentioned yesterday regarding the GOA agreement with the USSR concerning military arms and training. Mr. President you asked whether the USSR might not use the presence of technical advisers in Afghanistan and of military trainees in convenient countries to create a security issue by penetrating our military establishment. We were concerned with this issue after World War II when we made the arrangement and continue to be anxious.

(Here His Majesty went into a lengthy description of the inadequacy of the security forces in 1946—and the difficulties of any satisfactory solution.) The USSR-Afghan deal was—and is—a risky one and at the time when world tensions were high, it seemed justified. Afghanistan could trust America but could it trust countries armed by America to refrain from use of those arms against Afghanistan? But the world situation has changed. While military officers sent abroad are carefully chosen and watched, there have been instances where individuals seem to have shown immaturity and weakened before propaganda. Now it is recognized that Afghanistan's army is too large and too expensive. Civil demands will increase so a military reorganization is in contemplation. The territory of Afghanistan is not at present threatened—so no more arms necessary. In a year there will be sufficient officers trained to use the Soviet arms—so the sending of officers can be discontinued. We have reviewed our decision and have decided it is time to disengage. In this we need help and advice. Perhaps we can rebuild and expand the Corps of Engineers for a dual purpose—buildup of roads, housing, etc. By identifying our officers in the army with civil and economic development, we could strengthen their pride and intensify their loyalty—which is now high but can be improved and redirected to a degree.

The President: I greatly appreciate this frank exposition of your views. It has been illuminating, more than reading many papers. We need to discuss this in more detail. Our own plans for the next year are in doubt but the matter is of such importance that it should be explored.

The King: I am not making any formal statement here but simply exposing our problem and asking for a sincere and frank discussion.

At this point the President asked that Secretary Talbot and the Ambassador be brought in. He asked them if there would be further meetings between members of the delegation and US officers before the King left. Mr. Talbot replied that there would be a breakfast meeting on Saturday.

The President concluded the meeting as it was announced the helicopter was on the lawn to take him to Otis Air Force Base.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Visit of King and Queen 9/63, 1/63-9/63. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Wright on September 12. According to the President's Appointment Book, the meeting was held at the White House. (Ibid.) The King also met with Rusk on September 6, and discussed economic development programs in Afghanistan. A memorandum of this conversation is ibid., National Security Files, Countries Series, Afghanistan, Visit of King and Queen 9/63, 1/63-9/63.

330. Telegram From the Embassy in Portugal to the Department of State 330. Telegram From the Embassy in Portugal to the Department of StateSource

Lisbon, September 6, 1963, 7 p.m.

239. Eyes Only for President and Secretaries of State and Defense. From Under Secretary. Following constitutes my summary of the Pakistan situation as I found it during visit and should be regarded as basis for my report to President on Monday.

1. There is no doubt that the GOP from Ayub down are filled with deep fear of potential Indian military action to destroy Pakistan. This has its roots in the frightful blood bath of the partition period. It is reinforced by recollections of Indian moves to seize Janagadh, Hyderabad, and Kashmir and the more recent cynical Indian absorption of Goa. It is the reaction of a small nation living next door to a nation four times as large which it hates and distrusts. It is pervasive throughout Pak society. It is the central obsessive basis of GOP policy.

2. In providing military aid to India we have in Pakistan's view upset military balance under which, in opinion of Ayub and military commanders, West Pakistan, at least, was defensible. The Paks cannot be reassured merely by emphasizing the preponderately defensive character of our aid to India. A key aspect of Pakistani strategy has depended on their ability to strike into India in the event that India attacked either the East or West wing, since the dimensions of Pakistan do not permit defense in depth. This element of strategy is frustrated as we help increase India's defensive strength.

3. There is no substantial difference between the Pak estimate and our own USIB estimate of Chinese offensive capabilities against India from the north although we put a somewhat higher estimate on Chinese logistic capabilities. We also agree with Paks that Chinese would not attempt to launch a major offensive against India. Where we do not agree is in the area of lesser objectives, in which Chinese might seek political, psychological, or territorial gains through limited military operations.

4. Paks therefore see our efforts to help India, plus UK and USSR efforts to help GOI, to obtain a force level of 9 effective divisions as in effect providing India with the possibility of two armies. One army would be used to deter potential Chinese attack from north and the other army could be deployed and utilized in quick thrusts deep into Pakistani territories. Paks see, for example, that the new radar installations planned for Calcutta would have a range permitting full surveillance of the very limited Pak disposition of air strength in East Pakistan, while the increase in Indian armor and tactical air would permit an easy over-running of East Pakistan land defenses. Meanwhile the present Indian army reinforced in defensive strength could contain or attack West Pakistan.

5. Believing as they do that China will not attack India from north, they see even less danger to Pakistan from any direct Chinese aggression. The one area of contiguous border which they regarded as indefensible was, they hoped, taken out of the play by their action in reaching an agreed demarcation line with the Chinese last March.

6. They do see a Chinese capability for mounting an offensive against India through Burma as making far more military sense than an attack from the north. But this is an area of SEATO planning where US defensive power would be brought into play—and anyway they do not really think Chinese will mount such an attack.

7. Pak's profound fear and hatred of an aggressive India has led to a deep frustration approaching panic as they have seen their ability to defend themselves jeopardized by our aid to India. This frustration and despair translate into a sense of bitterness and betrayal when they are reminded that the shift in military balance has come about through the act of the US which they had regarded as their “best friend.” During my visit, the Paks tried, not altogether successfully, to express this feeling in terms of sorrow rather than anger, lamenting the fact that the US was making a tragic mistake in helping and trusting India. In their view Nehru is playing a devious Indian game that consists of milking the US for all possible aid with the intention, at the end of the day, of eradicating US influence from Asia. This is not merely Ayub's personal view. It was expressed by Paks at all levels.

8. Against this background the Paks are unwilling to accept, as meeting their security requirements, any military guarantee that the US is presently willing to propose. They see the following deficiencies in any such guarantee: (A) The Indians would almost certainly fuzz up the issue of aggression, particularly since action would most likely be started with a confused incident in Kashmir.

(B) The Americans—who have in the Pak view been consistently soft on Nehru—would be extremely reluctant to take military action against the Indians.

(C) US reluctance would be intensified by the probability that American intervention would invite a counter-threat of Soviet intervention, evoking the spectre of an escalating great power conflict.

(D) An Indian slash through Pakistan could occur very quickly in view of the lack of geographic depth, leaving the Americans confronted with a fait accompli which they would be loath to upset.

(E) The refusal of US to undertake joint planning against the Indian threat is taken as further confirmation of their prediction that an American response to Indian aggression against Pakistan would be slow and inadequate.

9. Accompanying this fear bordering on despair, is a growing doubt in Pak minds whether their policy of alliance with the US is viable for the future. They see India getting benefits both from the US and Soviets by playing one country off against the other without incurring the additional exposure (in Ayub's terminology “the political liability”) that comes from maintaining an alliance relationship. (Ayub cited, for example, Khrushchev's recent threat of missiles against Pakistan if Paks continue to permit the US to maintain the Peshawar base as well as similar threats at the time of the U-2 incident.)

10. While Paks are bedeviled by feeling that the logic of their situation might suggest adopting a course of conduct similar to that of the Indians—i.e. playing one against the other—they have no stomach for such business. Their hatred and contempt for the Indians make them averse to neutralism or neutrality which they regard as a typical Indian posture. (Note, for example, Ayub's shying away from the full implications of “normalization” of relationships with Communist Bloc.) Moreover, as a Muslim people with a fierce “mountain tribal” sense of independence, they hate the Communists.

11. As a test of American intentions, apart from our willingness to curtail aid to India, the Paks put greatest emphasis on our utilization of threat of curtailment as a lever to bring about Kashmir settlement. Kashmir remains the symbol of Pak-Indian difficulties. When pressed as to how Kashmir settlement could resolve the danger from potential Indian aggression, Pak answer is that if India ever brought itself to settle Kashmir on fair basis this would represent such a revolution in Indian policy as to make possible peaceful coexistence.

12. At no time during my conversation with GOP did Paks raise question of additional military aid nor did I offer it. Silence on this point reflected conscious decision on Pak's part that they must concentrate their efforts on trying to dry up flow of our MAP to India and thus maintain status quo in military ratio. This course apparently seems far better to GOP than pressure on US for additional military help that would enable them to maintain military balance at increasingly higher level, since Paks presumably could not win this race in the long run in view of the vast numerical superiority of Indian population and India's greater resources. Moreover, Paks recognize the inadequacy of their economy to support matching acceleration of military build-up.

13. This concentration on trying to bring about curtailment our MAP to India is also at least a contributing reason for their rejection of our offer of measures to give greater reality to assurances and the failure on their part to propose alternative measures, since they presumably feel that the acceptance of such measures might be interpreted by US as a license of US to continue military assistance effort to India.

14. Against background of foregoing we must also take into account Pak deep conviction that India—neither under present leadership nor in future—can be expected to act as useful agent in South Asia on behalf of free world, or even as an effective counterbalance to Chinese theme of “Asia for Asians.” Thus Paks see our policy as threatening their very existence but producing no strengthening of free world.

15. Yet in spite of all the foregoing it seems clear to me that in the last analysis, the GOP is not finally committed to any well-defined line of future policy. The impression was clear in Rawalpindi that GOP was groping for an effective new orientation while at the same time profoundly hoping US could be persuaded to return to former policy that would not include Indian military aid.

16. Thus, we can assume that there is still a large element of indecision in Pak attitude. They will not, in Ayub's words, do anything “stupid” nor act precipitously. At the same time it is my firm view that if matters are permitted to continue on their present course, we shall over a period of time see a gradual erosion of our influence with Paks, with mounting pressures for Pak move in general direction of neutralism. This could mean possible slow progression by small steps toward removal of “political liabilities” with Soviets and Chicoms leading to possible ultimate withdrawal of GOP from alliance. This last move would be taken only very reluctantly and only in response to sense of accumulating frustration.

17. During this period of agonizing reappraisal on part of GOP, Ayub and his ministers all desire a continuance of close conversations with US. Thus Ayub quickly seized my suggestion that my visit be regarded as only the beginning of a series of close talks of which Bhutto's forthcoming trip to the US could form a part.

18. During this crucial period of rethinking in Pakistan, I urge that we engage in a serious fresh look at our own South Asian policy to see if formula can be found for sustaining effective relations with Pakistan. Such a re-examination should, I think, be directed at at least three general areas of policy: (A) Critical study of potential character and dimensions of our MAP for India within framework of comprehensive policy for all of South Asia, including consideration of possible phasing out of Indian MAP at earlier point than heretofore contemplated.

(B) Additional measures to give realism to our assurances of military support for Paks, as for example, Indian Ocean task force.

(C) Additional MAP for GOP.

General Quinn has helped me prepare this telegram and he concurs. I am asking Ambassador McConaughy to cable his comments.1

Blue

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/BALL. Secret; Immediate. Received in the Department of State at 5:54 p.m. Repeated to Karachi eyes only Ambassador. Relayed to the White House.

1 In telegram 523 from Karachi, September 8, McConaughy concurred entirely with Ball's assessment of the situation in Pakistan. (Ibid.)

331. Memorandum for the Record 331. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, September 9, 1963, 12:10-1:10 p.m.

Meeting with the President on Ball Mission to Pakistan

PRESENT

The President

State

Secretary Rusk

Under Secretary Ball

Under Secretary Harriman

Dep. Under Secretary Johnson

Asst. Secretary Talbot

Defense

Secretary McNamara

Paul Nitze

General Quinn

CIA

John McCone

White House

McG. Bundy

R. W. Komer

Under Secretary Ball summed up his impressions of Pakistani visit. He thought central thrust of Pak policy was deep, obsessive fear of India. We were mistaken if we thought this merely tactical. Rusk asked for a look at whether this fear had grown in last few years—he thought it had. Harriman commented that when he saw Ayub in '55 latter was optimistic over Indo-Pak settlement, but no longer. Ball continued that what touched off the current outburst of Pak fears was US military aid; they feel they'll be overrun—East Pakistan manifestly was indefensible. But they want the old 3-1 ratio maintained at least. Their main pitch to Ball was to stop US aid to India; but now they've conceded to McConaughy they can't get this, so they want more balancing MAP from us.1

Ball went on to say that Ayub's own domestic position is not as secure as it was; strong popular sentiment exists for a deal with China. The rationale is that, after all, Americans condone Indian-Russian relationship. But this line was not to Ayub's personal taste or Bhutto's. When Ball pressed Ayub about precise meaning of Pak intent to go on “normalizing relations,” Ayub was extremely fuzzy. He was categorical that alliance with Peking was not what they had in mind. Nor would they pull out of CENTO and SEATO. So what it seemed to come down to was increased trade relations, perhaps cultural relations too. Ayub felt he had to go this far for domestic political reasons, but would not go any further. So Ball saw this as an empty threat. He had no real fear they'll go very far down road toward China and USSR, unless “pushed to the wall” as Ayub put it.

The President asked about Peshawar. Ball replied that when he taxed Ayub privately, the latter admitted he'd made “2/3 of a commitment” to McCone. He needed more time since Assembly was in session but intended to go ahead with expansion.

Rusk asked if Ayub knew how little we were actually doing with the Indians. Ball said this never really came up. Quinn thought the Paks really knew; their intelligence was excellent. Ball said it must be understood that the Paks were not wholly rational on this issue. They were reacting to the very fact we were helping, not so much to the amount of help.

Ayub had dismissed Ball's suggestions for closer military relations with us, because he feared we'd take this as carte blanche to go ahead with MAP for India. Ball summed up by saying we should re-examine the Pak-Indian military balance. Perhaps we should give supersonics to neither. In the meantime, “let's be cagy with Bhutto when he comes.” We could go ahead with some economic aid before Bhutto comes, but not the airport loan. We were not at any point of immediate crisis; “Ayub said they wouldn't do anything stupid.” The visit gave him a chance to blow off steam. We also need to do enough for Ayub to permit him to hold his position, because he's a lot better than anyone else in Pakistan.

The President asked why Ayub had no interest in pre-positioning, etc. Ball said he feared we would take this as putting us in a position to go ahead with India. Quinn further elaborated on their position as being that CENTO planning took care of the Communist threat, so there was no use in bilateral planning unless we were ready for planning against India.

The President left the room at this point. Mr. Ball, continuing the discussion, suggested that we not resist too much any little gestures of the Paks toward Peking because then they have less incentive to try them. Perhaps we shouldn't have objected to the civil air agreement.

Rusk asked how about pre-stocking equipment for India in Pakistan, to be released only in event of Chicom attack. Perhaps this was grasping for straws. Talbot felt the Indians wouldn't be very happy over this.

McNamara was certain that over the next six months the Paks would become interested in the dual-purpose moves we proposed. If General Taylor stopped in Pakistan in early November on his way back from CENTO and re-raised these matters, he might get a pretty good response.

Ball interjected that the Paks feared India, with our help, would create two armies, one to block the Chinese and the other to take on Pakistan. McNamara agreed with the Pak feeling that they had a serious military problem. Indians could reach a level when they could lick the Paks soon. It wasn't US military aid that created this problem, but India's increase in its own military budget from around a $750 million level before the Chicom attack to $1.8-$2 billion later. Our aid to India was marginal so far. But we couldn't build up Pakistan to the point where it matched far larger India. The only useful counter for the Paks was not US military aid, but the promise of US military support if they were attacked. Since the Paks couldn't possibly match Indians, they'd increasingly look to us for the military guarantee China couldn't really give them. It was too far away. So let's pursue this line when Bhutto is here, and then when Taylor goes out.

Rusk asked whether the real problem was fear of India or Pak fear that an Indian buildup would prevent Pak military pressure on India over Kashmir.

The President returned to the room, and Secretary Rusk summarized the sense of the meeting: (1) We had reasonable assurance the Paks won't withdraw from CENTO or SEATO; (2) We had reasonable assurance on continued use of Peshawar and a fair prospect they will go ahead with expansion; (3) We were not so sure there wouldn't be further flirtations with the Chinese. However, Ball commented that these were unlikely to go very far and we should not make too much noise about them. Ball couldn't believe that they'd go as far as defense relations with the Chinese. Rusk was not so sure, so felt we should look at the alternative possibilities.

The President wondered if there wasn't danger of an informal understanding that the Paks would attack India if the Chicoms did. Ball and Quinn both thought this highly unlikely. The Paks didn't want to get overcommitted to Peiping. Ball's visit would also produce some Pak second thoughts, as was already evident from Ayub's subsequent talk with McConaughy.

The President asked about Joe Alsop's thesis that the Chicoms just might attack again. Bundy said CIA doesn't think so; Joe was just sniffing the fearful air of New Delhi.

After Mr. Ball described how General Quinn had beaten Ayub at golf, despite Ball's orders, Quinn briefly described the difference in Pak and US estimates of the Chicom threat. In essence there was only minor disagreement over capabilities, but a larger one on intentions. The Paks just didn't think the Chicoms would attack again, but we saw this as a possibility.

(The meeting then turned to the Lisbon visit.)

RWK

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings with the President, 8/63-11/63. Secret. Drafted by Komer. The time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is taken from the President's Appointment Book. (Ibid.)

1 McConaughy reported on September 9 that he had reviewed the Ball visit with Ayub the previous evening. Ayub indicated that he was prepared to try to live with the repercussions of some limited continuation of the U.S. military assistance program to India, provided that there was a balancing increase in U.S. military assistance to Pakistan. (Telegram 526 from Karachi; Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/BALL)

332. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 332. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, October 10, 1963, 8:56 p.m.

309. Following are highlights of discussions held in Washington October 3-6 between Foreign Minister Bhutto and the President, Under Secretary Ball and Governor Harriman:1 1. From the start we sought to avoid repetition of arguments on both sides as presented at Rawalpindi. Bhutto accepted this approach in principle.

2. We made clear we had carefully considered all points made by GOP leaders at Rawalpindi about India's alleged threat to Pakistan and our military aid to India, but that we would proceed with a limited, selective military aid program for India tailored to meet the Chicom threat. Underlined our policy to help countries standing up to Chicoms.

3. We stated that we accept as a political fact that Pakistan's fear of India is genuine, whatever we think about the justification of that fear, and suggested that Pakistan accept as a political fact our decision to help India within the limits of our assessment of what is required to meet the Chicom threat.

4. Bhutto replied that he could accept these two “political facts of life” as a basis for discussion, though this did not mean that he accepted validity of the proposition that U.S. military aid to India should continue.

5. Discussions proceeded on this basis with initiative left to Bhutto to indicate, within framework of these political facts, what Pakistan wished from us. Ensuing conversations on this basis were inconclusive, and throughout the discussions we received impression Bhutto was without instructions to commit GOP to any new position on major subjects raised, though in course of one informal luncheon conversation with Harriman he made a remark which could be construed as hinting at more MAP for Pakistan as an offset to Indian program.

6. We also expressed our strong concern at recent evidences of a continuation of Pakistan's policy of “normalizing” its relations with Communist China. We pointed out that Pakistan's reply to Chou En-lai's letter proposing a nuclear disarmament conference, and the sending of an official delegation to the Chicom national day celebrations, for instance, caused extremely adverse reactions in the US, encouraged the Chicoms in their objectives, hardened India's stand in Kashmir, and pulled rug from under more conciliatory elements in India.

7. Bhutto attempted to justify Pakistan's steps toward “normalization” as intrinsically minor matters, on which Pakistan could be trusted not to go too far, and tried to defer any further discussion of this matter.

8. We found, however, that Bhutto continued to question the necessity for more aid to India. Thus, some of the discussion covered familiar ground on both sides. For instance, Bhutto again made the suggestion, which the President rejected as self-defeating, that the US should use the leverage of its military aid to India to induce the GOI to settle the Kashmir issue with Pakistan. Bhutto also expressed strong indignation at recent Indian moves designed to integrate Kashmir into India and concern at American aid for rebuilding the road from Srinagar to Leh.

9. The President suggested that it might be useful for General Taylor to go to Pakistan to examine with Pakistan military leaders the measures which we could take that might tend to reassure Pakistan about our support in the event of an attack on it by India. Bhutto welcomed this suggestion and we anticipate that General Taylor will visit Pakistan following the CENTO Military Committee meeting in Ankara November 5-6. Possibility also raised that McNamara might visit Pakistan with Taylor, although this not firmed up. Bhutto later informally suggested that Ball also come with these officers. Latter possibility only a Pak suggestion and we do not intend to act upon it now.

For London

While you may draw on above for discussions with CRO, suggest you also state Assistant Secretary Talbot will of course provide more details during his stay in London October 9 to 11.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-INDIA. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted in SOA by Harold G. Josif; cleared with BNA, and by Cameron, Grant, Harriman, and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Ball. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

1 Memoranda of Bhutto's conversations with Ball and Harriman are ibid., POL PAK-US. A memorandum of Bhutto's conversation with Kennedy on October 4 is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Pakistan, General, 10/63. Bhutto discussed many of the concerns that he raised in Washington in a conversation with Rusk in New York on September 28. (Secto 24 from USUN, September 28; Department of State, Central Files, POL PAK-US)

333. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 333. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, October 17, 1963.

MAC—

Our Indian Ocean exercise is moving ahead. Rusk is sending a strong (I helped beef up) reply to atrocious Gilpatric 2 October letter,1 stressing politico-military value of carrier task force. It accepts DOD offer of 2-4 months a year ad interim, but goes on to urge a carrier be deployed at least eight months out of twelve. So we're keeping ball in play.

Need for some more reassuring words to Paks when Taylor/McN. go out is also a plus factor. Since DOD has already offered intermittent deployment, doesn't this permit their mentioning to Paks that we'll be deploying a task force though perhaps not full-time for a while.

Incidentally, the draft (6 Sept.) SecDef memo for the President,2 which calls for maintaining 15 carrier level through FY 1969, contains many arguments which would justify Indian Ocean project. Unfortunately, the draft deals with everything else but the rationale for where to deploy the 15 carriers. Nonetheless: 1. Costs (pp. 9-10). These are very crudely estimated at $300 million annually for each carrier and associated air group, escorts, etc. But one cannot blithely accept this figure as the new out-of-pocket cost of putting a one carrier force in the Indian Ocean, because: (a) it includes amortization of capital outlay for the carrier, planes, associated air group, which costs have already been incurred; (b) Indian Ocean force might well need fewer escorts, less high performance aircraft etc. because of reduced air/sea threat and chiefly conventional mission.

2. Theater vs. CONUS-based tactical air (pp. 11-12). The case for theater-based air looks better in Indian Ocean than almost anywhere else, simply because this is the theater farthest from CONUS. So here theater-based forces are most needed to (a) improve probability of getting strategic warning; and (b) furnish temporary protection for deployment of CONUS-based forces.

3. Carrier Air vs. Land-based Air (CASF). Precisely those missions described as “efficient employment” of carrier air look best in Indian Ocean: (1) providing local air superiority to cover arrival of CASF (which gets out to IO area later than WE or FE); (2) providing tactical air power where land bases are not immediately available. We have no US land bases in IO area. To buy some could be very expensive. There are allied air bases, but presumably any aggressor would strike these first (e.g. in Iran) unless they were protected. So in IO a combination of initial sea-based airpower, rapidly supplemented by land-based CASF looks like best bet, and I am confident that the analyses of possible contingencies DOD proposes to undertake will confirm this quick judgment.

4. Increasing Mobility of Land-based Tactical Air. This factor is least persuasive with respect to IO area: (1) it is farthest from CONUS; (2) it has no US bases; (3) while more airfields are becoming available en route to the area, there are complex problems of getting timely overflight and landing rights; (4) airfields in the area might not be available prior to D-day for political reasons; (5) acquiring US bases would be expensive, aside from the political problems involved.

5. Vulnerability of Carriers. Least in IO area. Chicoms have only limited air capability against carriers in IO. Indonesian or UAR capabilities, even with Soviet-supplied weapons would be degraded. Soviet or Chicom subs would have a long haul to operate in IO. Only serious threat I can envisage would be Soviet long-range air operations in event of an attack on Iran.

6. Assumed deployment of even 13 carrier force (pp. 36-37) would allow for one carrier in Indian Ocean. From Atlantic-based forces it would allow one carrier full-time in Mediterranean, and an additional carrier four months out of the year for overseas deployment in such areas as the Arabian Sea. From Pacific-based forces three carriers could be deployed continuously in the Western Pacific or two there and one in the Bay of Bengal. Presumably with 15 carriers we could keep two carriers deployed almost full time in the IO area.

I would summarize the case for at least one carrier continuously in the Indian Ocean as follows: A. While of lower strategic priority than the Europe/Mediterranean or Pacific areas, it is the only one where we now have almost no theater forces.

B. From a purely political viewpoint, as well as that of deterrence, we need some visible multi-purpose US power in the area. The list of possible contingencies for which it would be useful is long (Arab-Israel, Arabian Peninsula, Somali-Ethiopia, Persian Gulf oil, Iraq/Iran, USSR/Iran, Pak/Indian, Sino-Indian, Chicom/Burma, SEA, Malaysia/Indonesia)

C. From a military viewpoint the highest priority initial requirement in such contingencies would be tactical air, in support of indigeneous local forces.

D. Because of the sheer distance of this area from CONUS, the lack of US bases in the area and the political complications of getting them, this initial requirement can best be met by carrier-based air. It would inter alia provide cover for the supplementary deployment of land-based air as needed.

E. In considering the relative cost/effectiveness of carrier vs. land-based US airpower to meet this initial requirement, we must include the cost of acquiring land bases, adequately protecting them against initial strikes, the continuing rental (direct and indirect) involved, and possible restrictions on employment of land-based air.

RWK

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 9/28/63-10/19/63. Secret.

1 The letter from Gilpatric to Rusk conveyed Joint Chiefs of Staff views that a limited, intermittent deployment of a carrier task force to the Indian Ocean was feasible. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, India 381 ((10 Jul 63), Indian Ocean Task Force 63) See footnote 1, Document 320.

2 Not found.

334. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 334. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, October 20, 1963, 11:04 a.m.

881. Deptel 795 to New Delhi,1 info Karachi 549, London 2286. Following summary for information only and contents should not be disclosed to foreign officials. It is uncleared and subject to amendment upon review of memcon.

Gov Harriman called in B.K. Nehru October 18 in order make known US views regarding recent Indian hard line on relations with Pakistan and in particular Bakshi's policy directives regarding Kashmir. Grant also attended. Principal theme of Governor Harriman's remarks was that we were engaged in effort to stem Pak flirtation with Chicoms, and India should avoid actions which make our task more difficult.

Governor Harriman noted US-Pak relations troubled because of our military aid to India. We are making serious efforts to bring Pakistan to recognize its long-run interest continues with West. Bakshi's announcement interferes with our efforts. Furthermore appearance that India considers Pakistan has combined with China against India, which we believe contrary to fact, aggravates rather than lessens our mutual problems with Pakistan. Grant mentioned Pak Aide-Memoire2 alleging Indians taking further steps integrate Kashmir; appealed to GOI avoid actions which would be treated by Paks as provocative.

In reply B.K. Nehru said Bakshi had made certain proposals to Kashmir assembly under authority Kashmir constitution. GOI had no power interfere. There was no plan integrate Kashmir National Conference with Congress. Status of Kashmir did not depend upon changes announced by Bakshi but rather on article 370 of Indian Constitution. GOI had no desire or intention to change this. He was unaware Pak Aide-Memoire on Kashmir.

In discussion which followed Harriman and Grant took line that we objected not so much to substance of Indian actions as their effect on Indian and US relations with Pakistan when we were seeking end to Pak-Chicom flirtation. Repeatedly stressed need for GOI avoid actions which would aggravate Paks. Timing of Kashmir actions unusually provocative and badly timed. B.K. Nehru took line that Pak complaints such as those in Aide-Memoire are only tactical aspects of over-all “hate India” policy which results from Pak refusal accept fact of greater Indian size and power. Nehru also said India increasingly convinced there is much greater Pak-Chicom understanding than appears on surface.

Governor Harriman said we feel we have made progress with Bhutto. Noted obsessive Pak fear of India. Said we had been telling Paks we believe this utterly unfounded but we had to accept fact of fear. We had assured Pakistan of our assistance if India attacked just as we have assured India. We would continue try handle their unfounded fears this way. We had told Bhutto that our military alliance was directed against aggression from any quarter. We did not see this as affecting India although we knew India had no intention of attacking Pakistan.

Gov Harriman said Paks are beginning to recognize some of their moves toward Chicoms have been counterproductive. We think Pakistan agreement to any type military alliance with Chicoms most unlikely. Appealed for Indian understanding of what US Administration doing on subcontinent. Our policy and attitude toward India unchanged; we firmly support India's defense effort. But we do look to India to help in our efforts with Pakistan.

Nehru expressed full confidence in US policies in subcontinent saying India did not wish do anything to make our task more difficult. He said he would welcome suggestions as to what India could do to assure Paks. India did not endanger their security.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret; Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider, cleared by Harriman, and approved by Grant. Also sent to Rawalpindi and Karachi and repeated to London and Ankara for Talbot.

1 On October 3, G.M. Bakshi, the outgoing Prime Minister of Kashmir, announced to the legislature of Kashmir a number of proposed constitutional changes designed to further the integration of Kashmir into the Indian Union. In telegram 795 to New Delhi, October 9, the Department of State transmitted its deep concern over Bakshi's announcement, which was viewed as likely to complicate the difficult task of promoting a climate in which progress could be made toward reducing tensions on the subcontinent. (Ibid.)

2 Reference is to the October 16 aide-mémoire summarized in Document 335.

335. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Grant) to Secretary of State Rusk 335. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Grant) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, November 4, 1963.

SUBJECT

Pakistan Aide-Mémoire

Pakistan has added a new dimension to its tactics and appears to be attempting “to prove” its charge that India has aggressive intentions against Pakistan. In the last few weeks we have received three Pakistan Aide-Memoires,1 the main points of which are: (1) Recent Indian statements regarding Kashmir are contrary to U.N. resolutions and India has increased its hostile activities along the cease-fire line; (2) United States military assistance to India is being misused by India and has been issued to units facing Pakistan; (3) The radar we are giving India sweeps Pakistan territory.

A fuller explanation of the validity of these charges is given below, but in brief our view is as follows: (1) The proposals by the outgoing Prime Minister of Indian-held Kashmir would, if adopted, be contrary to U.N. resolutions. There is no evidence of increased Indian military activity in Kashmir; on the contrary, there is some evidence that Pakistan has increased its military strength in the area. (2) We have no evidence that India has diverted equipment in militarily significant quantities to units facing Pakistan. (3) The radar in Calcutta will cover portions of East Pakistan.

1. October 16 Aide-Mémoire

a. Complaint

The Aide-Mémoire charges that: (1) the proposals of the outgoing Prime Minister of Indian-held Kashmir would constitute further steps toward the integration of Kashmir into the Indian Union and are contrary to commitments made by India to the U.N.;

(2) the Government of India has stepped up hostile activities along the Kashmir cease-fire line, particularly near the village of Chaknot;

(3) these acts of defiance by the GOI “stem directly from the strength and encouragement that she (India) has drawn from the continued flow of large-scale military aid to her from the United States and Britain since November last year.”

b. Facts

(1) The proposals by the Kashmir Prime Minister would, if endorsed by the Kashmir Parliament in March 1964, constitute a further integration of Kashmir into India. However, they are relatively minor moves in a series of steps by which India in the last 10 years has slowly eliminated many of the differences between Kashmir and the states of the Indian Union. There remains the basic difference embedded in Article 370 of the Indian Constitution.

(2) The U.N. cease-fire line observers have reported that there is no special Indian military build-up near Chaknot, but that the Pakistanis have moved an understrength battalion into the area.

c. Our Position

(1) Governor Harriman informed Ambassador Nehru that the Kashmir proposals were provocative and badly timed and that India's hard line on Kashmir was undercutting our efforts to calm down the Pakistanis.

(2) We have instructed Embassy New Delhi to inform the GOI that: (a) we expect the Indians to exercise restraint during the current tense period; (b) our position on the proposed changes on Kashmir's status is governed by the U.N. resolutions; and (c) we expect India to make maximum use of the U.N. cease-fire line observers and to avoid unilateral, provocative actions.

(3) We have also instructed Embassy Karachi to urge restraint on the Pakistan Government and to inform it that as far as the Kashmir proposals are concerned our position with the Indians is that these are governed by U.N. resolutions.

2. October 19 Aide-Mémoire

a. Complaint

The Aide-Mémoire charges that: (1) the GOI has issued arms supplied by the western powers to Indian military units facing Pakistan, and

(2) our military mission officials in India are prevented by the GOI from carrying out their investigations.

These actions, the GOP stated, confirm “Pakistan's contention that India plans to utilize western arms aid against Pakistan.”

b. Facts

(1) Embassy New Delhi has reported that some pieces of U.S.-supplied equipment may have been misdirected during the confusion of last fall and the subsequent military regrouping.

(2) Our military mission in New Delhi has not been hampered by the GOI in carrying out its inspections of MAP-supported units and it is unaware of diversion of equipment in a militarily significant quantity.

(3) The military mission has confined its inspection activities to MAP-supported units.

c. Our Position

(1) Embassy New Delhi has been instructed to inform the GOI that we are unaware of irregularities as charged by the GOP, but, nevertheless, we are depending on the GOI to exercise great care to see that U.S.-supplied equipment is not inadvertently diverted to units facing Pakistan.

(2) Embassy Karachi has been instructed to tell the GOP in a low key way that: (a) our military mission in New Delhi is exercising its inspection responsibilities without hindrance; (b) we are not in position to check the distribution of each individual piece of equipment, but we have no evidence that militarily significant quantities have been misused; and (c) if we discover irregularities we will take appropriate steps with the GOI.

3. October 29 Aide-Mémoire

a. Complaint

The Aide-Mémoire charges that the radar being provided India (Calcutta and western India) for air defense sweeps East Pakistan and part of West Pakistan, and that, if Indian intention were not to cover these areas, the radar would have been located nearer the Tibetan border. The current location of the radar is “… confirmation of its [Pakistan's] view that India's acquisition of western military aid is, in India's plans, to be utilized primarily against Pakistan.”2

b. Facts

A map in the joint U.S.-U.K. air defense report3 shows that the mobile radar in the Calcutta area will cover large portions of East Pakistan. This has been confirmed by the Air Force. The same map shows that the mobile set in the Delhi area reaches approximately to the border of West Pakistan.

The location of the radar units was determined following a joint U.S.-U.K.-Canadian-Australian estimate of the Chinese Communist air threat and reflects the recommendations of U.S. experts of the best sites to defend India against this air threat.

We have asked DOD for a full report on the radar coverage, both by the mobile radar now in place for the U.S./U.K./Indian air exercises and the permanent installations which will be established later.

c. Our Position

We do not presently propose to reply formally to this Aide-Mémoire.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Confidential. Drafted by Naas of November 1. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Secretary Saw.”

1 Not printed. (Ibid.)

2 Brackets are in the source text.

3 Not found.

336. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy 336. Letter From Prime Minister Nehru to President Kennedy

New Delhi, November 11, 1963.

[Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Nehru Correspondence, 9/1/63-11/22/63. No classification marking. A copy of this letter is attached to a November 11 letter of transmittal from Ambassador Nehru to President Kennedy. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-INDIA) This letter has not been declassified by the Indian Government.]

337. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 337. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, November 12, 1963.

Chet Bowles is very anxious to get some flavor of your current thinking about India-Pakistan tomorrow. He's putting up a brave front but actually feeling a bit low, and wondering whether we're still signed on to moving ahead with India.

We've explained to Chet that it isn't our policy but circumstances that have changed. Neither we nor the Indians could keep up the accelerated pace stimulated by the Chicom attack last October. The Hill revolt against foreign aid in general was another blow. So Ken skimmed off the cream, while Chet got out there just in time for the VOA fiasco and then Bokaro. Finally, the Paks have pre-empted center stage in their major campaign to spike our India program; by being so difficult they have in fact partly achieved their objective.

The important thing to do with Bowles is to reassure him that we intend to go forward with India, while getting him to set his sights a little lower and more realistically: (1) He argues for a five-year $314 million MAP commitment to India in return for tacit Indian agreement to stay within a reasonable force ceiling (thus mollifying the Paks) and to limit their take from the Soviets (see his memo attached).1 This is not much more than the $50 million a year the Pentagon has been thinking about. Chet feels he can sell such a package to Delhi. Query—are we able to make a five-year commitment just now?

(2) Chet thinks it foolhardy and counterproductive for us to keep beating the Kashmir drum at this point. We had a good try at settlement under the Chicom gun last winter, but no further movement is likely until another such break comes along. The trouble is the Paks are now whomping up the Kashmir issue as a means of highlighting Pak/Indian differences and thus proving their point that India is really out to get Pakistan, not fight China.

(3) Bokaro and US economic aid. Chet fears the Soviets will come in and get credit for Bokaro by offering much less than the $500 million we couldn't swallow. He'd dearly love to forestall the Soviets here, but it's hard to see what we can do at this moment without annoying the Congress.

While giving Bowles a friendly hearing, I'd urge holding off on any responses just yet till we can talk further with him. However, it would help greatly if you'd tell him you'd see him again before he goes (he'll be here through Thanksgiving).

Bob Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, Security, 1963. Secret.

1 The attached 5-page memorandum, dated November 12, entitled “Toward a Balance of Political and Military Forces in South Asia,” is not printed.

338. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) 338. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, November 14, 1963.

When Chet Bowles saw the President 13 November, the latter was favorably impressed in principle with Chet's pitch that it might be possible to trade off a 5-year US military commitment (at $65-$75 million or so) for at least a tacit understanding that the Indians would not exceed certain reasonable force goals, would limit their buys from the Soviets, and would take a more active role in our grand strategy against China. Chet thought that such a force ceiling would make continued MAP for India more palatable to the Paks, and would also limit the amount of free foreign exchange India would divert to defense at the expense of development.

The President's view was that Chet might have an interesting proposition even if it had only a 50-50 chance of success or even if we didn't get full performance. I attach the papers1 which Chet gave the President and the latter read with interest.

Chet mentioned India's desire for defense production aid (further highlighted in Nehru's recent letter, Delhi 1625).2 I suggested, however, that we might not want to build up too much of an indigenous production base at this time, since it made India less dependent on us and was the facet which most worried the Paks.

The President asked that he be given a preliminary Washington view on this in time to discuss it again with Bowles before the latter left. I've also told Phil Talbot about this and suggested a 22 November deadline for a joint State-Defense memo, so we can give it to the President for weekend reading.

While Chet told the President he would really like something on the order of $75 million annually, he also presented attached estimate that some $314 million over five years might do the trick. He noted that these figures would need to be carefully reviewed (I pointed out that DOD's current thinking was more on the order of $50 million a year, and an 18 division and 39 squadron ceiling). Also, a 5-year commitment a la Iran was hard to make at a time when future aid prospects were so uncertain. However, in response to the President, I did hazard, on the basis of previous talks with you, that if necessary DOD could probably find another $10-$12 million a year for Indian MAP.

My own reaction is that if in fact we're now involved in a long term MAP relationship (on the order of $50 million plus annually), why not see how much we can use this leverage to get some things from Delhi that we really want? If Bowles turns out to be over-optimistic, have we really lost very much?

R. W. Komer3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, India, General, 10/20/63-11/22/63. Secret.

1 Not attached. The documents cited are attached to a copy of Komer's memorandum in Department of State files. They include the memorandum cited in footnote 1, Document 337, a chart detailing the estimated cost of U.S. portion of supporting an 18-division Indian Army and a 47-squadron Indian air force for Fiscal Years 1965-1969, and a 2-page memorandum entitled “Proposed Programs for MAP, India.” (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-INDIA)

2 See Document 336.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

339. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) 339. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)Source

Washington, November 18, 1963.

YOUR REFERENCE

JCSM-735-631

SUBJECT

Indian Ocean Carrier Task Force Deployment

In a letter of October 2, 19632 the Deputy Secretary of Defense, in answer to a query by the Secretary of State, conveyed the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that intermittent deployment of a carrier task force to the Indian Ocean is feasible, if politically desirable.

In response, in a letter of October 17, 1963,3 the Secretary of State suggests: a. That the Department of Defense develop detailed proposals for the intermittent deployment of a carrier force for not less than two months out of every six.

b. That State and Defense staffs jointly prepare a paper to identify the problems involved in deployment of a carrier force for about eight months of the year and, also, to examine other actions, including CASF deployment, that would enhance the U.S. military presence in the Indian Ocean area. The resultant paper could then be used as a basis for further State, Defense and JCS discussion.

The political objectives of the carrier force deployment, as noted in the August 173 and October 17 letters of the Secretary of State, are to provide a visible U.S. military presence in the Indian Ocean area in order to help deter potential aggressors, reassure our allies and stabilize certain intra-regional disputes among our friends, e.g., India and Pakistan.

In addition to the foregoing, the Department of State has provided specific political guidance to be used in developing an initial carrier task force deployment schedule: a. Unless special circumstances arise which would call for revision, the task force should avoid the East Coast of Africa.

b. No visits should be scheduled for Burma and Ceylon at this time.

c. No visits should be scheduled to any of the Indian Ocean island territories of Great Britain or France.

d. Planned port visits should seek to strike a balance between calls on allied and friendly non-allied countries.

e. Port calls and other activities during the first deployment should be within the general framework of informal visits and good will missions.

Consistent with the foregoing, I request that the Joint Chiefs of Staff provide, at an early date, a proposed schedule for an initial carrier task deployment in the Indian Ocean for two months out of six. If feasible, the first six months period should begin with December 1963. This proposed schedule will be used as the basis for final political clearances prior to the first deployment.

The second suggestion of the Secretary of State, to study an eight months per year deployment, will be undertaken in the near future. The Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA) will coordinate Defense action in this matter.

Robert S. McNamara4

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, India 381 (10 July 63), Indian Ocean Task Force 63. Secret. Drafted in OASD/ISA on November 13 by Captain E.L. Schwab.

1 See footnote 1, Document 320.

2 See footnote 1, Document 333.

3 Not found.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates McNamara signed the original.

340. Memorandum for the Record 340. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, November 30, 1963, 11:00 a.m.

SUBJECT

Meeting with the President, in attendance Mr. Bundy, meeting lasted approximately 1-1/2 hours

[Here follows discussion unrelated to South Asia.]

6. The President then brought up the question of Pakistan and I reviewed briefly the intelligence community's feeling of concern and their view that our Pakistan relationship was of the greatest importance. Bundy mentioned the forthcoming December meeting between Ayub and General Taylor. The President made no comment but seemed to feel that Taylor should remain in the United States because of serious Defense budget problems. Bundy reviewed the great number of commitments we have made to Pakistan and that we would come to their defense if India should use our arms to attack Pakistan. The President expressed the greatest of confidence in Ayub and a feeling that we had not been forceful enough with him, had not given him a feeling of confidence in our motives and that he had drifted into the thought that we would abandon him in favor of India. He stated that he wished this corrected in a most positive manner.

[Here follows discussion unrelated to South Asia.]

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 80 B 01285A, Box 6, McCone Files, DCI Meetings with President Johnson, 23 November-31 December 1963. Top Secret. Drafted by McCone on December 2.

341. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan 341. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PakistanSource

Washington, December 2, 1963, 11:51 p.m.

755. Following summary of November 29 conversation between President Johnson and Foreign Minister Bhutto.1

President saw Foreign Minister Bhutto November 29. Under Secy Ball, Amb Ahmed and Talbot also present. Meeting had been arranged because Bhutto had told President on November 25 he had very important message from President Ayub and that he would stay as long as necessary to meet the President and deliver it.

At beginning of conversation Bhutto handed President written message (text being transmitted septel)2 from President Ayub expressing warm friendship and best wishes. After Bhutto had amplified message by his own comments and had heard President's appropriate response, it became clear that he thought purpose of meeting had been served and that he did not expect to discuss substantive issues in US-Pakistan relations.

The President then referred to Bhutto's statements that in spite of some difficulties the association between the people of Pakistan and the US was fundamentally strong and that the US still had a true friend in Pakistan. He thanked Bhutto for these sentiments, said he was indeed a friend of Pakistan and would continue to be one if Pakistan would let him. He said the American people and Congressional leaders had known Pakistan as resolutely strong against Communists. Now he understood Pakistan was going to have a state visit by the leaders of Communist China. He wanted Bhutto to know there would be a serious public relations problem here if Pakistan should build up its relations with the Communist Chinese. He was not pro-Pakistani or pro-Indian but pro-Free World. Such a state visit would make it increasingly difficult for us.

Bhutto said he appreciated this but he wanted the President to understand that Pakistan had its own public opinion. He could not describe the intensity of Pakistani feeling about India. India was bigger and stronger and Pakistan could never forget Indian antagonism.

To this the President responded that the Pakistani people knew that we would not let India attack Pakistan. President Ayub knew this. Pakistan had our assurances that we would live up to our commitments. We would also make sure that we would do nothing to hurt Pakistan.

Bhutto replied that Pakistan, being an ideological state itself, understood the strength of other ideological states such as the Communist ones. There were dangers but Pakistan could be trusted to handle them. US actions which contribute to the growing power of India were driving Pakistan to the wall. Ayub Khan had the strength to stand against this trend. Pakistan did not want to end its relations with the U.S. Yet everything since the Chinese attack on India had confirmed Pakistan's views that Southeast Asia, not India, was the object of the Chinese appetite. But, the President interjected, it is you who are going to sit down to eat with the Chinese Communists.

In response to an assertion that the Chinese leaders were going to visit a number of Asian and African states, Mr. Ball said that these included such countries as Mali, Guinea, Ghana, and Somali—countries with which the Communists have been involved—and this was fine company for Pakistan to put itself in.

The President said that the strongest men in Congress in favor of Pakistan are also the strongest against the Chinese Communists. The Chinese state visit was coming just at a time when we are making strenuous efforts to keep our alliances strong and our foreign aid program going. There was great opposition to aid. These were facts of life. When the Congressional leaders learned of the state visit, their adverse reactions could be expected. Bhutto replied that he could understand this but asked that the U.S. also examine with Pakistan the difficulties American actions were causing it.

In parting, the President said again that he was a friend of Pakistan and would remain so. He asked Bhutto to give his warm regards to President Ayub.

When Talbot saw Bhutto off at the airport later same evening Bhutto showed himself deeply upset and disturbed by turn conversation had taken. He seemed to regret that he had not taken issue with the President's statements and said he could not understand why the Chinese visit had been raised in this way. Mr. Talbot explained again corrosive effect on our relations of increasing Pakistani relations with Communist China. We have strong indications both the Chinese and the Soviets are extending area of their conflict to embrace subcontinent and we regretted seeing our ally Pakistan become an instrument of Chinese Communist ploys. President Johnson spoke from his heart and out of realities of American interests when he had reaffirmed his friendship with Pakistan, when he had said he wanted to continue this friendship, when he had made clear we would not let India attack Pakistan, and when he had expressed his deep concerns over Pakistan's involvements with Chinese Communists. Mr. Talbot added that we indeed appreciated Mr. Bhutto's strenuous efforts to come to Washington and acknowledged with gratitude the Pakistani tribute inherent in his action. On our side we were anxious to retain and strengthen this friendship. Unfortunately, when Pakistan got itself mixed up with Communist China this tied our hands domestically and also, of course, removed any leverage we might have had to influence India in direction of accommodation with Pakistan.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 US/JOHNSON. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cameron and Talbot, cleared by Ball and with the White House, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to New Delhi and London.

1 Bhutto came to the United States for the funeral of President Kennedy who was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, on November 22.

2 Telegram 756 to Karachi, December 2. (Ibid.)

342. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) and Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 342. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) and Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President JohnsonSource

Washington, December 11, 1963.

The attached paper from Rusk, McNamara, and Bell recommends a major initiative toward India. Its genesis was a proposal by Bowles that since we were probably going to be giving India substantial military aid against the Chicoms anyway, why not package it in such a way as to get the maximum from the Indians? So he suggested trading an informal indication of our longer-term MAP plans for Indian assurances that they would limit their own buildup, not divert too much from development to defense, and not lean too heavily on Soviet military aid. We fear Khrushchev may be coming to India shortly with some military goodies, so would like to start moving first.

The chief risk is a tough Pakistani reaction, unless we handle the transaction with skill. But we cannot afford to give the Pakistani a veto on our Indian policy, when we have a major opportunity to move India closer to us. Moreover, to mollify the Paks we would plan on a similar long-term MAP commitment to them, if they undertook to behave themselves vis-à-vis Peiping.

This thoughtful paper speaks for itself; we urge that you approve it. In fact, we'd go somewhat further than cautious State and DOD—perhaps to as high as $65 million MAP a year including high performance aircraft, if needed as an added sweetener to get the Indian response Bowles hopes to get. We propose a meeting to discuss this enterprise with you at 11:00 Thursday.1

McG. B.

RWK

Attachment2

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

SUBJECT

Next Steps on Military Aid to India and Pakistan

Proposal for India

Ambassador Bowles proposes that we make a five-year military assistance commitment to India in exchange for Indian decisions to limit their force levels, hold down procurement of military equipment from the Soviet Bloc, hold to a minimum diversion of foreign exchange from economic development, exercise restraint in relations with Pakistan, and cooperate with us in the containment of Communist China. He believes that there is a reasonable chance that India will make these decisions, if our offer is good enough. (See Enclosure 1.)3

The Departments of State and Defense and AID agree that if we could reach some such understanding with India, it would be well worthwhile. A steady long-term policy of military cooperation with India would do much to stabilize our relationship and serve our long-term political aim of pulling India closer to the United States. Indian decisions to settle on moderate force levels would hold down Indo-Paktensions. We would achieve some preclusion in fact, and excessive Soviet penetration of the Indian military would be prevented. Major diversions of foreign exchange from economic development, to which we are so heavily committed, would be avoided. (Over the past three years India has spent an average of $95 million of its own foreign exchange for defense; estimates indicate this figure may go as high as $160 million for Indian FY 1964. This would put real pressure on the Indian development program.) Since we will probably provide substantial MAP to India over the next several years anyway, we ought to maximize the leverage we get from it by proceeding along the above lines.

We believe, however, that we should stop somewhere short of as explicit a commitment as Ambassador Bowles suggests, and should approach it more cautiously, rather than laying all our cards on the table at the outset. Such tactics would leave us greater freedom of action to gauge the likely Pakistani reaction, and to find out whether the Indians would indeed be sufficiently responsive, before deciding how much of our own plans to divulge. Nonetheless, we would go ahead now with the preparation of a five-year MAP program for India in the $50-$60 million annual range, so that we would be prepared, if the timing were ripe and the Indian response to our initial probes satisfactory, to divulge our longer term plans.

Proposal for Pakistan

In the years since 1954, we have established a pattern of military assistance to Pakistan which in many respects resembles the one which we are now suggesting for India. We have agreed to modernize and maintain five and a half divisions and to modernize the Pakistan air force. The latter has come to mean that eventually we will replace the obsolescent F-86 squadrons with supersonic aircraft. (Pakistan already has one squadron of F-104s which we delivered in 1961.) We have told the Pakistanis from time to time of the quantities of certain types of equipment we were planning to deliver to meet our commitments. By providing this level of support, we were able to make it possible for the Pakistanis to limit their over-all force goals and the diversion of their foreign exchange to military expenditures.

One reason for caution about moving ahead too fast in revealing to India our longer term MAP plans is that these might leak prematurely to Pakistan and cause a violent reaction before we had laid the necessary groundwork. To mitigate the Pakistani reaction we might provide them too, at roughly the same time, with an indication of our longer term MAP intentions, perhaps for the next three years. To this end, we should also prepare a three-five year MAP program for Pakistan for use if and when the timing seems ripe. We've been planning on around $40 million annually in continuing MAP. As with India, we would also attach conditions to this program, particularly that it is predicated upon our clear understanding that Pakistan will not go too far with China.

Unfortunately Chou En-lai's coming visit to Pakistan leads me to believe that now is the wrong time to talk with Ayub about longer term MAP. However, as we chart our course in the troubled waters of U.S.-Pakistan relations during the months ahead, I believe it important that we be prepared to give Ayub a clear signal of our continued willingness to support Pakistan unless its conduct impairs our ability to do so. General Taylor in his forthcoming visit to Pakistan will be prepared to reiterate our assurances in the course of his review of our military relationship. (See Enclosure 2.)4

Recommendations

In order to permit us to move ahead with both India and Pakistan, but with appropriate tactical flexibility, I recommend with the concurrence of Bob McNamara and Dave Bell that you make the following decisions:

India

1. That we develop an internal plan, not to be disclosed to the Indians as yet, for a program of military assistance in support of Indian forces to meet the Chinese threat to be accomplished over a period of five years. The JCS determined on November 23 that India required 12 divisions and two independent brigades together with supporting units and 35 squadrons, including three squadrons of night/all-weather fighters to meet this threat. (We are now supporting the conversion of six divisions into effective mountain divisions and have told the Indians that we will convert two more if funds are available.)

2. That the above program include helping convert those Indian ground forces which are required to meet the threat from China into effective mountain divisions with supporting elements; that we continue to assist India develop its logistic capacity to support these forces along the China border; and that we continue to help India meet a part of its defensive needs against China through domestic production.

3. That the program include continued support to the Indian Air Force, including radar, communications and air transport. However, we would leave open the question of supersonics and postpone for the present a decision on supplying these to India or Pakistan.

4. That the above plans be developed within a range of $50-60 million in MAP annually, leaving for subsequent decision the precise five-year program level.

5. That our willingness to extend and thereafter continue such long-range assistance will rest upon a satisfactory understanding that the Government of India will: limit its over-all forces to reasonable levels; limit procurement of arms from the Soviet Union; avoid excessive diversion of foreign exchange to defense expenditure; and exercise restraint in its relations with Pakistan. Such United States action would also rest on continued United States-Indian agreement on the political and military implications of the Chinese threat.

6. That, as to the tactics with India, we proceed on the following careful, step-by-step basis: a. At this point, we would only authorize Ambassador Bowles to say that we were considering longer term plans for military aid to India. Before we could firm these up we needed a better understanding of proposed Indian defense plans, force ceilings, resource allocations, procurement from third countries, etc., over the next several years. We need to tell the Pakistanis nothing at this point.

b. General Taylor would reinforce this line during his visit to India (16-18 December) and probe Indian intentions. (See Enclosure 3.)5

c. Depending upon Indian responsiveness, we would be prepared at an appropriate time to divulge to India our longer term MAP intentions. Exactly what we say at that time would depend on our program conclusions and the extent of the understandings the Indians were prepared to reach with us along the lines of paragraph 5 above. We would in no case, of course, make a firm commitment but only state our intentions, the carrying out of which would be dependent on Indian performance and United States appropriations. We would simultaneously inform Pakistan.

Pakistan

7. That we similarly develop an internal U.S. plan for a possible three-five year MAP package for Pakistan within the context of our present commitments. This plan should include the provision of two more squadrons of supersonic aircraft.

8. That we not divulge this until we are further satisfied as to Pakistani intentions vis-a-vis their alliance obligations; but that we be prepared, if circumstances seem ripe, to divulge this program at such time as we divulge our long-term Indian program.

9. That any three-five year Pakistan MAP program be predicated on clear understandings that Pakistan will place acceptable limits on the development of its relations with Communist China and will fulfill the basic requirements of its alliance relationship with us.

Since we plan to move ahead with India in stages, I hope to be able to recommend to you that we move toward longer range military delivery schedules for Pakistan before or when we disclose the full dimensions of our Indian package to Nehru. Max Taylor will drive home to Ayub the dangers of his present course with China when he is in Karachi on 19-20 December. Upon his return we shall take another look at the whole problem of containing Communist aggression on the subcontinent. Since Pakistan sees its so far limited relations with Communist China as serving its national interest, just as India sees relations with the U.S.S.R. as serving its interests, it is perhaps too much to hope that we can develop unlimited security relationships with either country. Yet if we can move ahead, albeit somewhat jerkily in each country, I believe these proposals for military assistance to India and Pakistan will advance our strategic objective of resisting Communist pressure in the area without placing intolerable strains on our relations with either country. Moreover, the course we propose, though not ideal, seems best calculated to reduce the possibility that the Sino-Soviet dispute will be fought out in the subcontinent.

DR6

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, India, Vol. I. Secret.

1 President Johnson postponed the meeting proposed for December 12. Telegram 1241 to New Delhi, December 14, indicated that President Johnson was interested in the modified Bowles proposal put forward December 11, but decided to delay any decisions concerning it until after he had received General Taylor's advice, following Taylor's impending trip to India and Pakistan. (Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 JCS) A December 20 memorandum from Komer to Bundy indicated that the meeting to consider proposed military assistance programs for India and Pakistan would have to be rescheduled in January 1964. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, India, Vol. I)

2 Secret.

3 Enclosure 1 is the November 12 memorandum by Bowles cited in footnote 1, Document 337.3

4 Enclosure 2 is an undated 3-page “scope paper” that lays out the background and objectives of Taylor's trip to Pakistan. No drafting information is provided.

5 Enclosure 3 is an undated 2-page “scope paper” that lays out the background and objectives of Taylor's trip to India. It was drafted on November 25 in DOD/ISA/NESA by Colonel Miller.

6 Rusk's initials appear in an unidentified hand, indicating Rusk initialed the original.

343. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 343. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, December 18, 1963.

SUBJECT

Indo-Pakistan Relations

In view of the major decisions presently pending concerning military assistance to India, we thought you would be interested in an assessment of current Indo-Pakistan relations. The paper, which is enclosed, concentrates on the developments since October.

We have concluded that in the future Indo-Pakistan relations will be tense but, at this stage, serious hostilities appear unlikely. We have also concluded that the most that the United States can do in the present atmosphere is to try to exercise a moderating influence and that no initiative on Kashmir is possible at this time.

Marion Baldwin1

Enclosure2

INDO-PAKISTAN RELATIONS

A. The Situation

Over the last year the external pressures upon India and Pakistan, at a time when both governments are in a relatively weaker internal position, have resulted in a hardening of the position of each country toward the other and a consequent exacerbation of tensions, exemplified in the following:

1. Recent Pakistan Actions

Pakistan has used all media and available opportunities (bilateral discussions, CENTO and SEATO meetings, U.N., etc.) to emphasize its fear of India and conviction that a militarily strengthened India will be aggressive. In October the Pakistan Government mounted a sustained propaganda and diplomatic campaign charging India with misusing western arms assistance and taking actions in Kashmir which are contrary to U.N. resolutions. On the diplomatic level Pakistan delivered a series of aide-memoire to us and the U.K., exchanged bitterly worded notes with India and lodged letters of protest with the U.N. A virulent anti-Indian press campaign and vitriolic statements by Pakistan leaders supported the diplomatic moves. The principal thesis of these efforts was that India's actions had proven Pakistan's contention about Indian aggressive intentions. Also, we have received intelligence reports which indicated that Pakistan was considering causing trouble of some sort along the Kashmir border or within Kashmir. In the last few weeks there has been a decrease of overt indicators of immediate trouble in Kashmir, although the Pakistan press has periodically returned to the attack. Also, we continue to receive reports of the distribution of arms to civilians in the cease-fire line area. Foreign Minister Bhutto, who was out of the country in October, has informed us that he is strongly opposed to the current tactics of the GOP and would exercise his influence to prevent extreme reaction to inconsequential Indian “provocations.”

More recently Pakistan has requested India to close a branch office of the Indian Deputy High Commission in East Pakistan charging it was used for subversive activities. This policy toward India has been accompanied by a continuing series of steps to normalize Pakistan's relations with Communist China, India's enemy. Most recently, Pakistan has agreed to a state visit by Chou En-lai and Chen Yi in February 1964.

2. Indian Actions

Nehru's Lok Sabha speech on Kashmir in August withdrew the “concessions” offered during the earlier bilateral talks and virtually slammed the door on third party mediation.

On October 4, 1963 the outgoing Prime Minister of India-held Kashmir, Ghulam Bakshi, made certain proposals which, if adopted, would constitute further steps toward the integration of Kashmir into the Indian Union. While the Bakshi proposals thus far have not been implemented, an action of this nature is a red flag to Pakistanis and was the immediate stimulant for the Pakistani campaign. Later in the month the GOI replied to a Pakistan note of protest in a particularly insulting manner and a letter to the U.N. Security Council was provocative. The Indian press did not reach the high pitch of the Pakistan press but it did add to the over-all tense atmosphere.

On November 27, Home Minister Nanda told Parliament that Kashmir was “fully integrated” into India and, that while there was no present GOI intention to repeal Article 370 of the Indian Constitution which accords a special status to Kashmir, Nanda indicated that Article 370 undoubtedly would be further diluted by additional changes in consultation with the Kashmir government. He indicated that the GOI approved the nomenclature changes proposed by Bakshi on October 4. Supplementing Nanda's remarks, Nehru told Parliament November 27 that the “process of gradual erosion of Article 370 is going on” and should be allowed to continue.

India has continued to expel sizeable numbers of Muslims from Assam and Tripura into East Pakistan and has taken a hard line on negotiations with Pakistan on this problem. However, on November 13 Home Minister Nanda announced that special judicial tribunals were being formed to review expulsion cases to assure that no errors were made. Moreover, agreement reportedly has been reached with Pakistan for diplomatic and ministerial talks on the Muslim evacuee problem. This may be jeopardized by Pakistan's action to close India's branch office in East Pakistan.

During recent conversations with Ambassador Bowles, Indian leaders have stated that India will follow a policy of restraint in its relations with Pakistan. Prime Minister Nehru has reiterated this assurance in his recent letter to the President.3 In addition, Indian officials both in New Delhi and Washington have informed us that the GOI would be pleased if the United States repeated its security assurances to Pakistan regarding aggression by India. The Indians state that they hope and assume that this would have a quieting effect on the Pakistanis.

B. U.S. and U.K. Response

In Washington and in Karachi and New Delhi, we have urged both India and Pakistan to act with restraint, to avoid provocative actions, and to make full use of the U.N. Observers in Kashmir if trouble ensued. We also informed the governments that our position on the Bakshi integration proposals is governed by the U.N. Security Council resolutions. With respect to the Pakistani charges of Indian misuse of western military aid, we have intentionally refrained from making any formal reply to Pakistan so as not to encourage spurious charges, but we have quietly urged the GOI to take great care that equipment is not misdirected to units facing Pakistan. We have closely coordinated the substance of our response with the U.K. which in London and in Karachi and New Delhi has followed a parallel line. The British have emphasized to Pakistan that provocative acts on its part could undermine Pakistan's legal position on Kashmir.

C. U.N. Observer Group Action

General Nimmo, the head of the U.N. Military Observer Group in Kashmir, has reported that there has been a substantial increase in incidents in the last eighteen months and he has requested six additional military officers to bolster his current force of 34 people. Although the U.N. Secretariat has for several months been attempting to find a replacement for the DC-3 transport aircraft previously furnished the Group by the Italian Government, General Nimmo has recently expressed interest in obtaining instead smaller aircraft or helicopters to increase the observation capability of the Group. We have asked our Mission in New York to consult informally with the Secretariat to obtain the latter's clarification of its requirements so that we may explore ways we and others might assist to resolve this question.

D. Analysis of Current Maneuvers

1. Pakistan

a. In an exchange of views a few weeks ago in London, CRO considered that the GOP's genuine concern about the Indian threat and its exaggeration for tactical purposes are so intertwined, even in the minds of Pakistan's leaders, that it is difficult to determine the relative weight of each factor. We agree with this assessment.

b. Pakistan's strong reaction to the Bakshi proposals and subsequent Indian statements signalling further integration of Kashmir into India was automatic; for domestic reasons alone the Government had to put up a strong front. It is also possible that India's actions gave an opening to the “hardliners” within the GOP, such as Foreign Secretary Ahmed, to press their viewpoint.

c. The actions taken by Pakistan in the last few months have been directed as much against us as India. They are a reminder that Pakistan is not reconciled to United States military assistance to India, that the Kashmir issue is not dormant, and that Pakistan has the capacity to exacerbate tensions any time it wishes.

d. Pakistan's actions are also indicative of its basic attitude, or modus operandi toward its neighbors, namely, that the only way to get results is to apply strong pressure. This approach was used against Afghanistan during 1961-1963 and has always been applied in cycles to India. As Ayub puts it, Pakistan's policy is to “lean against India.” At the same time Pakistan is seeking to enlist on its side the power of other nations, particularly the United States, but also including Communist China, to bring pressure to bear on India to resolve the dispute on terms favorable to Pakistan.

2. India

The Indian Government is determined to avoid an appearance of weakness vis-a-vis Pakistan. Many influential Indians suspect that Pakistan has secret agreements with Communist China and are fearful of coordinated pressure against India. Consequently, India is not disposed to negotiate or to be forthcoming with Pakistan. The Indian assessment of the October tension was mixed. Moreover, as is the case in Pakistan, the GOI for domestic reasons must periodically demonstrate its ability to be firm with Pakistan. The official Indian position has been that the Pakistanis were playing to the gallery in preparation for General Taylor's visit and that India's best course was to ignore or play down Pakistani protests and act with restraint. A second viewpoint within the GOI was that the Pakistanis might well cross the ceasefire line in order to dramatize the Kashmir issue with a possible serious escalation of the conflict.

The GOI has told us that they favor a strengthening of the U.N. Observer group and a broadening of their terms of reference to include police as well as military action on the cease-fire line.

E. Conclusion

1. Indo-Pakistani relations will involve a fairly constant stream of insults in both directions, disposition to play up the border incidents that have been increasing in numbers over the years, and a heating up of other disputes; but at this stage serious hostilities appear unlikely.

2. The policy the United States should follow should be based on our recognition that geography, history, and our limited capability rule out the possibility of early solutions to any of the problems that underlie the Indo-Pak discord, desirable as this development may be. Therefore, our most constructive contribution is to play a consistent moderating role. This entails the following courses: a. Refrain from getting drawn into the dispute or taking sides;

b. Make known to both countries that we expect restraint and as necessary point out what the requirements of restraint are in specific situations;

c. Support an effective U.N. observer operation;

d. Undergird our selective and limited military assistance given to both countries for defensive purposes with sufficient political safeguards to avoid an arms race;

e. Continue to maintain that Kashmir is not an obsolescent issue but refrain from United States initiatives on the Kashmir issue in the present climate; seek to get the Pakistanis to realize the adverse effect of their current posture toward the Chicoms on the resolution of this issue and to persuade the Indians of the unwisdom of treating the Paks as though they are allied with the Chicoms;

f. Conduct quiet explorations through nongovernmental groups to determine whether it is possible to develop noncontroversial areas of cooperation within Indian and Pakistan society and attitudes receptive to finding rational solutions to the whole range of Indo-Pak problems.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Confidential. Drafted by Naas on December 11 and cleared by Talbot.

1 Baldwin signed for Read above Read's typed signature.

2 Confidential. Drafted in SOA December 11 by Naas, Laise, and Lakeland and cleared with INR and UNP.

3 See Document 336.

344. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 344. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, December 19, 1963, 7:24 p.m.

1267. Following summary is for information only and contents should not be disclosed to foreign officials. It is uncleared and subject to amendment upon review of memcon.

At own request Ambassador Nehru called on Acting Secretary Ball December 18. Ambassador said purpose was to obtain up-to-date reading Administration's thinking prior return to India for consultations. Principal topics of conversation relating to India were Indian Ocean Naval Task Group and longer-term military aid. (Ambassador also inquired about situation in Cambodia and Viet Nam. This being reported separately.)

Indian Ocean Naval Task Group: Ambassador said his reports from Delhi indicate General Taylor “went slow” on Indian Ocean Task Group, probably due situation created by press leak; Prime Minister Nehru “heard him out” and later made statement in Parliament giving Indian position. Ambassador asked what is concept behind Task Group—to link up Seventh Fleet with Mediterranean? Is concept more psychological than military? Mr. Ball replied Task Group would make forces available in Indian Ocean area in case of need, and give sense of US presence for defense of subcontinent which could contribute to its security. Mr. Ball emphasized that US not asking for bases. Ambassador suggested matter be kept at technical level and political aspects be played in low key. Mr. Ball agreed on low key approach and repeated US intention work things out through discussions.

Longer-Term Military Aid: Mr. Ball said US has under consideration longer-term military assistance to India. To make decisions we need more information about Indian plans on force levels; on diversion of resources from economic development; and “pretty definite” understanding regarding limitation of arms procurement from Soviets. Ambassador interrupted to ask what kind of understanding we had in mind. Mr. Ball said US could not work out longer-run aid for India if GOI would go around shopping in USSR. Ambassador asked if US would object to GOI getting Soviet arms as part of over-all plan on scope of Indian requirements and build-up. In such plan, US and Soviets each might supply some of what GOI unable achieve from own resources. Mr. Ball said that in view Congressional attitudes, for US to undertake longer-term assistance we would feel our aid should be “fairly exclusive,” Ambassador asked why. Mr. Ball replied there is difference between Soviet economic aid and military aid. Latter involves question of our security requirements and could establish relationship of Indian dependence on Soviets in military matters. Ambassador asked if General Taylor had discussed this. Mr. Ball said General Taylor would discuss it and added that this question subject to further discussion.

Ambassador said that Indian viewpoint would be to have a plan and to fill in gaps caused by limitation Indian resources where GOI could. Ambassador then said he understands US has two objections to Soviet arms aid: possible security compromise, and political objections. He said security problems could be overcome. Ambassador then cited Mr. Ball's statement that military assistance entails dependence and asked if US wants India to be dependent exclusively on US. Mr. Ball replied there is question of degree and this matter can be discussed further. He said US also needs more indication of India's plans to keep tensions down with Pakistan, in view of effect our arms aid on US as well as Indian relations with Paks.

Earlier in conversation Ambassador had expressed inability understand why Paks stirring up trouble with India. In response question, Mr. Ball expressed belief that Pak relations with Chicoms would remain “formalistic” and not develop into “something serious.”

Ambassador turned to US rationale for arms aid to India if US assessment is that Chicom won't attack. Mr. Ball said we do not believe Chicoms presently intend to attack again but we can't be sure about future. It is important for us that India not have to live in fear of an attack and that India be in position to meet attack if one develops in next few years. This does not mean we think India should have excessive military establishment and it important not to disrupt economic development.

Ambassador said he had no disagreement with this in principle. He also said that a defense plan which US might aid would have to be one of agreed magnitude. However, Ambassador said he foresaw “great difficulty” on the other two “conditions” (i.e. understanding re limitation arms procurement from Soviets and understanding re Indo-Pak relations). Ambassador then asked about the other “condition” he has heard, namely GOI undertaking security responsibilities in Southeast Asia. In response Mr. Ball said this not priority matter; stressed India needs to concentrate on own immediate problems. Ambassador next raised question of Sino-Soviet rift and after brief exchange of views suggested that Western actions could have important effect on rift. As he was departing Nehru said US insistence on exclusive Indian dependence on US arms, combined with placing India under protection 7th fleet, could have considerable effect on Soviet by seeming to place India in position of fearing attack from Soviets as well as from Chicoms. This could affect Soviet policy toward India and toward Sino-Soviet rift by tending push Soviets and Chicoms closer together.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-5 US. Secret. Drafted by Lakeland and approved by Talbot and Ball. Repeated to Karachi, London, Moscow, and Hong Kong.

345. Memorandum of Conversation 345. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Karachi, December 20, 1963, Noon.

PARTICIPANTS

President Mohammad Ayub Khan

Foreign Minister Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto

General Mohammad Musa, C-in-C of Pakistan Army

Mr. Nazir Ahmed, Secretary of Defence

General Maxwell D. Taylor, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Ambassador Walter P. McConaughy

Major General Andrew J. Goodpaster, USA

Taylor visited Pakistan December 19-20. A brief initial meeting between Taylor and Ayub at 8:15 a.m. on December 20 was reported in telegram 1188 from Karachi, December 21. (Ibid.)

After opening amenities, President Ayub in response to an invitation from General Taylor to give his general assessment of the security situation in the subcontinent, stated that he was bound to put forward the view that security interests of Pakistan had been seriously prejudiced by US military assistance to India. Vital interests of Pakistan had been placed in jeopardy. There was no telling what India would do with the added capability given her by the United States. He thought India would use the vast additional military strength to intimidate her smaller neighbors. The strength would not be used against the Chinese Communists. The Indians knew they could not challenge Communist China and they would in time seek an accommodation with the Chinese Communists. From the standpoint of India's own selfish interests, the augmented military program was a mistake. Indian military expenses rose about 300 per cent in the years just before the attack in 1962, and had risen another 300 per cent since then. This was a very heavy burden on the Indian people.

The US policy toward India had placed Pakistan in a “terrible predicament.” Pakistan was torn between her sense of loyalty to the United States as an ally and the need to look after Pakistan's security interests which had been hurt by US action.

In response to General Taylor's observation that there should be no incompatibility between national security and loyalty to an ally, Ayub agreed that this should be so. But he felt that Pakistan's security interests had been disregarded. The U.S. “held Pakistan's interests too cheap.” It seemed that Pakistan's security was considered an expendable commodity if it conflicted with other concerns of the United States. He thought that “wittingly or unwittingly,” the U.S. was building up the enemy of Pakistan. This was hard to reconcile with the status of uniquely close friendship which has happily prevailed between the United States and Pakistan. Ayub assured us that “we will fight for this land of ours.”

President Ayub indicated that he could not figure out why we had not required the Indians to come to a clear understanding with us on the nature of the commitments she would assume in return for the US aid she would receive. He thought India was assuming commitments against the Chinese which she could not and would not discharge, and was refusing to make collective security commitments to participate in the common defense which she could make and should be required to make. Ayub said it was self evident that the security objectives which presumably underlay our policy of assistance to India could not be achieved without a settlement between India and Pakistan, because the subcontinent was not defensible without the cooperation of India and Pakistan. Therefore, our Indian policy was self defeating unless we made an Indo-Pak settlement a condition precedent.

Ayub said it was the considered conclusion of the GOP that there would not be any Sino-Indian conflict. Tibet was not a feasible base for Chinese aggression across the Himalayas. He predicted that India would in time work out an accommodation with Communist China and then proceed to expel US influence from South Asia. He prophesied that the Indians would agree on “spheres of influence” with the Chinese. The Indians wanted only the “Indian Ocean littoral” and would leave Southeast Asia and the rest to Communist China.

The Indians would then be free to settle by force with Pakistan, using force in the same way that she has invoked force in the past. He recalled that India had already forced two mobilizations by Pakistan.

Ayub recognized that American assistance was not the only important contribution to the armament of India but he said that American aid was providing the decisive margin. And aid was the unsettling factor which was undermining the stability of the area. He said “only the Communists will benefit.” He said that all the peripheral small countries around India were disillusioned to see “US policy coinciding with India's.” They would feel compelled to turn to Communist China to seek a counterweight against a stronger India which could not be trusted. He said that “sometimes in a bad situation it is necessary to lie down with the Devil.” Commenting on General Taylor's remark that it was risky business to associate with the Devil, Ayub said sometimes it was necessary to decide which was the lesser of two Devils.

President Ayub insisted that the U.S. could not rely on Indian collaboration. He reiterated that India would eventually liquidate the US position in this area and accommodate with the Communists. The Pakistanis knew the Indians. Their positive prediction should be heeded. He recalled that Nehru has consistently sided with the USSR and the Communist Bloc against the U.S. and he will surely revert to this position. Ayub urged that the U.S. should support the smaller countries of South Asia. This was the natural course for the U.S. to follow in preserving a stable balance. All three of the big countries of the area (China, USSR, and India) were expansionist and it was disastrous for the U.S. to support any of them against the small countries. It forced the small countries to follow an unnatural course in trying to play one of the big Asian countries off against another as a means of self preservation. The Indians were not genuine allies of the U.S. and the U.S. is making a serious mistake to regard them as allies.

Ayub said that the people of Pakistan are completely baffled at the American policy of military aid to India. Everyone asks “Why?” and there is no good answer. The issue has made the life of every Pakistani miserable and the policy seems so clearly mistaken that Pakistanis keep looking for a deeper design not apparent to them. The President ended by saying, “We are in a fix. We have never had such a deep and close relationship as we have had with the U.S. and we want to continue to be your friends.” He implied that the creation of a deep sense of fear and insecurity in Pakistan was not consistent with friendship.

General Taylor expressed his appreciation for the opportunity of hearing firsthand a complete exposition of the President's views. He mentioned that the U.S. and the GOP evaluations of Chinese Communist capabilities against the subcontinent were about the same. However, we differed on the strength of defense forces needed by India as a deterrent. The figures which the Pakistan Service Chiefs had given him in an earlier meeting were somewhat lower than ours. He mentioned the state of shock which prevailed in the Indian Defence establishment right after the Chinese attack in late 1962 and the process of adjustment to more realistic planning objectives that had occurred since that time. He stressed the need for economic stability in India and assured the President that we did not have in mind any Indian military program which would destroy economic stability.

The defense program that the Indians are shaping up does not seem entirely unreasonable although it is somewhat higher than our estimate of force requirements. The Indians seem to be talking frankly to us on their defense objectives. Possibly they are hoodwinking us, but, if so, we have good checks which will soon reveal to us just what they are doing. General Taylor mentioned the force goals of Indian Army and Air Force and the problem of funding. He thought that funding problems would be an automatic and effective brake on any unwarranted Indian military expansion. The Finance Minister did not intend to allow defense expenditures to exceed the current rate of 5 to 6% of the G.N.P. He also was planning to reduce the foreign exchange drain caused by military procurement by 50 per cent. It was recently $235 million a year and he expected to cut it to $125 million. The British were not expected to make any major arms contribution. And the amount of aid to be received from the Soviet Union was highly problematical. The Soviets were evasive in what they would do. Considering the heavy Soviet obligations in Indonesia and Cuba it was doubtful if they had any large stocks available for supply to India. A runaway program seemed definitely unlikely. The U.S. would not underwrite the Indian deficit. Thus the economic factor would be the ultimate brake on the armament program.

In answer to a question from Ayub about the magnitude of the US military assistance program for India, General Taylor thought it would run about $50 million this year. In answer to Ayub's further question, he confirmed that this would be in addition to the Nassau Program of $60 million. In response to a further question from Ayub as to whether aid might be expected to continue at a figure more or less in this same range, General Taylor said no one could tell how much the US Congress would appropriate. Within the Executive Branch, the feeling was that a figure somewhere in this range was about right if Indian behavior should be right. We thought it would be worth that amount to help save a great nation from the Chinese Communist grip. The question had been carefully thought over for a long time and if India kept herself well detached from the Soviet Union and assumed some responsibility for the defense of the Free World countries facing China, the effort to help her would be worthwhile. The U.S. considered it essential to stop Chinese Communist expansionism in China's southern flank as well as in the Far East. The holding action on the flank involved both India and Pakistan.

General Taylor referred to some possibilities mentioned by Under Secretary Ball on his visit last September and said we would like to inquire further into the possibility of the U.S. contributing something additional to Pakistan's sense of security. We would like to demonstrate our determination and capability to assist Pakistan's defense in case of necessity. He mentioned our efforts to capitalize on the principle of strategic mobility. He said we were prepared to talk with the Pakistanis about bringing in Army and Air Force elements for experimental exercises. He also mentioned the prospect of an Indian Ocean Task Force which would afford additional sea and air protection. He spelled out in general terms our preliminary concept for the presence of the task force from the Seventh Fleet consisting of a carrier, two or three destroyers, and a fleet oiler, in Indian Ocean waters.

President Ayub said that this type of assistance was of value only if it were utilized in accordance with a military plan. Pakistan knew the high physical capacity of the US forces but the question had to be answered, “what do they come for?” General Taylor said we did not know for sure what the time factors would be in actual practice. We could compute them on a slide rule but we wanted to verify the calculations with actual exercises.

President Ayub thought it would be “just a gimmick” unless it was for a definite purpose—in support of a certain plan.

General Taylor said that a certain type of operational planning could be engaged in—planning on how to join up US forces with the Paks and make the best use of them on any frontier—North, South, East or West—without concentrating attention exclusively on any one. Naturally, we would not want it known that any planning against India was contemplated. President Ayub agreed that it was not necessary to orient the planning to one direction. All contingencies should be considered. Details could be deferred but “some discussion would be necessary.” He said that Pakistan would be agreeable to keeping all planning highly classified.

General Taylor thought that various aspects of planning could be accommodated as an outgrowth of the basic exercise. If it was assumed that US forces were positioned initially in a central area, several alternative plans could be worked out for theoretical movement of the troops to different fronts.

President Ayub asked if we could proceed with planning on that basis. With some preplanning the presence of mobile forces could be made effective and decisive.

General Taylor said it would have to be understood there would be no overt assumption of use of forces against India.

President Ayub readily agreed. He observed that there also could be a Soviet threat—from Afghanistan or even from Iran. The various contingencies should be considered.

General Goodpaster mentioned the recent US exercise in Germany where troops were flown in, married up with prepositioned equipment, and exercised in accordance with a plan for an appropriate field operation.

Ayub agreed that previous planning and prepositioning were useful.

General Taylor said there was in progress a world-wide study of prepositioning requirements. The earlier prepositioning in Germany was on the ground, but in the Philippines there was experimentation with the positioning of materiel in ships.

President Ayub said, “we can think further of that.”

President Ayub then reverted to the Indian question and predicted that the US-Indian policy would create problems for the U.S. He understood U.S. reluctance to take measures which would seem aimed at India. It would not make any sense for us to take direct measures to curb Indian misuse of her arms capability, at the same time we were building up that capability. He regretted that our influence had not been used in India to force a solution of the disruptive issues. He said that “India would not sit still” after her military capacity was built up.

In response to a question from General Taylor about why Pakistan had strong reservations about US assurances to Pakistan covering the contingency of Indian aggression, Ayub said the U.S. might not be able to come to Pakistan's assistance promptly. The good intention of the United States was not doubted. But the world situation and US global responsibilities might make it difficult even if the case were clear. The President observed that Pakistan could do the defense job for herself with proper modern equipment. Pakistan did not want to embarrass the United States or call on the U.S. to fight Pakistan's battles. He said Pakistan could perform the defense task “more cheaply.”

General Taylor mentioned the unfavorable geographical position in which Pakistan had been placed by fate. He thought that with potential military threats on several fronts, some reliance on US help was unavoidable.

President Ayub said Pakistan must be able to take the first shock of an Indian attack. He stated, “the strategic defense of East Pakistan lies in West Pakistan.” He thought that the GOP could hold in West Pakistan for a while. General Taylor affirmed that the United States wanted to keep Pakistan strong and its fighting forces tough so that they could have a considerable measure of reliance in themselves.

President Ayub said that the Pakistan forces needed something more in hand than they now have. He said if East Pakistan should be attacked “we go as hard as we can.”

General Taylor said in an ideal world there would be a unified defense of Pakistan and India.

President Ayub agreed, but said any such idea had to be dismissed. He had offered joint defense to Nehru four years ago and had got nowhere with that offer or any other attempt to cooperate. The Indians were completely negative and could not be brought to see the common interest.

President Ayub referred to the press reports of the proposal of an Indian Ocean Task Force and said he would tell us in all frankness that the political reaction to the reports was very adverse so far in African and Asian countries. It was interpreted as a reversion to “Gunboat Diplomacy.” It was thought of as a modern version of “teaching the natives and the heathen to behave.” He said the task force would be too far away to hurt or restrain Communist China. The task forces of the Seventh Fleet in Korean and Formosan waters were much closer to China. He had enough preliminary reaction from African and Asian countries to know the idea as it had leaked out in the press was not good. It had had a bad reception politically. He was “not in the know” but he had misgivings from this standpoint.

General Taylor asked if the reaction would be different if the task force were linked up with CENTO or SEATO responsibilities.

Ayub thought the “auspices” were important and that a collective security mantle would be an improvement.

General Taylor mentioned that the task force could operate in any context in fulfillment of CENTO, SEATO, or bilateral obligations.

Ayub thought that the defense problems in the Middle East and the subcontinent were essential land-air problems, not naval.

General Taylor noted that a carrier would provide a useful mobile airfield.

General Goodpaster observed that the task force would give us a better capability for backstopping our friends and carrying out our bilateral obligations.

President Ayub thought that with the remarkable jet air transport facilities the U.S. enjoyed, the Pacific was quite close and it would not take long for assistance to come from the Far East.

General Goodpaster mentioned the CASF groups in several sizes which are highly mobile and can close in on a given area within 48 to 72 hours.

President Ayub thought the task force was not the right sort of back-up for what we had in mind. He thought we needed staff talks on “what?” and “where?” If there was going to be a task force it needed the right sort of collective auspices. If the thing had been announced in a different way it could have been dovetailed with something acceptable. He thought it was unfortunate the way it had leaked.

General Taylor thought the question could be discussed in SEATO and CENTO councils.

President Ayub thought it would be a good thing to have discussions there.

Foreign Minister Bhutto said the Ceylonese leaders talked to President Ayub and him last week in the course of the official Ayub visit to Ceylon. Bhutto said the Ceylonese were quite concerned when the leak came out. The Ceylonese were worried about the nuclear weapons aspect, remarking that the Indian Ocean was free of the nuclear threat until this matter came up. They thought the task force would bring the confrontation of the great powers much closer to the Indian Ocean area.

Foreign Minister Bhutto then asked if we were consulting our allies first on the task force matters. He was assured that this was the case and that the reports to the effect that we had consulted the Indians closely on the matter over a long period of time were entirely without foundation in fact.

Ambassador McConaughy answered a question as to whether TTK and other Indian leaders had not been informed about the matter a long time ago, by stating categorically that no Indians had been consulted or informed about the matter until General Taylor did so earlier this week. He said he had already informed the Foreign Secretary to this effect earlier in the week.

President Ayub said he still thought the task force proposal as it now stands is “a gimmick.”

Minister Bhutto said that every country must be able to count on its own defense forces and have its own independent sense of security if it is to maintain its self-respect and its integrity.

General Taylor pointed out that no country in the present-day world could rely entirely on its own resources, not even the United States.

Ayub and Bhutto agreed that this was so and indicated that they had in mind more an initial holding capability so that the first shock could be absorbed. General Musa added that Pakistan badly needed equipment in order to prevent the heart of the country from being pierced during an initial attack.

President Ayub confirmed specifically in answer to a question from General Taylor that Pakistan did not want to enlarge its army or add greatly to the quantity of its equipment. The aim was to modernize. Ayub recognized that the United States would not want to negate its aid to India by automatically offsetting it in Pakistan. But he said that inevitably “you are involved on both sides under your present policy.” Ayub thought that if war should break out between India and Pakistan it would be bound to spread. It could not be kept localized.

General Taylor mentioned the U.S. conviction that the probability of Indian aggression was very low.

President Ayub thought that Indian intentions could change very rapidly when its capability changed. He thought that 1,000 years of history and antagonism could not be ignored.

Ambassador McConaughy recalled earlier statements of President Ayub that the Pakistanis could hold the Indians in case of an attack and administer them a lesson which the Indians would not forget.

President Ayub said the Pakistani resolve would remain the same but better quality of arms was needed to maintain the traditional ratio between the two countries. Pakistan would continue to rely on better skill, superior leadership, better fighting manpower and highly mobile equipment, “then India would not go off the deep end.”

General Taylor mentioned that we have got economic strings on India. The economic sanctions we could apply would in themselves be a strong deterrent to aggressive action.

President Ayub felt that various policy making elements in Washington “still bend over backwards to appease the Indians.” He said that Nehru consistently blackens the US reputation but seems to get more consideration from us the worse he acts. He said “it makes us sick to see how it goes.”

President Ayub mentioned with apparent approval a recent remark he attributed to an American caller to the effect that the U.S. seems to apply reverse order of priority in the consideration it shows to other countries. He said it seems that Communist countries get the most attention, then the neutralist countries, and finally the friends and allies—if anything is left.

General Taylor smiled at this but noted that we could not limit our help only to those who speak well of us. We would not do much helping if we confined ourselves to those who did not criticize us or follow policies divergent from ours. It was increasingly difficult to please all recipients of our aid.

Bhutto asked us to bear in mind that India had no interest in working with us in a security sense, once she is out of the China difficulty. “India will never be a security fortress.” General Taylor agreed that India would probably never be any great reinforcement to the Free World in a military sense, but he thought that politically and socially, India might become an asset. If it could be made into a good example of a going democratic nation, this would be a great development.

President Ayub noted that a year ago we had the Indians where we should have wanted them. We could have asked them to behave at that time, and they would have been bound to comply. They could not have turned their backs on the U.S. and turned to the Russians because the Russians would not pay. The opportunity passed quickly when we did not seize it and the present situation also is transitory. There is no solidarity in present US relationship with India.

(At this point the group adjourned for lunch with the President. General Taylor stayed on for a few words alone with the President.)

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Taylor, Gen., Trip to India and Pakistan, December 1963. Secret. No drafting information is on the source text, but telegram 1189 from Karachi, December 21, which transmitted the text of the memorandum of conversation as Enclosure F, indicated that it was drafted by McConaughy. (Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 JCS)

346. Memorandum for the Record 346. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Karachi, December 20, 1963.

SUBJECT

Private Conversation with President Ayub Khan, 20 December 1963

1. At my request I had a 30-minute private discussion with President Ayub at the close of the meeting which included Foreign Minister Bhutto, Defense Secretary Ahmed, Ambassador McConaughy, and General Goodpaster. I opened by saying that I wanted, as a long time friend of Pakistan and of its President, to express my deep regret over the apparent downward trend in Pak/US relationships over the past year. As an outgrowth of the frank discussions just completed, could we not accept the existence of an honest difference of view as to the rightness of US military aid to India, cease the recriminations which have been souring our relations and move forward together toward common objectives? On the US side we have no reason to apologize for our course of action. The decision has been taken after careful thought and close attention to the views of the Pakistan government.

2. I stated that on our side we felt that we should put aside the discussion of past disagreements despite the fact that the coming visit of Chou En-lai to Karachi has created for us a domestic problem for the immediate future. President Johnson made this point clear to Foreign Minister Bhutto during his recent visit to Washington, particularly with respect to the impact of the visit on Congressional relations. Right now Congress is in an unfriendly mood toward all foreign aid and could well use the discord in South Asia as a reason to reduce or eliminate aid to both Pakistan and India.

3. President Ayub responded forcefully that he “loved President Johnson more than a brother” and that he wanted me to report to him the true facts with regard to Pak relations to Red China and the circumstances of the Chou En-lai visit. With regard to Pak/Chinese relations, the US could hardly quarrel with his desire to normalize relations with one of his potential enemies and thus limit his military stakes. After all, the US maintains relations with the USSR and receives their visiting officials in Washington.

4. I interposed that we received them correctly but did not embrace them. The Chou En-lai visit appears to be a matter of another kind. Ayub will be seen in close company with him on every TV in the world—this to the detriment of US/Pak relations.

5. Ayub argued heatedly that his motive should not be misunderstood. For him to be on terms with Chou En-lai was a service to the West. He could learn something of Chinese intentions and discover in time any move by the Indians to seek accommodation with Peking—a move he is sure the Indians will eventually make. During the visit, he will be able to talk over important matters with Chou En-lai and turn the attacks which his visitor is sure to make on the US.

6. Ayub indicated that he too had a domestic problem resulting from US aid to India. His people simply did not understand what the US meant by helping their enemies. I suggested that the kind of joint exercise we had mentioned should have the effect of reassuring his people about US capability and intention to come to the aid of Pakistan. Also Pakistan leadership could help by interpreting the true situation in statements to the public.

7. He picked up the reference to the joint exercise and after some discussion agreed that I should draw up a proposed scenario for the exercise and send it to him for consideration, possibly by way of General Adams. I felt that he was wary of the exercise as well as of the Indian Ocean Task Force, probably sensing the possibility that a successful reinforcement exercise could be used at some future time as a reason to curtail military aid to Pakistan.

8. The meeting closed with Ayub's renewed expression of respect for President Johnson.

Maxwell D. Taylor1
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Taylor, Gen., Trip to India and Pakistan, December 1963. Secret. The source text is Enclosure “G” to telegram 1189 from Karachi, December 21.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

347. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 347. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, December 19, 1963, 11:15 a.m.

1929. State for Ball; White House for Bundy; JCS for Adm Riley, PJS and Rogers, OCJCS. From General Maxwell Taylor.

1. In company with Ambassador Bowles and appropriate Embassy personnel, I have completed a very satisfactory round of talks with Indian officials including Prime Minister Nehru, Foreign Minister Desai, Finance Minister Krishnamachari, Defense Minister Chavan, Army Chief of Staff Chaudhuri, and Air Force Chief of Staff Engineer.1 All requests for information have apparently been met within limits of availability of data. It is possible to ask many questions about the military program for which there are largely no answers.

2. In the conversations, the US side stressed the following points; A. Continuing desire of USG to assist the GOI in dealing with its military and economic problems.

B. Need for GOI to develop a properly phased (preferably five-year) military program to permit USG to anticipate Indian needs and make a timely and effective contribution.

C. Importance of avoiding an excessive military program in over-reaction to the Chicom aggression of last year.

D. Need to work with Pakistan in defense of subcontinent.

E. Need to accept the long-term nature of the Chicom military threat accompanied by recognition that India has friends, notably the US and its Asian allies, to share in the task of neutralizing this threat.

3. Information elicited from the GOI representatives covered the following points: A. As expounded by General Chaudhuri, Indian estimate of Chinese military threat does not differ significantly from US. However, Indians attach greater weight to a possible concentration of Chinese effort against Assam which is geographically isolated from the rest of India and exposed to invasion from three directions. Oil fields add to its attractions as a military prize.

B. Government approved force goals for the army are 16 divisions totalling 807,000 men. However, General Chaudhuri is seeking authority for five additional smaller territorial divisions which will increase manpower requirement to 866,000.

C. Air Marshal Engineer considers that his present program is 45 squadrons, although status of approval at governmental level is not clear. Several senior officials indicated that an approved program has not yet been established, but expect it to be soon. The 45 squadron force was stated by Engineer to consist of 25 fighter, 4 fighter/recon, 12 transport, 3 bomber and 1 bomber/recon squadrons, and to total about 50,000 men. These figures are apparently changing day by day. On his own, Engineer has developed a requirement, still unapproved for planning, which calls for 64 squadrons consisting of 12 all-weather interceptor, 6 fighter/recon, 22 fighter/bomber, 5 light bomber, 2 strategic/recon, 2 maritime recon and 15 transport squadrons.

D. There are vague hopes for naval modernization but no specific plans.

E. GOI is resolved to prevent the military program from affecting adversely the economic program. Military expenditures this year amount to between 5 and 6 per cent of GNP and are causing a loss of about 235,000,000 dollars in foreign exchange. Finance Minister TTK indicates intention to level off for the next year or two at about present percentage of GNP and reduce the drain of foreign exchange by half.

F. There is no approved mid-range plan for reaching the desired force goals with the available assets implicit in subparagraph E above.

G. US is main hope for external help to meet the uncovered portions of the military program. Indians expect little from UK because of limited resources and British fear of offending China. Statements on Soviet aid were evasive. There was no discussion of possible levels of US aid.

H. The GOI officials do not appear to fear Pakistan in a military sense, though they do not overlook possibility that situation could escape control of Ayub Khan. However, they justify the presence of several divisions facing the Paks on ground that populace there is uneasy without military presence. They also point to practical need of occupying the permanent cantonments and other facilities which have been used in the Punjab since British times.

I. The Indians are concerned over the situation in Burma because of governmental instability and the infiltration of thousands of Chinese farmers and ex-soldiers into north Burma. In this northern area, the Burmese government exerts only nominal control.

J. The Indian leaders evidence no particular concern over the prospect of a Chinese nuclear explosion. They recognize, however, that there may be some psychological effect, particularly in the small countries in Asia.

K. GOI intensely interested in assistance for defense production. They estimate need for $200 million capital investment and look to it for substantive help in this area.

4. The Indians never raised with me the question of the Indian Ocean Task Force although it had been the subject of several articles in the Delhi press. Taking the matter as a point of departure, during my meeting with Nehru which included attendance from foreign affairs and defense, I gave a short low-key explanation of the project. I described it as still incomplete in detail and without final approval. Nehru showed little interest and did not pursue the matter.

5. From these Indian contacts I have drawn the following impressions: A. The Indians are aware of the dangers of a run-away military program but have not yet worked out a coordinated economic-military plan to reach goals in both areas following a line of phased priorities.

B. They are probably incapable of producing such a program without considerable US assistance in developing planning procedures. Only TTK seems to understand the problem.

C. The Indians are prepared to view themselves, implicitly at least, as part of a regional security community with the common objective of containing China. They seem to accept the fact that they should not try to handle China alone.

D. There is a justified requirement for continuing US military and economic aid to India. It should be conditioned, however, on adequate Indian mid-range (five-year planning) with military aid held within bounds proportioned to the limited nature of the military threat.

6. The foregoing represents a preliminary report which will be made in final form upon return with appropriate recommendations.

Bowles

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 JCS. Secret; Priority. Received in the Department of State on December 21 at 2:20 a.m. A note on the source text indicates that the telegram was delayed in transmission. Passed to the White House on December 21.

1 Taylor visited India December 16-19. A fuller summary of Taylor's discussions with Nehru and other Indian officials was transmitted in telegram 1942 from New Delhi, December 19. (Ibid.)

348. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 348. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, December 23, 1963.

CM-1089 – 63

SUBJECT

Next Steps on Military Aid to India and Pakistan

REFERENCES

a. Memorandum for the President, “Next Steps on Military Aid to Pakistan and India”1

b. Embassy New Delhi cable 1943 to State dated 20 December 632

c. Embassy New Delhi cable 1929 to State dated 19 December 633

d. Embassy New Delhi cable 1942 to State dated 20 December 634

e. Memorandum of Conversation, 1000 hours, 20 December 1963, Karachi5

f. Memorandum of Conversation, 1200 hours, 20 December 1963, Karachi6

g. Memorandum for Record, “Private Conversation with President Ayub Khan, 20 December 1963”7

As a result of my recent visits to India and Pakistan and the conferences reported in the referenced documents above, I have reached the following conclusions and have formulated certain recommendations relating to the next steps for military aid to these two countries. In effect, they represent suggested modifications and extensions of reference a.

I. INDIA

1. I am in agreement with Ambassador Bowles that it is time to develop a five-year military assistance plan with India provided the Indians will (a) limit their force goals, (b) hold down procurement from the Soviet Bloc, (c) hold to a minimum diversion of foreign exchange from economic development, (d) exercise restraint in relations with Pakistan, and (e) cooperate with us in the containment of Communist China. I would go about assuring the attainment of these five conditions not by negotiating them with the GOI but through encouraging the development of a five-year plan by the Indians which if put into effect would assure meeting the first three provisos. Conditions (c) and (d) would remain a continuing background requirement for cooperation with India in both the economic and the military fields.

2. If my information is correct, there is at the present time no interdepartmental plan in the Indian government which establishes a balanced relationship between the economic and military programs of the GOI. In the case of the military program, there are as yet no agreed time-phased levels of force goals, no plan for the allocation of available or anticipated resources to the needs of the three services, and no determination of the kind and extent of foreign aid needed to augment domestic resources.

3. It would be a service to the Indian government as well as in our own interest to press for governmental planning to remedy these deficiencies as a precondition to a discussion of long-term aid in the specific terms of dollar levels, numbers and types of MAP supported units, the provision of advanced equipment, and similar matters. A five-year plan would have the advantage of obliging the GOI to face the economic facts of life and of reinforcing the hand of the civilian leaders who appear genuinely interested in preserving the economic program from excesses in the field of rearmament.

4. The kind of five-year military program which we should seek would include the following features: a. Statement of the Indian resources available in the period for military purposes, expressed in terms of internal expenditures and foreign exchange outlays.

b. Assumption for the preparation of the program that US would contribute from 50 to 60 million dollars per year.

c. Indication of third country aid anticipated or to be sought.

d. Force levels supportable by the application of the foregoing resources.

e. Impact of this military program on economic development.

5. If the Indians are capable of producing such a plan with or without our help, it would allow us to verify their intentions as to force goals, Soviet procurement and the diversion of foreign exchange from economic developments (conditions (a), (b), and (c) of paragraph 1 above). By this device, we could hope to avoid arguments with them over force goals, always a source of irritation, and would force the Indians to decide for themselves between the competing needs of their economy and of their own services. The US position would be strengthened vis-a-vis our own Congress by putting us in a position to explain our aid in terms of a coherent Indian program.

6. To make such a plan a precondition for long-term aid injects an undesirable time factor. Even if the Indians accept our help in developing such a plan, it will take time to draft one. To bridge the time gap, we would be justified in offering an interim one-year program of about $50 million providing for the Army continued support of the mountain division program, of improved logistics for the forces along the Chinese border, and of better intelligence efforts oriented toward China north of the frontier. For the Air Force, in the interim program we should continue to support radar, communications and air transport.

Recommendations—India

7. It is recommended that the US indicate to the GOI a willingness to embark on parallel military planning provided that the GOI first produce a satisfactory five-year plan for its military forces along the lines of paragraph 4 above. Pending the completion of such a plan, the US would make the interim offer suggested in paragraph 6 above. However, it should be clearly intimated that we are not willing to go forward indefinitely with military or economic aid without a firm five-year military plan.

II. PAKISTAN

1. President Ayub and his Chiefs of Staff view West Pakistan as exposed to attack from Afghanistan, China, and India; but of these potential enemies, in their opinion India is the prime threat toward which the major defensive effort must be directed. This view of the primacy of the Indian threat is reinforced by consideration of the isolated situation of East Pakistan which, encircled by India, is virtually indefensible by direct means.

2. Finding itself in such a disadvantageous strategic posture, Pakistan is deeply and genuinely afraid of Indian aggression. Our US pledge to help the GOP to resist such aggression is politely noted but Ayub and those around him openly express their fear that US aid in a crisis would be delayed by the possible ambiguities of the situation, by the delays or hesitations inherent in the decision-making process of a democracy, or by the distances to be traversed by our reinforcements. Ayub would say that these factors plus the inexplicable action of the US in giving aid to India have caused an acute uneasiness which obsesses his people.

3. With this view of the military situation of Pakistan, Ayub appears to have set for himself certain defense goals for his armed forces. The latter should have the capability in themselves of deterring or checking an Indian attack against West Pakistan. They should also be capable of deterring India from attacking East Pakistan; but if deterrence fails, there is little likelihood of checking an attack against this exclave. To effect deterrence, Pakistan needs supersonic aircraft as a threat against Indian targets. With the foregoing capabilities, the armed forces would have the visible strength necessary to deter India, reassure the people and allay the current fears.

4. It then becomes a question of how to obtain such forces. For this purpose Ayub must have the US as an ally willing to provide the essential military equipment. But our military aid to India and our reluctance to meet his equipment needs to the extent desired have led him to embark on a campaign of sharp criticism of US behavior coupled with moves to “normalize” relations with Red China. Such moves appear useful to him both in neutralizing an unfriendly neighbor and in goading the US to pay greater attention to his needs. While the campaign is in progress to get greater and more expeditious help out of the US, Ayub can hardly be expected to drop the quarrel with India or become enthusiastic over military exercises which will demonstrate that the US forces are not as far away as he says. But in spite of his strong objections to US help to India, I have the feeling that while he is swallowing hard, it is going down.

5. In these circumstances, it is to the interest of the US to give due recognition to the Pak case and strengthen Pak confidence and good will without appearing to succumb to querulous complaining. This purpose could best be served by offering the Paks US support through a five-year military plan under essentially the same conditions as the Indians. The goal of 5-1/2 modernized divisions for West Pakistan remains valid. The provision of two more squadrons of supersonic aircraft would add to Ayub's weapons of deterrence against India and to the arsenal of CENTO and SEATO. If, as it appears, the Indians have made a deal with the Soviets for the purchase of surface-to-air missiles, this decision on supersonic aircraft for Pakistan becomes much easier. The foregoing offer should be conditioned on a wholehearted change of attitude by the GOP toward CENTO, SEATO, and the U.S.

Recommendations—Pakistan

6. It is recommended that, concurrently with the action toward India, the US indicate to Pakistan its willingness to engage on parallel terms in five-year military planning under similar assumptions of continued US aid. This offer should include the provision of two additional squadrons of supersonic aircraft. It should be contingent on continued fulfillment by Pakistan of its obligations to CENTO, to SEATO, and to the US. To demonstrate to the Pak public the availability of US military support, we should seek GOP concurrence in a joint mobility exercise involving the proposed Indian Ocean Task Force.

Maxwell D. Taylor
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Taylor, Gen., Trip to India and Pakistan, December 1963. Secret. Sent to the President under cover of a December 23 memorandum from Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric.

1 Printed as an attachment to Document 342.

2 Telegram 1943, dated December 19 rather than December 20, transmitted Bowles' assessment of the memorandum for the President cited in footnote 1 above. (Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 JCS)

3 Document 347.

4 See footnote 1, Document 347.

5 This memorandum recorded a conversation among Taylor; Secretary of Defense Nazir Ahmed; General Mohammed Musa, Commander in Chief of the Army; Air Marshal Mohammed Asghar Khan, Commander in Chief of the Air Force; and Vice Admiral Rahman Khan, Commander in Chief of the Navy. (Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Taylor, Gen., Trip to India and Pakistan, December 1963)

6 Document 345.

7 Document 346.

349. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 349. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndiaSource

Washington, December 23, 1963, 7:34 p.m.

1281. Deptel 1267 to New Delhi,1 info Karachi 830, London 3796, Moscow 1852. During call by Ambassador B.K. Nehru on Secretary Dec. 21, Secretary described current state our relations with Soviets (being reported by memcon). Toward close conversation B.K. Nehru referred to remarks Dec. 18 by Under Secretary on US attitude toward Soviet military aid to India (reftel) and asked for clarification. Ambassador incorrectly interpreted Mr. Ball's remarks as meaning India would have to exclude all Soviet military aid if it were to be able rely on US military assistance. Secretary replied he would inquire into matter and we would be in touch with Ambassador Nehru prior departure for consultation.

Talbot called in Ambassador Dec. 23 to convey US position. Talbot said Mr. Ball's remarks should not be interpreted to mean we would expect India forego Soviet military aid as condition US military aid. We recognize that Indians may not exclude all such Soviet aid. We do, however, proceed from assumption that US is clearly the more reliable source of support to India against Chicoms. Our specific judgment on significance of Soviet military assistance would be determined by number of factors including following: quantities and types of Soviet aid accepted, effect on security US equipment, compatibility of differing types equipment, extent to which Soviet assistance requires introduction Soviet technicians, US Congressional attitudes, impact Soviet aid, and degree of Indian dependence on Soviets. Talbot concluded by saying he assumed Indians were examining implications of Soviet aid along similar lines.

Ambassador recalled earlier US-Indian talks on implications Soviet military aid when Indian military team visited USSR last summer. Said position as restated by Talbot seemed reasonable enough.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-INDIA. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Schneider and approved by Talbot. Repeated to London, Karachi, and Moscow.

1 Document 344.

350. Letter From the Ambassador to India (Bowles) to President Johnson 350. Letter From the Ambassador to India (Bowles) to President JohnsonSource

New Delhi, December 27, 1963.

Dear Mr. President: I have not written to you directly about the situation confronting us here in South Asia, because I am keenly aware of the extraordinary burden so suddenly placed on your shoulders on November 22nd, and also because I feel that the cables sent from New Delhi give you a clear view of the existing situation as I see it.

Having worked for two years on the Washington end, however, I am also aware of the wide variety of problems that reach your desk, and since I understand that a decision in regard to my proposals will be made soon, I did want to fill in some background that the cables do not carry.

When John Foster Dulles decided in late 1953 to arm Pakistan as the “strongest available anti-Communist power in South Asia and the Persian Gulf area” I and many others who know the area well vigorously dissented for a variety of reasons—all of which, I believe, have been vindicated by events: 1. From the outset Pakistan would view the arrangement not as an alliance against the Communists, but as a source of United States assistance against India;

2. As fears of U.S.-strengthened Pak forces develop in India, the political strength of the anti-American, pro-Soviet, Krishna Menon group would be sharply increased to our grave disadvantage;

3. The likelihood of settling the Kashmir dispute (which was very nearly accomplished in February 1952) would be diminished to the disappearing point;

4. The Soviets, looking for an ultimate balancing factor to China in Asia, would be given a wide open opportunity for a close political, economic, and military relationship with both Afghanistan and India with unpredictable but clearly unfavorable results to our interests.

Between 1954, when this pact was finally signed, and the election of our Democratic Administration in 1960, I wrote extensively and spoke in 43 states with this particular example of mistaken judgment by the Eisenhower Administration as a major theme. May I add in all fairness that the bold move by Herter and Dillon in 1958 to bolster India's economy in spite of Krishna Menon was a major factor in undoing some of the damage done by the Pak “alliance.”

In October of 1962 we were suddenly confronted with the opportunity that many of us had been hoping for—an overt Chinese Communist action which would bring home to the Indian Government and people some primary facts of life of Asian politics, i.e., the inevitable political-economic rivalry of China and India and the danger an expansionist China holds for India not only along the 2,200-mile Himalayan frontier but also in Southeast Asia which flanks India's eastern approaches.

The Indians, who had refused substantial Soviet military aid in May 1950 and again in February 1957, were wholly unprepared for the Chinese attack and were, as you know, humiliatingly defeated. This situation forced the resignation of Krishna Menon, threw the Communist Party into disarray, knocked the Soviets off balance and (following our prompt assistance) established the United States as India's most reliable friend with an outpouring of public good will for our country which must be seen and felt to be believed.

If the Pakistanis had seized on this opportunity to establish a better relationship with India by a strong statement of support against China, or at least a beneficent neutrality, a wholly new atmosphere would have been created between Karachi and New Delhi in which some settlement of the Kashmir quarrel might have been achieved. But Pakistan chose to endorse China's border claim, assert that India had attacked China, and have Mao Tse-tung as a friend. Five weeks from now Chou En-lai will be welcomed in Karachi as a state guest.

I have many warm associations in Pakistan and indeed I have known on a personal basis every Pakistani Prime Minister and President since Liaquat Ali Khan. Moreover, I am fully sympathetic to the emotional strain which the Pakistanis are undergoing in regard to India's relatively orderly political development, the growth of her industries and her steady progress towards the status of a major power which inevitably downgrades Pakistan somewhat.

This, plus the fact that in their hearts the Pakistanis in spite of all this talk are good friends of America and the China gesture is more a gimmick than a commitment, leads me to feel that our aid to Pakistan should continue, and that we should seek in every reasonable way to quiet their fears—provided they are prepared at least to adopt a policy of neutrality in regard to the China-India conflict, and to work with us in establishing a better atmosphere on the subcontinent in which we can all deal more effectively with the basic problems of defense and development.

I think it is fair to add that under present circumstances the military aid we have given to Pakistan is wide open for attack by a Wayne Morse or some other critic of our foreign policy. Although the Mutual Security Act emphasizes that our military assistance is to be given for the purpose of combatting the Communists, the Pakistanis have made it clear that China is not a threat to her interests, and that their defenses are keyed solely towards India. The very nature of the highly sophisticated and mobile equipment which we have given Pakistan, equipment which is much better adapted to fighting Indians on the north Indian plains than to fighting the Chinese and Russians in the Himalayas and Hindu Kush, could be said by an unfriendly critic to bear this out. Pakistan can correct this situation only by assuming a new posture in regard to South Asian defense against China, and in the types of weapons which they seek from us.

One thing is certain. Contrary to the Pakistan view we do not have the power to decide whether or not India will build up her defenses. The only influence we can exert is over the sources of military equipment and to some degree the amounts obtained.

The Indians are thoroughly aroused against China and are deeply committed to the creation of an adequate defense force. They can accomplish this in cooperation with us (with an understanding as to ceilings, use of their own foreign exchange, modest purchases from the Soviets, and a greater willingness to work with us on the political containment of China in Asia)—or they can go down a different road with much greater purchases in the USSR, a bigger defense industry of their own and diversion of more of their own foreign exchange for defense purposes.

In South Asia at long last we have the opportunity some of us have been hoping for over the years, and which was the primary reason I returned to India, i.e., the building of a new relationship with India that will bring her growing industrial and military potential into focus against the Chinese Communists.

If I am to have even a reasonable chance for negotiating the basis for the new relationship I need a five-year military assistance commitment (properly hedged in regard to Congress), an adequate amount of annual assistance (no less than $75-$80 million including the British—a sum which is half that we give to Turkey or South Korea), and maximum flexibility in regard to items and timing.

Given these tools I will do my level best. Without them all we can expect is a continuing impasse, the gradual strengthening of the pro-Soviet Menon forces in India, and the loss of a major opportunity to further United States interests in Asia.

Believe me, I would not have written to you on this “eyes only” and personal basis if I did not feel that the situation and my long personal relationship to it warranted this direct approach. I feel the need for some contact with you, with whom I have never had an opportunity to discuss this situation or my relationship to it in any depth.

With my warmest regards and good wishes in all that you are striving to do,

Sincerely,

Chet Bowles

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, India, Exchanges with Bowles. Secret; Personal; Eyes Only.

351. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 351. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, December 31, 1963.

SUBJECT

Kashmir Disturbances: The Affair of the Hair

Demonstrations in India-held Kashmir have brought a strong Pakistani reaction and are certain to further increase Indo-Pak tensions.

The Disturbances

A sacred relic of the Prophet Mohammed was stolen from a Muslim shrine near Srinagar on December 27. A mass protest meeting on December 28 went out of control and mobs set fire to two theatres, a hotel, a police station and several cars. The Kashmir police opened fire to maintain order. Two persons, one a Hindu, and the other a Muslim, reportedly were killed. Curfew was imposed but on December 29 two large processions of 140,000 persons were permitted. No additional disturbances have been reported since the 28th. Numerous arrests have been made, including certain political leaders suspected of pro-Pakistan sentiments. While the police function of maintaining law and order continues to be exercised by the local Kashmir Government, the Government of India has sent investigators to study the theft. Apparently the Indian Army is being used only to guard public buildings. Nehru has alleged that “miscreants” have been guilty of the theft to embarrass the Kashmir Government. While GOI officials have avoided speculation that Pakistan in any way caused the incident, the Indian press is implying that such may have been the case.

Pakistan Reactions

Pakistan has reacted strongly to the events in Kashmir. The theft of the sacred relic is being attributed to an Indian plot, possibly involving the Indian Government; the press has even hinted U.S. Government involvement. Indian measures to control the disturbances are being cited as evidence of a program to wipe out the rights of Muslims, if not the Muslim community itself.

In the first comment on the situation by a member of the Pakistan Cabinet, the Minister for Kashmir affairs said that the Government of India “cannot absolve itself from the terrible responsibility of genocide of the Muslim population in Kashmir and India.” On December 30, Foreign Minister Bhutto declared that the theft could not have taken place but for the climate created by “the Government of India's evil policy of suppressing the human rights of the people of Kashmir.” He also implied that India has a “plan to reduce the Muslim majority of Jammu and Kashmir to a minority,” and expressed the conviction that recent events will hasten the Muslims' “day of deliverance from Indian aggression.”

U.S. Action

On December 29 we instructed our Embassies in New Delhi and Karachi to inform the Governments of Pakistan and India of our strong view that the Kashmir disturbance should not be permitted to become a major new issue between India and Pakistan. We authorized our Embassies in their discretion to make additional approaches without further instructions.1

On December 29 we instructed USUN to suggest to the UN Secretariat that it send instructions to the UN Military Observer Group in Kashmir to be on special alert along the cease-fire line.2

Both of these instructions have been carried out.

On December 31 Embassy Karachi on its own initiative protested to the Government of Pakistan regarding Dawn's suggestion of U.S. involvement.

Conclusions

1. The incident involves strong religious and communal feelings and has, therefore, the potentiality of being troublesome.

2. The Indians have taken a series of security measures and seem to have the situation in control.

3. Pakistan official and press reaction has followed the usual pattern of exploiting the incident to highlight unsatisfactory Pakistan-Indian relations. This serves the double purpose of strengthening the GOP's political position internally and building the case against India for possible use whenever the GOP sees a suitable opportunity to further its cause.

4. The incident could provide an excuse for irregular Pakistan infiltrations into Indian-held Kashmir. Since personnel involved would probably be locals, winter weather would not be a great impediment. However, Pakistan has in the past been restrained from much activity in the field, apparently realizing that it could adversely affect Pakistan's international position on Kashmir.

5. The possibility always exists that Pakistan can use incidents in Kashmir to charge that a threat to peace and security exists and to reopen the question in the Security Council, since this issue remains on the Council's agenda. It is doubtful, however, that the GOP would do this under circumstances in which it would receive less support than in previous sessions. To obtain adequate support, it would have to seek U.S. assistance. At that time we should be able to exercise considerable influence over the Pak course of action.

W. Lubkeman3

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK. Secret. Drafted by Schneider and Josif and cleared with INR/RNA/MEA and by Grant and Cleveland.

1 Telegrams 1303 to New Delhi and 856 to Karachi. (Ibid., POL 25 INDIA)

2 Telegram 1772 to USUN. (Ibid., POL 32-1 INDIA-PAK)

3 Lubkeman signed for Read above Read's typed signature.

Index Index

Adams, J. Wesley, 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 16], 37n [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17], 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 26]

Adams, Gen. Paul D., 404n [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 228], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 230], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 230]-454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 230]

Afghanistan (see also Afghan - Soviet relations; Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute), 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 88] Bowles' visit (1962), 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 106]-219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

economic situation, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 327]

Helmand Valley project, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 7], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 106]

India, relations with, 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 277]

Iran transit route, 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 40], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 41], 137n [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 62], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 82], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 85], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88], 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 193 [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 94], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 117], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 229], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 229] U.S. acceptance of, 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]-475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 240], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]-477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 246]-485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Kennedy - Zahir correspondence, 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

Naim's visit to U.S. (1962), 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]-332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 169], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173]political situation, 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 168], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 327]-660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 327]

U.S. aid to limit Soviet influence, 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 112], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]-240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

U.S. economic assistance (see also Iran transit route above), 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7]-15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 7], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]-44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 21], 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]-87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 62], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 64]-144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 64], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 106] Kabul - Kandahar road, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 240]-475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 240], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 246] movement of goods through closed border, 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 82], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 85]-178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 86], 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-193 [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 94], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 110], 227n [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 113]

U.S. education assistance, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 7]-14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 7]

U.S. objectives re, 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 240]-476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Yusuf government, installation of, 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

Zahir's visit to U.S. (1963), 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 246]-485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 327]-660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 327], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 329]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

Afghan - Soviet relations, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8], 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 9], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15], 216n [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 106] Afghan over - dependence on Soviets, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]-87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute and, 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]-94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 101], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 229]

Soviet objectives, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 106], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 168]

U.S. intelligence report on, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 109]

U.S. policy, 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Zahir's assessment of, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 327]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 327], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 329]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

Ahmed, Aziz, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 114]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 114], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 328] Chinese representation in U.N., 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99]-208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

Indian - Pakistani relations: broadened contacts at all levels, proposed, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 155]-307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 155]

joint defense proposal, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 126]

Indian - Soviet relations, 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 143]-287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

Kashmir dispute: armed attack, Pakistani concerns re, 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]-173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 84], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 99]-206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 99], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 126]

Goa dispute, relation to, 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]-173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 84]mediation option (1963 initiative), 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 323]-653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]

“no war” declaration issue, 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 155]-308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 155]

U.N. action on, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 83]

Kashmir negotiations: Ladakh issue, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 256]-503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 256], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 259]

Pakistani - Chinese relations and, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259]

U.S. involvement, proposed, 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]-488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 249]

U.S. support for, 225n [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 111]

Pakistan Consortium, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 99]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]-94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]-113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 51]

Pakistani - Chinese relations: air link, 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 308]

border situation, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 126]-257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259]

Pakistani - U.S. relations, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 155] Ahmed's farewell visit with Kennedy, 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]-619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

alliance issue, 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]-324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 166]

U.S. military assistance to India, 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 126], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 143]-287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 155]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 192], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 194]-377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 281]-556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

Ahmed, Ghulam, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 26], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 26], 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 341]

Ahmed, Nazir, 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 345], 723n [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 348]

Aid India Club, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3]

Air defense of India. See Air defense program under U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India.

Ali, Mohammed, 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 191], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 191], 392n [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 201], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214] death of, 494n [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 253] Indian - Chinese border dispute, 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]-403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

Kashmir dispute, 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 176], 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 347n [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178] compromise formula for ending, 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173]-339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 173], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 176], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 178]

Pakistani - Chinese relations, 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 176], 463n [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]

Pakistani - U.S. relations, 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]-403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]-345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 176]

U.S. military assistance to India, 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 245]-482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 245]

Ali, Salman, 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 114], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 143], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 155], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 328]

Ali, Sayed Amjad, 441n [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228]

Ali, Wazir, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

Ali Mohamed Khan, Sardar - i - Ala, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

Alsop, Joseph, 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 331]

Amachree, Godfrey Kio Jaja, 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 114]

Anderson, Adm. George, Jr., 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 225]-434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283]-565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284] Aram, Abbas, 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 173], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 178], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 301], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302] Asghar Khan, Mohammed, 723n [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 348]

Austria, 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

Ayub Khan, Mohammed: Afghan officials, assessment of, 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Afghan political situation, 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 168]

Afghan - Soviet relations, 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 168]

India: communist threat, 28

political situation, 304

regionalism problem, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 30]

Indian - Chinese border dispute: Ayub's assessment of, 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 228], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 345]-711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 345]

Chinese objectives, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 212]

Pakistani policy, 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 186], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 191]-373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 191], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Pakistani - U.S. relations and, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 315]-631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in, 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 345]-716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 345]

Indian - Pakistani relations: Ayub's assessment of, 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]-253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 124]

communal rioting, 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]

Harriman mission to find common ground, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 212]-414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 217], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 228]

water issues, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11]

Indian - Soviet relations, 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 154]

international scene, assessment of, 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 22]-49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 22], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 30]-68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 30]

Kashmir dispute, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 8], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 22] Galbraith, discussions with, 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 73]

mediation option, 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 97]

mediation option (1963 initiative), 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 323], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 328]-664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 328]

U.N. action on, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 30], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 83]-171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 97]-203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 97], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 115]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 123]-252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 144], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

U.S. leverage with India, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 22]-48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 22], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 30]-70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 30], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]

Kashmir negotiations, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 105], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 107], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 108] Ayub's attitude toward, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 30], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 154], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 154], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 234]-462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 234], 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]-568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 286]failure, inevitability of, 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 272]

Kennedy - Ayub correspondence, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 228]

Pakistani agreement to, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 212]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 212]

Pakistani initiative in talks, U.S. requests for, 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 263]-519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

preliminary talks, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 115]

U.S. involvement, proposed, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 252]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 252]

Nehru, assessment of, 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]-253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 124], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 286]

Nehru's assessment of, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 60]

Pakistan: economic situation, 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 22]-50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 22]foreign relations, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 29]-65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29]

German military assistance, 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 286]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

military situation, 49

neutralist sentiments, 2

political situation, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 29]-63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 29], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 213]

Pakistan Consortium, 206n [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 99]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287] Afghan proposal for ending dispute, 229n [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 113]

armed conflict, potential for, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 9]

border closing, 88

compromise formula to end dispute, 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 178]

Iranian mediation effort, 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

mediation, U.S. offer re, 89n [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 38], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 39], 114n [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

nmediation effort by Merchant, 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 54], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 54], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 55], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 56]

Pakistani use of U.S. arms, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15]-35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 30]

reestablishment of relations, proposals for, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 153]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 548 [Pg. 548 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

U.S. initiatives with Pakistanis, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 11], 210n [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 101], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 168]-331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

U.S. leverage with Afghanistan, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 30]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 30]

Pakistani - Chinese relations: border situation, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11]-29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11]

Chou's visit to Pakistan, 718

normalization option, 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 328]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 328], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 346]

Pakistani - U.S. relations and, 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 328]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 328], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 346]-719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]

Pakistani - Soviet relations, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 30]-71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 30]

Pakistani - U.S. relations, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 87]-181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88] alliance issue, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 6]

anti - Americanism in Pakistan, 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

anti - colonialism issue, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 6]

Ayub's visit to U.S. (1961), 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30]

Ayub's visit to U.S. (1962), 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]-331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Ball's visit to Pakistan (1963), 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 315], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 328]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 328]

Bowles' visit to Pakistan (1962), 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 108]

Harriman's visit to Pakistan (1961), 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]

Indian - Chinese border dispute and, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 315]-631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Johnson's visit to Pakistan (1961), 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 22]-50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 22]

Kennedy - Ayub correspondence, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 6], 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 8], 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]-26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 46n [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 22], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 55], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 83]-171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 97], 206n [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 99], 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 115]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 123]-252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 186], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 217], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 228], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]-459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 237], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 252]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 252], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 263]-519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Pakistani - Chinese relations and, 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 328]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 328], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 346]-719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]

Rusk's visit to Pakistan (1963), 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Taylor's visit to Pakistan (1963), 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 345]-717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 345], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 346]-719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]

U.S. security guarantee, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11]-30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 315], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 345]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India, 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]-459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 234]-463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 237]

U.S. economic assistance to India, 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 124]-254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

U.S. economic assistance to Pakistan, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 22]

U.S. military assistance to India, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 139], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 151], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 154], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 191], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 195]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 198], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 212], 421n [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 217], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 228], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 286], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 345]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 345]

U.S. military assistance to Pakistan: delivery problems, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 170]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

joint planning against communist threat, 663

operational planning and prepositioning, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 345]-713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 345]

tanks and submarines, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 170]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

Aziz, Abdul Hai, 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 229], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 229], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 229]

Bakshi, G. M., 683n [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 343]

Baldwin, Marion, 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 343]

Ball, George W., 194n [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 93], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 136], 292 [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 283], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 293], 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 655n [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 341] Goa dispute, 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]-158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 161n [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 75], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77]

India Consortium, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 18]-39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in: carrier task force, 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 344]

communications stations, 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]-654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 324]

Indian - U.S. relations: ferromanganese barter, 6

sugar quota in U.S. market, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3]

Kashmir dispute, 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

Kashmir negotiations, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 111], 225n [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 111], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]-465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

Pakistan Consortium, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]-57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute: settlement proposal (April 1963), 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

U.S. initiatives with Pakistanis, 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 101]-210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 101]

Pakistani - Chinese relations, 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 328]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 328]

Pakistani - U.S. relations: Ball's visit to Pakistan (1963), 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 315], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]-636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 318], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 318]-638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 318], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 328]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 328], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]-673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 330], 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]-678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 331]

Bhutto's visit to U.S. (Oct. 1963), 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 332]

Pakistani - Chinese relations and, 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 328]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 328]

U.S. security guarantee, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 330]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 224]

U.S. economic assistance to India, 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 16]

U.S. economic assistance to Pakistan, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15]

U.S. military assistance to India: five - year program, 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 344]-708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 344]

Lightning aircraft from U.K., offer re, 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

Pakistani position, 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]-673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 330]

U.S. military assistance to Pakistan: delivery problems, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 170]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

Indian concerns re, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]-80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

tanks and submarines, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 170]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

three - year program, 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]-648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 322]

Ball Mission to Pakistan. See Ball's visit to Pakistan under Pakistani - U.S. relations.

Banerji, S. K., 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Battle, Lucius D., 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 16], 38n [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 18], 120n [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 128n [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 63], 181n [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 234n [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 115]

Belgium, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

Belgrade conference (1961), 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 35]-85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 35]

Bell, David E., 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 293], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 342]

Berlin issue, 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 30], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 35]-82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 35]

Bhabha, Dr., 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

Bhoothalingam, Shri, 551n [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 278]

Bhutan, 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 183], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 190]

Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 22], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 29], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 323], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 328] Foreign Minister appointment, 494n [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 253]

Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in, 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 345], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 345]

Kashmir dispute, 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 351]

Kashmir negotiations, 462n [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 234], 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 282], 596n [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 24n [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 548 [Pg. 548 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 277], 605n [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 301]

Pakistani - Chinese relations: border situation, 511

normalization option, 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 332]-680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 332]

Pakistani - U.S. relations and, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 341]-696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Pakistani - U.S. relations: Bhutto's visit to U.S. (Oct. 1963), 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 332]-680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 332]

Bhutto's visit to U.S. (Dec., 1963), 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 341]-696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Pakistani - Chinese relations and, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 341]-696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Taylor's visit to Pakistan (1963), 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 345], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 345], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 345]

Black, Eugene, 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 93], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 97], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 99], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 288]

Blue, William L., 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

Bogra, Mohammed Ali, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 114]

Boland, Frederick H., 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 144], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 144], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Bottomly, Lt. Col. Heath, 30n [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]

Bowles, Chester B., 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 76n [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 101n [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 103n [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 155], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 293], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 304] Afghanistan: Bowles' visit (1962), 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 106]-219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

Iran transit route, 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 40]

U.S. aid to limit Soviet influence, 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 112], 238n [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 117], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

U.S. economic assistance, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]-44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 21], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 106]

Afghan - Soviet relations, 216n [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 106]

Ambassadorial appointment, 621n [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 309]

Berlin issue, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 35]-82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 35]

China, People's Republic of: Tibet occupation, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 35]

U.S. - Indian assessment of, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 35]-84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 35]

Indian - Chinese border dispute, 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 350]-729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 350]

Indian - U.S. relations: Bowles' visit to India (1961), 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]-86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

Bowles' visit to India (1962), 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]-213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 219n [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

Taylor's visit to India (1963), 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 347], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Kashmir dispute, 213 mediation option (1963 initiative), 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 313], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 321]-645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 655n [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

Kashmir negotiations, 221

nuclear weapons, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]-94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 55]

Pakistani - U.S. relations: Ball's visit to Pakistan (1963), 628n [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 315]

Bowles' assessment of, 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]-730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 350]

Bowles' visit to Pakistan (1962), 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 108]

United Nations, India's role in, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 35]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India, 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 297], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

U.S. economic assistance to India, 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 337]

U.S. military assistance to India: Defense Department position, 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

five - year program, 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 337], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]-691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

funding levels, 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 283]

U.S. military assistance to Pakistan, 621n [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 309], 648n [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 322]

Brazil, 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 69]

Breisky, A. E., 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 138], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 398n [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

Brewer, William D., 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 229], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 229]

Brubeck, William H., 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 138], 325n [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 167], 441n [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 502n [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 256], 589n [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 294] Indian - Chinese border dispute, 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]-323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]-318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]

Bruce, David K. E., 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 216], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

Bundy, McGeorge, 120n [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 136n [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 63], 157n [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 166n [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 181n [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 191n [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 193n [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 194n [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 93], 234n [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 115], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 136], 270n [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 137], 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 138], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 139], 280n [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 140], 325n [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 167], 352n [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 376n [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 194], 377n [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 405n [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 441n [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228], 461n [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 234], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 502n [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 256], 518n [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 263], 519n [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 575n [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 290], 590n [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 295], 591n [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 607n [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 303], 614n [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 306], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 331], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340] Afghanistan, 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 112], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

Indian - Chinese border dispute, 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 180], 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in, 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 318], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 333]

Indian - Pakistani relations, 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Indian - Soviet relations, 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Indian - U.S. relations, 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-292 [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

Kashmir dispute, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 144], 296n [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 297n [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 351]

Kashmir negotiations, 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 271], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 110], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Pakistani - U.S. relations: Ball's visit to Pakistan (1963), 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 318], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 318]-639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

reevaluation of U.S. policy, proposals for, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 87]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India: air defense program, 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 293], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 294]

U.S. - U.K. working group on, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

U.S. economic assistance to Pakistan, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

U.S. military assistance to India, 361n [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189] five - year program, 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]-697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 342]

funding levels, 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 283]

Kashmir negotiations and, 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283]

Lightning aircraft from U.K., offer re, 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

U.S. military assistance to Pakistan, 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Bundy, William P., 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 150n [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 265n [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 136], 270n [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 137], 333n [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 170], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 198], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 221], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 590n [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 295], 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305] Ball's visit to Pakistan (1963), 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 318], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 318]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India: air defense program, 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 297], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 297]-596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

U.S. - U.K. agreement on, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 230], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 230], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 231]

Bunker, Ellsworth, 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 288]

Burki, Gen., 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 22], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 79]

Burma, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 165], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 183], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 283], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 347]

Byroade, Henry A., 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 30], 201n [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97] Afghanistan: Iran transit route, 137n [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 62]

U.S. economic assistance, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7]-15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 7], 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]-87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Afghan - Soviet relations, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]-87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute: Afghan position, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 47]

armed conflict, potential for, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]-23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9]

mediation, U.S. offer re, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9]-24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 39], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]-103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 47], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 51], 114n [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

mediation effort by Merchant, 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 120n [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 56], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 56], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

moratorium on border closing, 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 81], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 85]-176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 85], 178n [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 86], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Soviet policy, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9]-23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9]

Cameron, Turner C., Jr., 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 251n [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 123], 259n [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 128], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 261n [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 262n [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 264n [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 133], 272n [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 138], 280n [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 140], 296n [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 151], 310n [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 314n [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 333n [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 170], 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 179], 352n [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 358n [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 360n [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 187], 377n [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 420n [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 422n [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 218], 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 483n [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 246], 489n [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 490n [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 498n [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254], 541n [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 545n [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 555n [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 281], 579n [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 590n [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 295], 655n [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 328], 694n [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 341]

Canada, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 18], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 190]

Carle, Robert J., 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 76n [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 317n [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 483n [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 246], 486n [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 541n [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 545n [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 60n [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 222n [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 109], 257n [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 263n [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 132], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 190]

Central Treaty Organization (CENTO), 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 231], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 328], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 345]

Ceylon, 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 183], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 345]

Chagla, Mohammed Ali Currim, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

Chatterjee, D. N., 80n [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

Chaudhury, Lt. Gen. J. N., 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 347]

Chavan, Yashwantrao, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 196], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 219], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 347]

Chayes, Abram, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 201], 579n [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]

Chen Yi, 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 198], 511n [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 259]

Chiang Kai - shek, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 30]

Chile, 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 144]-290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 144]

China, People's Republic of (see also Indian - Chinese border dispute; Pakistani - Chinese relations), 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 22]-49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 22], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 286] food situation, 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

foreign policy, Nehru's assessment of, 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 317]-634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 317]

nuclear weapons, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 347]

Soviet - Chinese relations, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 12]

Tibet occupation, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 35]

U.N. representation issue, 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99]-208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

U.S. - Indian assessment of, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 35]-84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 35]

Chou En - lai, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 12], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 198], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 214], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 332]-680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 332], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 342], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 346]

Clay, Gen. Lucius D., 524n [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

Cleveland, J. Harlan, 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 114], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 114], 296n [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 731n [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 351] Kashmir dispute, U.N. action on, 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 144]

Kashmir negotiations, U.S. support for, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 111]-225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 111]

Clifton, Gen. Chester V., 164n [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

Coffin, Frank, 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 283], 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

Commonwealth countries. See U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India.

Congo, 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 35], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 95]

Coon, Carleton S., 579n [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]

Cottam, Howard R., 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 16], 37n [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 26], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 26]-57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Daud, Sarder Mohammed, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15] Afghanistan: Bowles' visit (1962), 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 106]-218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 106]

U.S. economic assistance, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

Afghan - Soviet relations, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 106]

Ayub's assessment of, 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 23n [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9] Afghan position, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 106], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 229]-447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 229]

armed conflict, potential for, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 9], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9]

border closing, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 37]

mediation, U.S. offer re, 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

mediation effort by Merchant, 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 54]

moratorium on border closing, 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 85], 227n [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 113]

political downfall, 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

Dayal, Rajeshwar, 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 111]

Dean, Sir Patrick, 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 114]

Defense, U.S. Department of (see also Joint Chiefs of Staff), 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 190] Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in: carrier task force, 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 333]

communications stations, 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 324]

U.S. military assistance to India, 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]-98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 67], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 253], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 342]

Dehlavi, S. K., 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 22], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 54], 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 178], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 191], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 191], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 212], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 213], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 234]

Denmark, 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Desai, M. J., 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 48], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 107], 278n [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 139], 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 203], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 214], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 214], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 230], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 272], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 280], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 594n [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 297], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 347] Goa dispute, 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]-156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

Indian - Chinese border dispute, 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 174]

Indian - Soviet relations, 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 121]

Kashmir dispute, 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 313], 655n [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 299], 615n [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

U.S. military assistance to India, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 174], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 180], 613n [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 305]

Desai, Morarji, 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 151], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 180], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 214], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 219]

Development Loan Fund, (DLF), 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 26]

Dillon, C. Douglas, 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 293], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 350]

Disarmament, 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 63]-140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 63]

Dixon, Sir Owen, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 114], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259]

Duke, Angier Biddle, 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 327]

Dulles, John Foster, 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 350]

Dungan, Ralph A., 24n [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 16], 37n [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17], 38n [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 18] Durand Line, 21n [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 9]

Durand Line dispute. See Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute.

Dutt, Subimal, 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 304]

Dutt, Air Vice Marshal, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 152]

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 211], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 328]

Engineer, Air Marshal A. M., 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 67]

Etemadi, Nur Ahmed, 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 167n [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 85], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 85]-177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 86], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 113], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 229]

Ethiopia, 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

Ewell, Col. Julian J., 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Export - Import Bank, 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

FitzGerald, Dennis, 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

France, 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 30], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 190], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 238], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 253] Mirage aircraft for India, proposed, 268n [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 135]

Fulbright, J. William, 491n [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 251]

Galbraith, J. Kenneth, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8], 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 136]

Goa dispute, 146n [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 65], 150n [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 68]-153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 69], 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]-156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 157n [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 74]-162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76] India: Menon's departure from office, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 185], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 196]-382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 196]

military situation, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 122]

political situation, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 122], 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]-320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 164]

Indian - Chinese border dispute: Chinese objectives, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 196]-383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 196]

Indian - Pakistani relations and, 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 196]-384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Indian policy, 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]-347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

maximum political and military effort required of India, 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 206]

military activity, 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 174]

Pakistani - U.S. relations and, 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 199]

political effects in India, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]-382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 196]

press coverage, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 196]

U.S. military involvement, proposed, 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 203]

U.S. policy, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 360n [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 187]

U.S. policy objectives in South Asia and, 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]-390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

Indian - Pakistani relations: Harriman mission to find common ground, 405n [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]-417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 214]

Indian - Chinese border dispute and, 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 196]-384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Indian - Soviet relations, MIG aircraft for India, 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 121]-247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 121], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 122], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 142], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]-314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 164]-321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 167], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 230], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 231]

Indian - U.S. relations: Bowles' visit to India (1962), 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]-213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 219n [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

Johnson's visit to India (1961), 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 20]

Nehru's visit to U.S. (1961), 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 60]-130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 60], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 60], 134n [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60]eutrality policy of India and, 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

Rusk's visit to India (1963), 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 288], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]-574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 289]

status of relationship following Goa and Kashmir debates in U.N., 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 292 [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]-294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 147]

Kashmir dispute, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 230]-449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 230] Ayub - Galbraith discussions, 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 73]

Indian - Pakistani overall relations and, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 28]-60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29] Indian position, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 60], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60]

mediation option (1963 initiative), 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 288], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

plebiscite issue, 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 148]-296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 297n [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 276]

U.N. action on, 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]-166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

U.S. leverage with India, 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

Valley joint tenancy proposal, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 48]-109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

Kashmir negotiations, 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219] “elements” settlement proposal, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 280]-554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 280]

Galbraith - Nehru discussions, 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-548 [Pg. 548 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Indian agreement to, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 79]-166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

Indian domestic opposition to settlement, 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 262]

joint statement of objectives, 478

partition proposal, 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

U.S. - Indian political bargain, Galbraith's proposal re, 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]-529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 280]

U.S. military assistance to India and, 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

Nehru's relations with, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 35]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India: air defense program, 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 262], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

Nehru informed of, 460n [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 233]

U.S. - U.K. agreement on, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 230], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 230], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 230], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 231], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 231]

U.S. economic assistance to India, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 16], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17]

U.S. economic assistance to Pakistan, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 16], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17]

U.S. military assistance to India, 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 42]-98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 151n [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 67] advisory personnel, 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 189]

dual - purpose equipment, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

FY 1964 amounts, 613n [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 305]

Galbraith's support for, 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 122]-250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 122]

Indian requests, 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Kashmir negotiations and, 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

Lightning aircraft from U.K., offer re, 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 136], 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 140], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 142], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 159]

Menon's departure from office and, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 185]

U.S. contingency planning, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 180]-351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

U.S. military assistance to Pakistan, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 147]

Gandhi, Indira, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 154], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Gatch, John N., Jr., 111n [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 112n [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 127n [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 177n [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 86], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 208n [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 209n [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 101], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 114], 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 272n [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 138], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 143], 333n [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 170], 344n [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 347n [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 179], 458n [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 489n [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 498n [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 518n [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 263], 541n [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 605n [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 301]

Gaud, William S., 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 82], 177n [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 86], 193n [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 376n [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 194], 377n [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 198], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 202], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 221], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 483n [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 246], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 283], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 327]

Geneva Conference of 1954, 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 60]

German Democratic Republic, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 35]

Germany, Federal Republic of, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 18], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 26], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 26], 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 238], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 253] military assistance to Pakistan, 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 286]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Ghaffar Khan, Abdul, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]-21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 9], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 31]

Ghana, 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 144]

Ghazi, Zalmai Mahmud, 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 327], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 329]

Gilpatric, Roswell L. , 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]-98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 283], 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 333], 722n [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Goa dispute, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]-150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 68]-158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 74]-163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77] Indian - U.S. relations and, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 95]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 105]-215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 105]

Kashmir dispute, relation to, 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]-173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 84]

U.S. economic assistance to India and, 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 88]-188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 88], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 95]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Goodpaster, Gen. Andrew J., 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 345], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 345]

Gore-Booth, Sir Paul, 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 68], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 280], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 313], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Graham, Frank P., 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 83], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 115]

Grant, James P., 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 224n [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 111], 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 251n [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 123], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 264n [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 133], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 136], 270n [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 137], 272n [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 138], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 139], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 139], 280n [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 140], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 143], 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 352n [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 376n [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 194], 377n [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 198], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 202]-396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 202], 458n [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 459n [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 486n [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 489n [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 490n [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283], 579n [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 583n [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 590n [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 295], 639n [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 645n [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 655n [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 334], 731n [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 351] India's aggressive intentions, Pakistani aide - memoire on, 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]-688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

Greece, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Guinea, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 30]

Gul, Bacha, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 47]

Gundevia, Yezdezard Dinshaw, 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 280], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 289]

Gupta, Chandra Bhanu, 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 219]

Hall, William O., 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 107], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 108]

Hamilton, Fowler, 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 98]

Hangen, Welles, 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 259]

Hannah, Norman B., 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 85], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 85], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 85], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 113]

Harriman, W. Averell, 20n [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 202], 420n [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 422n [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 218], 489n [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 490n [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 518n [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 263], 519n [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 590n [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 295], 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305] India, visit to (1961), 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]-32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Indian - Chinese border dispute, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 212]

Indian - Pakistani relations, mission to find common ground, 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]-418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 215], 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 220]-427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 220], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 228]

Indian - Soviet relations, MIG aircraft for India, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 214], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 215], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 231]

Kashmir dispute, 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]-685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

Kashmir negotiations, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 212]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 212], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 271]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 23n [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 11]

Pakistani - U.S. relations, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11] Ball's visit to Pakistan (1963), 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 318]-637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 318], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 331]

Bhutto's visit to U.S. (Oct., 1963), 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 332]

Harriman's visit to Pakistan (1961), 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India: air defense program, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 297]

U.S. - U.K. agreement on, 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 230]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 230], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 231], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 231]

U.S. military assistance to India, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 212]

Hassan, Said, 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

Henry, David H., II, 99n [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Herter, Christian A., 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 350]

Hewitt, Warren E., 191n [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 193n [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 208n [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

Hilaly, Aghampuakha, 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 154]

Hilliker, Grant G., 607n [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 303]

Hilsman, Roger, Jr., 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 404n [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

Holmes, Julius C., 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 543n [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 301], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 328]

Home, Lord Alexander Douglas, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 230], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 230], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 231], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 231]

Hood, Lord, 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Horgan, Rogers B., 146n [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 149n [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 66], 153n [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 166n [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 211n [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 224n [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 111], 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 259n [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 128]

Hull, Gen. Sir Richard, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 230]-454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 230], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Humphrey, Hubert H., 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 238]

Hunt (UK), 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]

India (see also Goa dispute; Indian - Chinese border dispute; Indian - Pakistani relations; Indian - Soviet relations; Indian - U.S. relations; Kashmir dispute; Kashmir negotiations; U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India; U.S. economic assistance to India; U.S. military assistance to India): Afghanistan, relations with, 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 277]

Communist threat, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11]

economic situation, 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

foreign relations, 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]-130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 60], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

international economic assistance, see India Consortium

international stature, 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 88]

Menon's departure from office, 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 185]-358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 190], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 196]-382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 196]

military situation, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 122], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 220]-427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 220], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 253], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 347]-721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 347], 722n [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]eutrality policy, 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 220], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300]-602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 300]

nuclear weapons policy, 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

political situation, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 122], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 154], 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]-320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 164], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 190], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 193], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]-382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 196]

regionalism problem, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 30]

Southeast Asia policy, 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 107]

U.N. role, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 35]

U.S. intelligence report on, 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

U.S. military assistance to Pakistan, concerns re, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]-80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 147]

India Consortium, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 18]-39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]-52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 26]-55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 26], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]-317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 282], 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 300]

Indian - Chinese border dispute, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 12], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 87], 255n [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 350]-729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 350] Ayub's assessment of, 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 228], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 345]-711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 345]cease - fire, 403n [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 214]-416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 214]

Chinese objectives, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 196]-383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 196], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 212], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 215], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 230]

Colombo proposals, 479n [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 243], 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

gradual ending, 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 226]-436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 226]

Indian assessment of, 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 304], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 304]

Indian - Pakistani relations and, 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 196]-384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Indian policy, 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]-347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

maximum political and military effort required of India, 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 206]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 206]

military activity, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 174], 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 179], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 180], 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 190]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 190]

negotiations, 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]-323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 174]-342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 174], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 202], 403n [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 214]

Nehru's assessment of, 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 214]

Pakistani policy, 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 179], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 184], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 186], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 191]-373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 191], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Pakistani - U.S. relations and, 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 199], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]-391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]-403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 315]-631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

political effects in India, 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 190], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]-382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 196]

press coverage, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 196]

resumption of hostilities, U.S. study re, 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]-526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

Soviet policy, 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 190]

timing of Chinese attack, 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 289]

U.S. assessments of, 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 190]-368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 190], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 202], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 202], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]-399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 205]

U.S. military assistance to India and, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 174]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 180]-351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 189], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 205], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

U.S. military involvement, proposed, 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 203], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 206]-402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

U.S. policy, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]-353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 187], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 190]-368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 190]

U.S. policy objectives in South Asia and, 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]-390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

U.S. security commitment to India, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 107]

Western military assistance for India, 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 190]

Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in, 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 318] carrier task force, 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283]-565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 306]-615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 320], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 333]-683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 344], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 345], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 345]-716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 345], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 347]

communications stations, 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]-624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]-654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 324]

Indian - Pakistani relations (see also Kashmir dispute; Kashmir negotiations), 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 224] Ayub's assessment of, 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]-253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 124]

broadened contacts at all levels, proposed, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 155]-307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 155]

communal rioting, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8]-20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]

expulsions of Muslims from India, 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 343]

future prospects, U.S. paper on, 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

Harriman mission to find common ground, 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]-418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 215], 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 220]-427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 220], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 228]

Indian - Chinese border dispute and, 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 196]-384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

India's aggressive intentions, Pakistani aide - memoire on, 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]-688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 343]

joint defense proposal, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 126], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 224]

Nehru's assessment of, 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 289]-574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 289]

transportation arrangements between East and West Pakistan, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 30]

water issues, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11]

Indian - Soviet relations, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 345] economic assistance for India, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3]

MIG aircraft for India, 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 121]-247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 121], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 122], 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 128]-260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 278n [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 139], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 142], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 143]-287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 214], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 215], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 230], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 231] Ayub's assessment of, 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 154]

Indian decision re, 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]-314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

negotiations re, 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 167]-326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]

U.S. cessation of opposition, 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 164]-321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]military relations, 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

U.S. military assistance to India and, 726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]

Indian - U.S. relations (see also U.S. economic assistance to India; U.S. military assistance to India), 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 244] Bowles' visit to India (1961), 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]-86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

Bowles' visit to India (1962), 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]-213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 219n [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]ferromanganese barter, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Goa dispute and, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 95]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 105]-215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 105]

Harriman's visit to India (1961), 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]-32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Indian appreciation of, 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]-319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]

Johnson's visit to India (1961), 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Kennedy - Nehru correspondence, 32n [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 93]-195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 95]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]-319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 187], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 203], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]-404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 218]-423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 233], 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 251], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]-520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 264], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]-635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]-640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 319], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

Krishnamachari's visit to U.S. (1963), 594n [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 297], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 300]

Menon's visit to U.S. (1961), 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 63]-142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]

Nehru's visit to U.S. (1961), 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]-135n [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]eutrality policy of India and, 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]public image of U.S. in India, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 105]

Radhakrishnan's visit to U.S. (1963), 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

Rusk's visit to India (1961), 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Rusk's visit to India (1963), 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]status of relationship following Goa and Kashmir debates in U.N., 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 147]sugar quota in U.S. market, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3]

Taylor's visit to India (1963), 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]-722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

U.S. courses of action, 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]-245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 120]

Indonesia, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27]

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 26], 204n [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 98], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

International Control Commission (ICC), 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 63], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 63]

International Development Association (IDA), 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3]

Iran, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 12], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104] Afghan transit route through. See under Afghanistan.

Pakistan, relations with, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, mediation effort re, 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]-318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]

Iraq, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8]

Ireland, 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 144], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 144], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Italy, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 238], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 253]

Jackson, Elmore, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 270], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 270], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 271], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

Jacques, Sidney B., 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

Jaffri, M., 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

James, Sir Morrice, 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 234]-463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 291], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

Japan, 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 35]

Jarring, Gunnar, 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 114]

Jha, Chandra S., 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

Jha, L. K., 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 118]

Johnson, Gen., 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 221]

Johnson, Charles K., 311n [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]

Johnson, Lyndon B., 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 722n [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348] India, visit to (1961), 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Pakistani - Chinese relations, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 341]-696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Pakistani - U.S. relations: Bhutto's visit to U.S. (Dec., 1963), 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 341]-696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Bowles' assessment of, 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]

Johnson's intention to improve relations, 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Johnson's visit to Pakistan (1961), 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 22]-50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 22]

Pakistani - Chinese relations and, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 341]-696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

U.S. military assistance to India, 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 697n [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 342]

Johnson, U. Alexis, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 157n [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 262n [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 136], 314n [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 430n [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 458n [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 459n [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 483n [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 246], 565n [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 253], 565n [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284] Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in, 641n [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 320], 681n [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 333]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 225]-434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 293]

Jones, G. Lewis, Jr., 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 2]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 24n [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]

Josif, Harold G., 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 332], 731n [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 351]

Kashmir dispute (see also Kashmir negotiations), 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 8]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 12], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 22], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 138], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 176], 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 230]-449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 230], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 300]-604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 300] armed attack, Pakistani concerns re, 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]-173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 84], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 99]-206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 99], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 126]

Ayub - Galbraith discussions, 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 73]

Goa dispute, relation to, 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]-173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 84]

Indian - Pakistani overall relations and, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 28]-60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Indian position, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60]-134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60]

integration of Kashmir into Indian Union, proposed, 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]-685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 335], 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 343]

mediation option, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 93]-195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 97], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 99], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104] mediation option (1963 initiative), 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]

Bowles' assessment of, 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 313]

Indian position, 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]-635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]-640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 319], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

Pakistani position, 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 649n [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 323], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 328]-664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 328]

U.S. - Indian discussions, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 321]-645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

U.S. - Pakistani discussions, 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 323]-653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]

U.S. strategy, 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]-656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 326]

military forces involved, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 30]

“no war” declaration issue, 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 155]-308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 155]

plebiscite issue (see also U.N. action on below), 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 148]-297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 276], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 289]

Rusk's assessment of, 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 290]-576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 290]sacred relic theft, 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 351]-733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 351]

U.N. action on, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 30], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]-167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 83]-171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 97]-203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 97], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 111], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 115]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 258] Kennedy - Ayub correspondence, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 123]-252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

Pakistani assessment of, 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Pakistani strategy, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 114]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 114]

recapitulation report, 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 144]

Security Council vote, 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

U.N. Military Observer Group, 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 343]

U.S. leverage with India, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 22]-48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 22], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 30]-70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 30], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]-238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]

U.S. military assistance to India and, 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 305], 613n [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 305]

U.S. policy issues, 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 88]

Valley joint tenancy proposal, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 48]-109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

Kashmir negotiations, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 105], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 107], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 108], 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 227]-440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 227] Ayub's attitude toward, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 30], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 154], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 154], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 234]-462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 234], 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]-568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 286]collapse of, 596n [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

“elements” settlement proposal, 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 270], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 280]-554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 280]failure, consequences for U.S., 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 257]

failure, inevitability of, 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 272]-541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]failure, Nehru's assessment of, 639n [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

Galbraith - Nehru discussions, 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-548 [Pg. 548 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Indian agreement to, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 79]-166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 410n [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 212], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 214]-417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 214]

Indian assessment of, 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 304]-610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 304]

Indian domestic opposition to settlement, 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 262]

Indian initiative in talks, U.S. requests for, 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 251], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]-520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 264]

internationalization proposal, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254]-499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 254], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 261]

joint statement of objectives, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 242]

Kennedy - Ayub correspondence, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 228]

Komer's assessment of, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 238]

Ladakh issue, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 256]-503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 256], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 259], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 259]

negotiating sessions: first, 462n [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 234]

second, 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]-478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 242]

third, 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 253]-495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 253]

fourth, 523n [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

fifth, 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 282]

sixth, 596n [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

Pakistani agreement to, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 212]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 212]

Pakistani - Chinese relations and, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 243], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 263]

Pakistani initiative in talks, U.S. requests for, 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 263]-519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Pakistani proposals, U.S. assessment of, 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]-490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]partition proposal, 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]-486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]preliminary talks, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 115]

Rostow - Komer mission re, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 271], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 272]-541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]

Rusk's assessment of, 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 282]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India and, 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 262], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 278]

U.S. - Indian political bargain, Galbraith's proposal re, 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]-529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 270], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 280]

U.S. integrated proposal for settlement, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 257]-507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 257]

U.S. involvement, proposed, 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]-488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 249], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 252]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 252]

U.S. leverage in, 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 257]-506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 257]

U.S. military assistance to India and, 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]-524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 271], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283]

U.S. strategy, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 111]-225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 111], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 226]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 226], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]-465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 238], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 239]-472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 253], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254]-501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 257]-510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 271], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279]

U.S. - U.K. coordination, 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 219], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 224]-432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 224], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 253], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 261], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 270]

Kaul, Gen. B. M., 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 107]

Kaysen, Carl, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 99], 296n [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 152], 352n [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 355n [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 358n [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 360n [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 187], 376n [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 194], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 398n [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 404n [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 561n [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 283] Indian - Chinese border dispute, 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]-352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 190], 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 198]

U.S. military assistance to India, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 185]-358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 192], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 198]

Kelly, Maj. Gen. John, 362n [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 189]

Kennedy, Jacqueline, 213n [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

Kennedy, John F., 546n [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 278], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 575n [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 290], 694n [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 341] Afghan - Soviet relations, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 327]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 327]

Afghanistan: Iran transit route, 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 193 [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Kennedy - Zahir correspondence, 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

Naim's visit to U.S. (1962), 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]-332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 169], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173]

Zahir's visit to U.S. (1963), 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 327]-660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 327], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 329]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

Chinese representation in U.N., 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99]-208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

Goa dispute, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 163n [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 95]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 105]-215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 105]

India, 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300]

India Consortium, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 18]

Indian - Chinese border dispute: Indian assessment of, 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 304], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 304]

maximum political and military effort required of India, 400n [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 206]

Pakistani policy, 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 186], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

political effects in India, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

resumption of hostilities, U.S. study re, 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

U.S. military involvement, proposed, 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 203]

U.S. policy, 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]-353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 187]

U.S. status report on, 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 190]

Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in, 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 306]

Indian - Pakistani relations: communal rioting, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8]-20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

Harriman mission to find common ground, 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]-408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 211], 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Indian - Soviet relations, 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

Indian - U.S. relations, 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12] Goa dispute and, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 95]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 105]-215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 105]

Indian appreciation of, 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]-319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]

Kennedy - Nehru correspondence, 32n [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 93]-195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 95]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]-319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 187], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 203], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]-404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 218]-423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 233], 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 251], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]-520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 264], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]-635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]-640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 319], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

Krishnamachari's visit to U.S. (1963), 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300]-604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 300]

Menon's visit to U.S. (1961), 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 63]-142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]

Nehru's visit to U.S. (1961), 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]-135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]public image of U.S. in India, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 105]

Radhakrishnan's visit to U.S. (1963), 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

status of relationship following Goa and Kashmir debates in U.N., 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Kashmir dispute, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 8]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 300]-604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 300] armed attack, Pakistani concerns re, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 99]-206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 99]

Indian position, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60]-134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60]

mediation option, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 93]-195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 97], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 99], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

mediation option (1963 initiative), 599n [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]-640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 319], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

plebiscite issue, 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 297n [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

U.N. action on, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 30], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 83], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 115]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 123]-252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 144]

U.S. leverage with India, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 30]-70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 30]

Kashmir negotiations, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 105], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 227]-440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 227] Ayub's desire for, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 30]

“elements” settlement proposal, 553

failure, inevitability of, 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 272]

Indian initiative in talks, U.S. requests for, 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 251], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]-520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 264]

Kennedy - Ayub correspondence, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 228]

Pakistani - Chinese relations and, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 243]

Pakistani initiative in talks, U.S. requests for, 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 263]-519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

partition proposal, 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Rostow - Komer mission re, 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 272]

U.S. involvement, proposed, 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]-488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 249], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 252]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 252]

U.S. military assistance to India and, 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]-524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 271], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283]

U.S. strategy, 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 257], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]-510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 271]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 271]

U.S. - U.K. coordination, 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 261], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Laos, 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 30], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 60]-130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 60]

Nassau conference (1962), 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 230]-458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]

nuclear weapons, 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 60], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 105], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 293], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 318]

Pakistan: economic situation, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8]

Iran, relations with, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8]

Pakistan Consortium, 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 98], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 99]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute: border closing, 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

mediation, U.S. offer re, 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

mediation effort by Merchant, 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 52], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 55], 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

moratorium on border closing, 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

Pakistani use of U.S. arms, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 30]-73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 30], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

reestablishment of relations, proposals for, 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 301]-606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

U.S. - Afghan discussions, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 31]-76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173]

U.S. initiatives with Pakistanis, 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 168]-331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

U.S. leverage with Afghanistan, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 30]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 30]

Pakistani - Chinese relations, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 176]

Pakistani - Soviet relations, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 8]

Pakistani - U.S. relations: anti - colonialism issue, 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 8]-17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 10]

Ayub's visit to U.S. (1961), 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30]

Ayub's visit to U.S. (1962), 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]-331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Aziz Ahmed's farewell visit with Kennedy, 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]-619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Ball's visit to Pakistan (1963), 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 318], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 318]-638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 318], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 331], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 331], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 331]

Bhutto's visit to U.S. (Oct., 1963), 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 332]-680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 332]

Kennedy - Ayub correspondence, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 6], 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 8], 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]-26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 46n [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 22], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 55], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 83]-171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 97], 206n [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 99], 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 115]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 123]-252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 186], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 217], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 228], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]-459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 237], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 252]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 252], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 263]-519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

U.S. intelligence facilities in Pakistan, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 314]

U.S. security guarantee, 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

U.N. disarmament discussions, 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 63]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India, 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 215] air defense program, 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 243], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 293], 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 293], 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 293], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 293], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 294], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 295]-593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 297], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 297], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 303]-608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Ayub informed of, 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]-459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Ayub's attitude toward, 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 237]

Nehru informed of, 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 233]

NSC Subcommittee proposal re, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

rationale for, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 198], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 202], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 202]

U.S. approval of, 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

U.S. - U.K. agreement on, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 230], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 230]-454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 230], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 231], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 231]

U.S. - U.K. communications re, 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 216]-420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 224]

U.S. economic assistance to India, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 41n [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 20], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 95]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

U.S. economic assistance to Pakistan, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90]-191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

U.S. military assistance to India, 190 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39] five - year program, 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 337], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]-691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

funding levels, 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 283]-563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283]

Kashmir negotiations and, 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]-524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 271], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283]

Lightning aircraft from U.K., offer re, 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 128], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 133]-271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 137], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 139]-281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 284n [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 142], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 151]-301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 316n [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

Pakistani position, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 192], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 193], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 194]-377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

U.S. - Soviet relations, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30]-67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 30]

Vietnam, 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 63]-142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 105]

Yugoslavia, 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60]-135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Kettelhut, Marvin C., 150n [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 333n [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 170]

Kharas, Jamshed Gustadji, 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Khrushchev, Nikita S., 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 12], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30]-67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 30], 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 35], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 214], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Khurshid (President of Azad Kashmir), 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 114], 548 [Pg. 548 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Kitchen, Jeffrey C., 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 179], 565n [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]

Knepper, William E., 398n [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

Komer, Robert W., 99n [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 52], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90]-191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 136], 270n [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 137], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 139], 280n [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 140], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 152], 325n [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 167], 403n [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 405n [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 221], 458n [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 459n [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 489n [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 490n [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283], 575n [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 290], 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300], 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 617n [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 639n [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319] Afghan - Soviet relations, 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Afghanistan: Iran transit route, 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]-477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

U.S. aid to limit Soviet influence, 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 112], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]-240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

Indian - Chinese border dispute, 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 202], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 226]-436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 226], 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]-526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in, 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 306]-615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 333]-683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Indian - Soviet relations, MIG aircraft for India, 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Kashmir dispute, 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 599n [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Kashmir negotiations, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 238] “elements” settlement proposal, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 280]-554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 280]partition proposal, 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]-486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

Rostow - Komer mission re, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 271], 538n [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 272]

U.S. strategy, 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 226]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 226], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 257]-505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 257], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 258], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

U.S. - U.K. coordination, 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 261]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute: border closing, 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 37]

mediation, U.S. offer re, 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]-99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

mediation effort by Merchant, 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

moratorium on border closing, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 110]

U.S. - Afghan discussions, 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]-332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 169]

Pakistani - U.S. relations: Ball's visit to Pakistan (1963), 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]-632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 318], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 318]

reevaluation of U.S. policy, proposals for, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 87]-181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 226], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283]

U.S. economic assistance to India, 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 337]

U.S. economic assistance to Pakistan, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

U.S. military assistance to India: five - year program, 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 337], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]-691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]-697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 342]

funding levels, 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 283]

Lightning aircraft from U.K., offer re, 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157]

Pakistani position, 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 193]

Special Forces training, 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 253]

U.S. military assistance to Pakistan, 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]-623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]

Krishna Menon. See Menon, V.K. Krishna.

Krishnamachari, T. T., 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 196], 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 293], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 293], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 297] air defense program for India, 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 299]

Indian - Chinese border dispute, 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300]

Indian neutrality policy, 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300]-602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 300]

Indian - Soviet relations, 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]-314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

Kashmir dispute, 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 300]-604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 300]

Taylor's visit to India (1963), 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 347]

visit to U.S. (1963), 594n [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 297], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 300]

Laise, Carol C., 317n [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 344n [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 347n [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 519n [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 619n [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 702n [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 343]

Lakeland, Albert A., 702n [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 343], 706n [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

Laos, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8], 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 22], 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 22], 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 22], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 30], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 60]-130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 60], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 63]-141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 63], 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 107]

Latin America, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 35]

Lightning aircraft for India. See under U.S. military assistance to India.

Lilienthal, David, 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90]

Lloyd, John, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

Lockheed company, 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 121]

Lord, Winston, 565n [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 653n [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]

Lubkeman, Walter H., 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 351]

Ludlow, James M., 224n [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 111], 296n [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 471n [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 239], 489n [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

MacDonald, Malcolm, 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 198]

Macmillan, Harold, 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 30] Indian - Chinese border dispute, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 230]

Indian - Pakistani relations, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 224]

Indian - Soviet relations, 278n [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 139]

Kashmir negotiations, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 224]-432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 224], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 243]

Lightning aircraft for India, offer re, 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 133]-268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 135], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 137], 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 140]-281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 151]-301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 316n [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

Nassau conference (1962), 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 230]-458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India: air defense program, 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 243], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 295]-593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 303]-608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

U.S. - U.K. agreement on, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 230]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 230], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 231], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 231]

U.S. - U.K. communications re, 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 216]-420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 224]

Maffitt, Edward P., 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Maiwandwal, Mohammed Hashim, 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 86], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 178] Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 31]-76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 64]

Majid, Abdul, 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 327]

Malikyar, Abdullah, 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 106], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 106], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 327]

Manfull, Melvin L., 127n [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 194n [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 93], 211n [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

Mao Tse - tung, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 35]

Martin, Edwin M., 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 26], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 26], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 26], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30]

Masood, M., 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]-238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 155]

McConaughy, Walter P., 209n [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 101], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 136], 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 138], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 178], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 212], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 328] Indian - Chinese border dispute: Pakistani policy, 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 179], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 191]-373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 191]

Pakistani - U.S. relations and, 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]-403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 315]-631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in, 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 345]

Indian - Pakistani relations, Ayub's assessment of, 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]-253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 124]

Indian - Soviet relations, 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 154]

Kashmir dispute: mediation option (1963 initiative), 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 323]-653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]

U.N. action on, 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

U.S. leverage with India, 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]

Kashmir negotiations: Ayub's attitude toward, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 154], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 154], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 234]-462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 234]

Pakistani proposals, U.S. assessment of, 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Partition proposal, 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

U.S. involvement, proposed, 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 252]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 347n [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178] Iranian mediation effort, 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

reestablishment of relations, proposals for, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 153]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 548 [Pg. 548 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 277]

U.S. initiatives with Pakistanis, 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 168]

Pakistani - U.S. relations: Ball's visit to Pakistan (1963), 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 315], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 676n [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 331]

Indian - Chinese border dispute and, 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]-403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 315]-631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Taylor's visit to Pakistan (1963), 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 345]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India: Ayub informed of, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 234]-463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]

U.S. - U.K. agreement on, 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 231], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 231]

U.S. economic assistance to India, 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 124]-254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

U.S. military assistance to India, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 139], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 198], 421n [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 217], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 245]

McCone, John A., 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 215], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 244], 583n [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293] Indian - Chinese border dispute, 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Pakistani - U.S. relations: Ball's visit to Pakistan (1963), 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 318]

Johnson's intention to improve relations, 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

U.S. intelligence facilities in Pakistan, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 314], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 318]

U.S. military assistance to India, 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 283]

McGhee, George C., 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 161n [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 75], 208n [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 139], 280n [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 140], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 201], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 489n [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 490n [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 518n [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 263], 519n [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264] Pakistani - U.S. relations, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 138]-277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 138]

U.S. military assistance to India, 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 143]-287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

McMahon, Sir Arthur, 351n [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

McNamara, Robert S., 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 136] Indian - Chinese border dispute, 350 resumption of hostilities, U.S. study re, 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

U.S. assessment of military situation, 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 202], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 202]

Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in, 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283]-565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 320], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Kashmir negotiations, 536n [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 271]uclear weapons, U.S. policy on, 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 293]

Pakistani - U.S. relations, 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 331]-678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 331]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India, 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 215] air defense program, 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 293], 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 293]-586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 293], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 293]-588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 293]

JCS position, 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 225]

rationale for, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 202]

U.S. approval of, 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

U.S. - U.K. working group on, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 274]

U.S. military assistance to India, 361n [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348] five - year program, 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 342]

funding levels, 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 283]-562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 283], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283]

Indian requests, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 174]

Kashmir negotiations and, 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 271]

Lightning aircraft from U.K., offer re, 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

U.S. military assistance to Pakistan, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 170], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 342], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

McSweeney, John M., 24n [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]

Menon, Lakshmi, 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 304]-611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

Menon, V. K. Krishna, 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 42], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 97], 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 105], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 105], 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 124], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 212], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 350] departure from office, 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 185]-358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 190], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 196]-382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 196]

Goa dispute, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 65], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 69]

“Hindu Dulles” issue, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 164]

Indian political situation, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 122], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 154], 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]-320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 164]

Indian - Soviet relations, MIG aircraft for India, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 121]-247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 121], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 159], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 167]

Kashmir dispute, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 126], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 144]

Pakistani attitude toward, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 138]

U.N. disarmament discussions, 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 63]-140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 63]

U.S. military assistance to India, 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 159], 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

visit to U.S. (1961), 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 63]-142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]

Vietnam, 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 63]-142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]

Menshikov, Mikhail A., 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 35]

Merchant, Livingston T., 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 62]

Metcalf, Lee E., 177n [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 86]

Mexico, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 66]

Meyer, Armin H., 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 99n [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 101n [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 103n [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 112n [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 127n [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 136n [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]

Meyers, Howard, 653n [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]

MIG aircraft for India. See under Indian - Soviet relations.

Millikan, Max, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14]

Mirage aircraft for India, proposed, 268n [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 135]

Mohammed, Ali, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 327]

Morse, Wayne, 729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 350]

Mountbatten, Lord Louis, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

Murray, R. J., 645n [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Musa, Gen. Mohammad, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 328], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 345], 723n [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 348]

Naas, Charles W., 177n [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 86], 191n [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 323n [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 377n [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 391n [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 541n [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 555n [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 281], 617n [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 619n [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 685n [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 701n [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 702n [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 343]

Nadar, Kamaraj, 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 219]

Naim, Prince Mohammed, 443n [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 229] Afghan - Soviet relations, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]-87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Afghanistan: Bowles' visit (1962), 216n [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 106]

Iran transit route, 137n [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 62], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 85]

U.S. economic assistance, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 15n [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 7], 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]-87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Zahir's visit to U.S. (1963), 485n [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Ayub's assessment of, 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute: Afghan proposal for ending dispute, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 113]-229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 113]

armed conflict, potential for, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9]

compromise formula for ending dispute, 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173]-340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 178]

mediation, U.S. offer re, 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 39], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]

mediation effort by Merchant, 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 54], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 56], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

moratorium on border closing, 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 81], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 85]-176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 85], 178n [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 86], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

U.S. - Afghan discussions, 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]-332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 169], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173]

visit to U.S. (1962), 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]-332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 169], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173]

Nassau conference (1962), 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 230]-458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]

Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 63]

National Intelligence Estimates: NIE 31-62, 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

NIE 37-62, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 109]

National Security Council, 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 244] Executive Committee meetings, 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 215], 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 226]

meetings: 514th, 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]-588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 293]

516th, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 314]

Subcommittee on South Asia, 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 221], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 226], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 238]-470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 238], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 253]-497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 253]

Nawazish, Brig., 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 328]

Ne Win, 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300]

Nehru, Braj Kumar, 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 63], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300], 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304] Goa dispute, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 66]-150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 69], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 161n [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 75], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 105]-215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 105]

Indian - Chinese border dispute, 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]-353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in, 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 344]

Indian - Soviet relations, 726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]

Indian - U.S. relations: ferromanganese barter, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Goa dispute and, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 105]-215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 105]

public image of U.S. in India, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 105]

sugar quota in U.S. market, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3]

Kashmir dispute: integration of Kashmir into Indian Union, proposed, 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]-685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

mediation option, 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

Kashmir negotiations, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 105], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 227]-440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 227]

U.S. economic assistance to India, 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 16]

U.S. military assistance to India: exchange of diplomatic notes re, 384

five - year program, 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 344]-708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 344]

Indian - Soviet relations and, 726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]

Nehru, Jawaharlal, 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 195], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228] Ayub, assessment of, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 60]

Ayub's assessment of, 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]-253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 124], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 286]

Berlin issue, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 35]-82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 35]

China, People's Republic of, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 35]-84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 35] foreign policy, Nehru's assessment of, 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 317]-634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 317]

Tibet occupation, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 35]

Galbraith's relations with, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 35]

Goa dispute, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 66], 152n [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 68], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 69], 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 157n [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 74]-161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 75], 163n [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 95]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

India: foreign relations, 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]-130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 60]

political situation, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 122], 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]

Indian - Chinese border dispute, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 12]

cease - fire, 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 214]-416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 214]

Indian policy, 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]-347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

military activity, 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 174]

negotiations, 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]-322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 165], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 174], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 214]

Nehru's assessment of, 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 214]

political effects in India, 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 190], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 196]

press coverage, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 196]

U.S. military involvement, proposed, 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 203]

U.S. policy, 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 187]

Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in, 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 344], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 347]

Indian - Pakistani relations: Harriman mission to find common ground, 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]-417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 214], 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 218]-423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

joint defense proposal, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 126]

Nehru's assessment of, 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 289]-574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 289]

water issues, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11]

Indian - Soviet relations, MIG aircraft for India, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 121], 278n [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 139], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 142], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 159], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 167], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 214], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 215]

Indian - U.S. relations: Bowles' visit to India (1961), 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]-86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

Bowles' visit to India (1962), 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]-213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 219n [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

Goa dispute and, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 95]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Harriman's visit to India (1961), 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]-32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Indian appreciation of, 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]-319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]

Johnson's visit to India (1961), 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Kennedy - Nehru correspondence, 32n [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 93]-195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 95]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]-319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 187], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 203], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]-404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 218]-423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 233], 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 251], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]-520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 264], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]-635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]-640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 319], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

Nehru's visit to U.S. (1961), 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]-135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Rusk's visit to India (1961), 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Rusk's visit to India (1963), 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 289]

status of relationship following Goa and Kashmir debates in U.N., 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 147]

Taylor's visit to India (1963), 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 347], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 347]

international scene, assessment of, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 12]-32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 20]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 60], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60]-135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Kashmir dispute, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 8], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 12] Indian position, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60]-134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60]

integration of Kashmir into Indian Union, proposed, 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 343]

mediation option, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 93]

mediation option (1963 initiative), 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 288], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]-635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 321]-645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

plebiscite issue, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 276], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 289]

sacred relic theft, 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 351]

U.N. action on, 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]-166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

U.S. leverage with India, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 4]-8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

Valley joint tenancy proposal, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 48]-109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

Kashmir negotiations, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 105], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 107], 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219] “elements” settlement proposal, 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 280]-554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 280]

failure, inevitability of, 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 272]

failure, Nehru's assessment of, 639n [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

Galbraith - Nehru discussions, 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-548 [Pg. 548 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Indian agreement to, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 79]-166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 410n [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 212], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 214]-417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 214]

Indian initiative in talks, U.S. requests for, 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 251], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]-520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 264]

preliminary talks, 235

nuclear weapons, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 60], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60]

Pakistani - Chinese relations, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11]

Soviet - Chinese relations, assessment of, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 12]

United Nations, India's role in, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 35]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India, 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 233], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

U.S. economic assistance to India, 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 16], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 41n [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 20] Goa dispute and, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 95]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

U.S. military assistance to India, 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 245] Lightning aircraft from U.K., offer re, 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 142]

U.S. military assistance to Pakistan, 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 147]

Nehru, R. K., 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

Nepal, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 88]-189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 183], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 190]

Netherlands, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

Newlin, Michael, 224n [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 111]

Ngo Dinh Diem, 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 63]

Nimmo, Gen., 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 343]

Nitze, Paul H., 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 404n [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 214], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 230], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 231], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283]

Nkrumah, Kwame, 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 114]

Nogueira, Alberto Franco, 149n [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 66], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 69]

Norway, 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Nu, U, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 35], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 35]

Nuclear weapons, 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 30], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 60]-131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 105] Chinese policy, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 347]

Indian policy, 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

U.S. policy, 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 293], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 318]

O'Donnell, Kenneth, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 52]

Ormsby - Gore, David, 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Padelford, Edward A., 150n [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Pahlavi, Mohammed Reza, Shah of Iran, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 12], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302] Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, mediation effort re, 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 153], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]-318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]

Pakistan (see also Indian - Pakistani relations; Kashmir dispute; Kashmir negotiations; Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute; Pakistani - Chinese relations; Pakistani - Soviet relations; Pakistani - U.S. relations; U.S. economic assistance to Pakistan; U.S. military assistance to Pakistan): Chinese representation in U.N., 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99]-208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

economic situation, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 22]-50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 22], 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 29]-64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 29]

foreign relations, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 29]-65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29]

German military assistance, 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 286]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Indian - Chinese border dispute, 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 179], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 184], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 186], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 191]-373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 191], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Indian - Soviet relations, 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 143]-287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

international economic assistance, see Pakistan Consortium

Iran, relations with, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8]

military situation, 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 22]

neutralist sentiments, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 2]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9]

political situation, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 29]-63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 29], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 138], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 213]

U.S. intelligence report on, 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29]

U.S. military assistance to India, concerns re, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 67], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 88]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 88], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 126], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 132], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 138], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 143]-287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 154], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 155]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 191], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 192], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 193], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 194]-377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 195]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 198], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 212], 421n [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 217], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 228], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 245]-482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 245], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 281]-556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 286], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]-673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 330], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 335]-688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

Pakistan Consortium, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]-57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 88], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90]-191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 98], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 99]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 138], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 282], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 138], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287] Afghan position, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 47], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 106], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 229]-447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 229]

Afghan proposal for ending dispute, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 113]-229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 113]

Afghan - Soviet relations and, 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]-94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 101], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 229]

armed conflict, potential for, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]-23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9]

border closing, 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 37], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 39]-92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

compromise formula for ending dispute, 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173]-340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 176], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 178]

Iranian mediation effort, 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]-318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]

mediation, U.S. offer re, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9]-24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 38]-96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]-106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 47], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 88] withdrawal of offer, 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]-487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

mediation by Saudis, proposed, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 64], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]

nmediation effort by Merchant, 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 62]

military forces involved, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 30]

moratorium on border closing, 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 82], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 85]-178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 86], 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-193 [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 94], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 110], 227n [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 113]

Pakistani use of U.S. arms, 24n [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15]-35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 30]-73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 30], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

periodic border openings, proposed, 443n [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 229], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 229]

Powindah problem, 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 64]

reestablishment of relations, proposals for, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 153]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]-546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 548 [Pg. 548 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 277], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 301]-606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

Soviet policy, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9]-23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9]

U.S. - Afghan discussions, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 31]-76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]-332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 169], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173]

U.S. courses of action following failure of mediation, 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]-146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]

U.S. initiatives with Pakistanis, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 11], 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 101]-210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 101], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 168]-331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

U.S. leverage with Afghanistan, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 30]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 30]

U.S. national security concerns, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 51]

Zahir's assessment of, 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 327]-658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 327], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 329]-670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 329]

Pakistani - Chinese relations, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8] air link, 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 308]

border situation, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11]-29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 126]-257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 138], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 176], 463n [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259]

Chou's visit to Pakistan, 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 342], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 346]

Kashmir negotiations and, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 243], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 263]

normalization option, 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 328]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 328], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 332]-680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 332], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 346]

Pakistani - U.S. relations and, 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 328]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 328], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 341]-696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 346]-719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]

Pakistani - Soviet relations, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 29] oil exploration, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 2], 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 8]

Soviet threat to Pakistan, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 30]-71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 30]

Pakistani - U.S. relations (see also U.S. economic assistance to Pakistan; U.S. military assistance to Pakistan), 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 155], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 244] A. Ahmed's farewell visit with Kennedy, 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]-619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

alliance issue, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 6], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 88]-183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 88], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]-324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 166]

anti - Americanism in Pakistan, 414

anti - colonialism issue, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 6], 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 8]-17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 10]

Ayub's visit to U.S. (1961), 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30]

Ayub's visit to U.S. (1962), 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]-331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Ball's visit to Pakistan (1963), 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 315] Ayub's meeting with Ball, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 328]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 328]

Ball's assessment of, 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]-673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 330]

planning re, 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]-632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]-639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

post - visit assessment by U.S. officials, 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]-678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 331]

Bhutto's visit to U.S. (Oct. 1963), 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 332]-680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 332]

Bhutto's visit to U.S. (Dec. 1963), 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 341]-696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Bowles' assessment of, 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]-730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 350]

Bowles' visit to Pakistan (1962), 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 108]

Harriman's visit to Pakistan (1961), 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]

Indian - Chinese border dispute and, 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 199], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]-391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]-403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 315]-631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Johnson's intention to improve relations, 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Johnson's visit to Pakistan (1961), 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 22]-50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 22]

Kennedy - Ayub correspondence, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 6], 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 8], 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]-26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 46n [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 22], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 55], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 83]-171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 97], 206n [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 99], 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 115]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 123]-252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 186], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 217], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 228], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]-459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 237], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 252]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 252], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 263]-519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

McGhee's report on, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 138]-277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 138]

Pakistani - Chinese relations and, 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 328]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 328], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 341]-696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 346]-719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]

Pakistani objectives, 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 138]

reevaluation of U.S. policy, proposals for, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 87]-181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 138]

Rusk's visit to Pakistan (1963), 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 290]-577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Taylor's visit to Pakistan (1963), 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 345]-717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 345], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 346]-719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]

U.S. courses of action, 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]-245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 120]

U.S. intelligence facilities in Pakistan, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 314], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 318]

U.S. intelligence report on, 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29]

U.S. objectives, 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 138]

U.S. security guarantee, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11]-30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 315], 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 330], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 345]

Patil, S. K., 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 121], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 219]

Peabody, Endicott, 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Peace Corps, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 22]

Phoumi, Gen. Nosavan, 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 63]

Pickard, Cyril S., 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 230], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 231], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 288], 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Plimpton, Francis T.E., 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 114]

Polk, William R., 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]

Portugal, Goa dispute and, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]-150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 68]-158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 74]-163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77]

Powindah tribe, 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 64]

Pushtunistan dispute. See Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute.

Qadir, Mansur, 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 22], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 30], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 30], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 30], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 54], 120n [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 138n [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 62], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 114]

Quinn, Lt. Gen., 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 328], 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 331]-677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 331], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 331]

Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli, 278n [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 139], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 288], 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

Rafiq (Afghanistan), 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 229], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 229]

Rahman Khan, Vice Adm., 723n [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 348]

Read, Benjamin H., 591n [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 343], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 351]-733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 351]

Reddy, Sanjiva, 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 97], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 219]

Rewinkel, Milton G., 259n [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 128], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 264n [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 133], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 151]

Rishtiya, M. Q., 605n [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 301]

Rishtiya, Sayyid Kasem, 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 327]

Roberts, Chalmers, 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 262]

Robinson, Col., 653n [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]

Rostow, Walt W., 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 98n [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60], 164n [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79] Kashmir negotiations, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 271], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 272]-541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]

Rountree, William M., 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 22], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 30], 164n [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 97], 209n [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 101] Kashmir dispute, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 73]

Pakistan, neutralist sentiments in, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 2]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 138n [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 62], 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64] mediation, U.S. offer re, 89n [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 38], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 39], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 51]-114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

mediation effort by Merchant, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 54], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 54], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

Pakistani use of U.S. arms, 24n [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15]-35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15]

U.S. courses of action following failure of mediation, 146n [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]

U.S. initiatives with Pakistanis, 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 101]-210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 101]

Pakistani - U.S. relations: alliance issue, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5]

Harriman's visit to Pakistan (1961), 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]

Kennedy - Ayub correspondence, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 6]

U.S. military assistance to India, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 151n [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 67]

Rousek, Col. Charles, 57n [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Rowan, Carl T., 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Rusk, Dean, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 30], 181n [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 333n [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 170], 441n [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228] Afghanistan: Iran transit route, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 82], 193 [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 94], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 246]-485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

U.S. aid to limit Soviet influence, 238n [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

U.S. economic assistance, 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 64]-144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 64]

Zahir's visit to U.S. (1963), 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 246]-485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 669n [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 329]

Goa dispute, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 66]-150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 69], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 75], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77]

Indian - Chinese border dispute, 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178] maximum political and military effort required of India, 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 206]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 206]

negotiations, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 202]

Pakistani policy, 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 179], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 184], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 186], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Pakistani - U.S. relations and, 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]-391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

resumption of hostilities, U.S. study re, 515

timing of Chinese attack, 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 289]

U.S. assessment of military situation, 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 202], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]-399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 205]

U.S. military involvement, proposed, 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 206]-402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

U.S. policy, 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]-353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 187]

Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in, 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 318] carrier task force, 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 333], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 339], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Indian - Pakistani relations: broadened contacts at all levels, proposed, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 155]-307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 155]

Harriman mission to find common ground, 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]-408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 211], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 220]-427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 220]

India's aggressive intentions, Pakistani aide - memoire on, 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

joint defense proposal, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 126]

Indian - Soviet relations: MIG aircraft for India, 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 128]-260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

U.S. military assistance to India and, 726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]

Indian - U.S. relations, 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12] Kennedy - Nehru correspondence, 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Krishnamachari's visit to U.S. (1963), 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 299]

Nehru's visit to U.S. (1961), 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 60], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60]

neutrality policy of India and, 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

Radhakrishnan's visit to U.S. (1963), 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

Rusk's visit to India (1961), 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Rusk's visit to India (1963), 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Kashmir dispute, 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 176] armed attack, Pakistani concerns re, 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]-173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 84]

Goa dispute, relation to, 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]-173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 84]

integration of Kashmir into Indian Union, proposed, 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]-685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

mediation option, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 93]-195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

mediation option (1963 initiative), 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 626n [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 313], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 319], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]-656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 326]

“no war” declaration issue, 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 155]-308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 155]

plebiscite issue, 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Rusk's assessment of, 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 290]-576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 290]

U.N. action on, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 30], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]-167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 114]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 114]

Kashmir negotiations: Indian initiative in talks, U.S. requests for, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 251], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 264]

internationalization proposal, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254]-499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 254]

Ladakh issue, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 256], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 259], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 259]

Pakistani - Chinese relations and, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259]

Pakistani initiative in talks, U.S. requests for, 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Pakistani proposals, U.S. assessment of, 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]-490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]

Rusk's assessment of, 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 282]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India and, 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 278]

U.S. military assistance to India and, 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283]

U.S. strategy, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 239]-472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254]-501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 257]-508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 258], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 270], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 271], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 271]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 271], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279]

U.S. - U.K. coordination, 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 219], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 270]

nuclear weapons, 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 60], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 318]

Pakistan, neutralist sentiment in, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 2]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287] compromise formula for ending dispute, 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173]-340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 176], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 178]

mediation, U.S. offer re, 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 38]-90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]-104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]-114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]-487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

mediation by Saudis, proposed, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 64]

mediation effort by Merchant, 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 62]

moratorium on border closing, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 82], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 86]-178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 86], 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-193 [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 94], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

reestablishment of relations, proposals for, 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]-546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

U.S. courses of action following failure of mediation, 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]-146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]

U.S. national security concerns, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 51]

Pakistani - Chinese relations, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259]

Pakistani - U.S. relations, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 155] alliance issue, 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]-324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 166]

Ball's visit to Pakistan (1963), 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 318], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 318], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 318], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 331], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 331], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 331]

Bhutto's visit to U.S. (Oct. 1963), 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 332]-680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 332]

Bhutto's visit to U.S. (Dec. 1963), 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 341]-696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Indian - Chinese border dispute and, 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]-391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

Kennedy - Ayub correspondence, 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]-26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 217]

Rusk's visit to Pakistan (1963), 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 290]-577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

U.S. intelligence facilities in Pakistan, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 314]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]-345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 176]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India: air defense program, 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 243], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 278], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 282], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]-583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 293]-585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 293], 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 293]-587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 293], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 293], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 294], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]-595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 297], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 299], 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 305]

Ayub informed of, 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

defense planning, 551

defense production, 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 278]-551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 278], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 282]-559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 282]

Kashmir negotiations and, 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 278]

Nehru informed of, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 233]

U.S. approval of, 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 221], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

U.S. - U.K. communications re, 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]

U.S. economic assistance to India, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 16], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 282]-560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 282]

U.S. economic assistance to Pakistan, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 16], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 282]

U.S. military assistance to India: defense production, 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 305]

dual - purpose equipment, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 67]

five - year program, 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 342]-701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

funding levels, 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 283], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283]

FY 1964, 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]-613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 305]

guiding principles, 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 290]-577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Indian - Soviet relations and, 726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]

Kashmir negotiations and, 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283]

Lightning aircraft from U.K., offer re, 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 128]-262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 137], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 151], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 155]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

long - range assistance, 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 282]

Pakistani position, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 67], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 126], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 194]-377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 245], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 281]-556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

transport assistance, 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 205]

U.S. military assistance to Pakistan, 80n [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35] five - year program, 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 342]-701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

three - year program, 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]-621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 309]

Sabri, Ali, 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300]

Salazar, Antonio, 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 75]

Sandys, Duncan, 278n [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 139], 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 214], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 271] Indian - Chinese border dispute, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 230]

Indian - Soviet relations, 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 231]

Harriman mission to India and Pakistan, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 212]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 212]

Kashmir dispute, 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 288], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 291]

Kashmir negotiations, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 212]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 212]

Lightning aircraft for India, offer re, 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 151]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India: air defense program, 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 282]

U.S. - U.K. agreement on, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 230]-451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 230], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 230], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 230], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 231]-456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 231]

U.S. - U.K. working group on, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 274]

Saudi Arabia, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 64], 146n [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]

Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr., 164n [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

Schneider, David T., 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 426n [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 220], 428n [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 221], 459n [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 463n [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 471n [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 239], 490n [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 498n [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 519n [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 599n [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 639n [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 645n [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 655n [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 683n [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 726n [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 731n [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 351]

Schwab, Capt. E. L., 691n [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Sen, A. K., 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 219]

Sen, P. C., 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 219]

Shafqat (Pakistan), 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Shah of Iran. See Pahlavi, Mohammed Reza .

Shahi, Gen. (Pakistan), 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 315]

Shastri, Lal Bahadur, 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 219]

Sheldon, Huntington, 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Shepard, Capt. Tazewell T., Jr., 546n [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Sherzad (Afghanistan), 216n [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 106]

Shoaib, Mohammed, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 6], 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 22], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 22], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30] India Consortium, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 26]-55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 26]

Indian - Pakistani relations, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8]-20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

Kashmir dispute, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 8]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8]

Pakistan: economic situation, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8]

Iran, relations with, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8]

Pakistan Consortium, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]-57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Pakistani - Chinese relations, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8]

Pakistani - Soviet relations, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 8]

Pakistani - U.S. relations, 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 8]-20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

U.S. economic assistance to Pakistan, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 26]-57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Sikkim, 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 183], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 190]

Singh, Swaran, 462n [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 234], 463n [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 577n [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 596n [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

Sino - Indian border dispute. See Indian - Chinese border dispute.

Sisco, Joseph J., 157n [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 166n [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

Slater, Warren E., 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 152]

Smith, Bromley, 101n [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 103n [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 208n [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 209n [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 101], 211n [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 261n [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 264n [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 133], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 151], 347n [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 419n [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 216], 422n [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 218], 430n [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 483n [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 246], 546n [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 293], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 314]

Smith, Horace, 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 22]

Smith, Stephen, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 22]

Sneider, Richard, 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 191], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 234], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 315], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 328]

Snelling, Sir Arthur, 543n [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 274], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

Souphanouvong, Prince, 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 63]

South Asia, U.S. overall policy re, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]-189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO), 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 22], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 30], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 30], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]-345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 176], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 231], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 345]

Souvanna Phouma, 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 63]-141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 63]

Soviet Union (see also Afghan - Soviet relations; Indian - Soviet relations; Pakistani - Soviet relations), 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13] Chinese - Soviet relations, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 12]

Indian - Chinese border dispute, 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 165], 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 190] Kashmir dispute, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 84], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 144], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

nuclear weapons, 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 60]-131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9]-23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9]

U.S. - Soviet relations, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30]-67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 30]

Special National Intelligence Estimates: SNIE 31/32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 29], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 132]

SNIE 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 29], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29]

Spengler, William F., 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

Spielman, Henry W., 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 99n [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 166n [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80] Staley, Carroll, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 238]

Starrs, Francis R., Jr., 153n [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

Steeves, John M., 201n [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 117], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 483n [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 246], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 327] Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute: Afghan position, 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 229]-447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 229]

Afghan proposal for ending dispute, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 113]-229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 113]

moratorium on border closing, 227n [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 113]

reestablishment of relations, proposals for, 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

Stevenson, Adlai E., 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 121], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 215] Goa dispute, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 66], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 84]

Kashmir dispute, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 114], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 114], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 144]

Stoessel, Walter J., 24n [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]

Suhrawardi, 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 229]

Sullivan, William, 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Swank, Emory, 191n [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

Sweden, 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Symington, Stuart, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 202]

Syria, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 63]

Talbot, Phillips, 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 16], 37n [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17], 51n [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 30], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 89n [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 38], 99n [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 48], 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 63], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 150n [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 157n [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 163n [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77], 166n [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 82], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 177n [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 86], 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 193n [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 194n [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 93], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 99], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 99], 208n [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 209n [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 101], 211n [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 114], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 114], 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 261n [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 262n [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 296n [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 152], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 155], 314n [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 323n [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 333n [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 170], 344n [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 347n [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 179], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 355n [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 358n [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 360n [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 187], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 192], 376n [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 194], 377n [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 390n [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 391n [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 202], 398n [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 400n [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 206], 403n [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 405n [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 420n [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 422n [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 218], 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 426n [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 220], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 227], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 230], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 231], 458n [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 459n [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 463n [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 471n [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 239], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 483n [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 246], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 259], 518n [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 263], 519n [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 541n [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 545n [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 599n [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300], 605n [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 301], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 304], 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 617n [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 619n [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 327], 701n [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 706n [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 726n [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349] Goa dispute, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 66]-150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Indian - Soviet relations, 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]

Kashmir dispute: U.N. action on, 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 144]

U.S. leverage with India, 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]-238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

Kashmir negotiations, U.S. strategy re, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 111]-225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 111], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]-509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 258], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 271], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 271], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 271]

NSC Subcommittee on South Asia, 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 221], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 238]-470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 238], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 253]-497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 253]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute, 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]-92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

Pakistani - U.S. relations: Ball's visit to Pakistan (1963), 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 318], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 318], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 318], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

Pakistani - Chinese relations and, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 341]-696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 297]

U.S. intelligence facilities in Pakistan, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 314]

U.S. military assistance to India: exchange of diplomatic notes re, 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Indian - Soviet relations and, 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]

Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D.: India, visit to (1963), 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]-722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in, 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 320], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 344], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 345], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 345], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 347]

Pakistan, visit to (1963), 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 345]-717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 345], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 346]-719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]

Pakistani - Chinese relations, 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 346]-719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India: air defense program, 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 293], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 293]

U.S. - U.K. working group on, 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 274]

U.S. military assistance to India: advisory personnel, 362n [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 189]

five - year program, 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 348]-725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 348]

Lightning aircraft from U.K., offer re, 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Taylor - Ayub discussion re, 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 345]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 345]

U.S. military assistance to Pakistan: five - year program, 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 348]-726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349]

operational planning and prepositioning, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 345]-713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 345]

Thailand, 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 22], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 30]

Thant, U, 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 75]

Tibet, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 35]

Timmons, Benson E.L., 157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Tin Pe, 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 300]

Tito, Marshal, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 35], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60]-135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Toure, Sekou, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 30]

Turkey, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 190]

Tyler, William R., 157n [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

United Arab Republic, 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 144]

United Kingdom (see also U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to Pakistan; Lightning aircraft from U.K. under U.S. military assistance to India), 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25] economic assistance to India, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 18]

economic assistance to Pakistan, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 26]

Goa dispute, 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 68], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 69], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Indian - Chinese border dispute, 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 190]

Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in, 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]-624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]-654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 324]

Kashmir dispute, U.N. action on, 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 144], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 144], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Kashmir negotiations, U.S. - U.K. coordination re, 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 219], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 224]-432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 224], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 253], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 261], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 270]

Laos policy, 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 30]

United Nations (see also under Kashmir dispute): Chinese representation issue, 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99]-208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

disarmament discussions, 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 63]-140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 63]

Goa dispute, 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 69]-155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 75], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 84], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 95]

India's role, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 35]

U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India, 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 215] air defense program, 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 221], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 226]-437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 226], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 230], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 230], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 230], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 231], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 238], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 243], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 253], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 262], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 274], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 278], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 282], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 299], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 305] defense commitment issue, 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]-596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 303]-608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Indian acceptance of, 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

JCS reports on, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 225]-434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

presentation of proposal to Nehru, 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

Ayub informed of, 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]-459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 234]-463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]

Ayub's attitude toward, 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 237]

Commonwealth contributions, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 238], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 253]-497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 253]

defense planning, 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 278]

defense production, 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 278]-551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 278], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 282]-559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 282]

Kashmir negotiations and, 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 262], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 278]

Nehru informed of, 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 233]

NSC Subcommittee proposal, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 226]

rationale for, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 198], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 202]-396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 202]

U.K. contributions, 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 253]

U.S. approval of, 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 221], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

U.S. - U.K. agreement on, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 230]-458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]

U.S. - U.K. communications re, 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 216]-420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 224]

U.S. - U.K. working group on, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

U.S. economic assistance to India, 41n [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 20], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90] Ayub's assessment of, 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 124]-254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Bokaro steel mill, 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 282], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 337]

commitment of funds, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 16], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Congressional approval, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 238]

FY 1964 amounts, 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 282]-560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 282]

Goa dispute and, 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 88]-188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 88], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 95]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Indian gratitude, 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Indian proposals, 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3]

U.S. economic assistance to Pakistan, 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 138] commitment of funds, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 16], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 26], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 26], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 88], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90]-191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

FY 1964 amounts, 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 282], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

grant aid, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 26]-57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

water logging program, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 22]

U.S. military assistance to India (see also U.S. - Commonwealth military assistance to India), 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 253]-496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 253] advisory personnel, 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 189]

Congressional involvement, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 238], 491n [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 251]

Defense Department position, 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]-98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]

defense production, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 238], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 253], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 305]

deliveries of equipment, 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 190], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 192], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 238]-470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 238]

dual - purpose equipment, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 67]

exchange of diplomatic notes re, 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

five - year program, 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 337], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]-691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]-701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 344]-708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 344], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 348]-725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 348]

funding levels, 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 283]-563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283]

FY 1964 amounts, 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]-613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 305], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 318]

Galbraith's support for, 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 122]-250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 122]

guiding principles, 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 290]-577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Indian - Chinese border dispute and, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 174]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 180]-351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 189], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 205], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

Indian requests, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 174]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Indian - Soviet relations and, 726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]

Kashmir dispute and, 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 305], 613n [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 305]

Kashmir negotiations and, 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]-524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 271], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 283]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 283]

Lightning aircraft from U.K., offer re, 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 139]-280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 140], 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 142], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157] Indian rejection of, 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 159], 316n [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

Pakistani concerns, 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 132], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 143]-287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 154], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 155]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

U.S. - U.K. communications re, 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 128]-262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 133]-271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 137], 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 140]-281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 151]-301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 316n [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

long - range assistance, 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 282]

major military items, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 88]

Menon's departure from office and, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 185]-358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

Pakistani position, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 67], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 88]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 88], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 126], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 138], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 191], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 192], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 193], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 194]-377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 195]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 198], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 212], 421n [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 217], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 228], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 245]-482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 245], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 281]-556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 286], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]-673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 330], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 335]-688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

Special Forces training, 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 253]

Taylor - Ayub discussion re, 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 345]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 345]

transport assistance, 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 205]

U.S. contingency planning, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 180]-351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

U.S. intelligence report on, 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 132]

U.S. military assistance to Pakistan, 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 138] delivery problems, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 170]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

five - year program, 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 342]-701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 348]-726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349]

FY 1964 amounts, 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 318]

Indian concerns, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]-80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 147]

joint planning against communist threat, 663

operational planning and prepositioning, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 345]-713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 345]

tanks and submarines, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 170]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

three - year program, 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]-621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 309], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]-623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]-648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 322]

U.S. military presence in Indian Ocean. See Indian Ocean, U.S. military presence in.

Veliotes, Nicholas A., 120n [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Venezuela, 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 144]-290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 144]

Vietnam, 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 30], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 30], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 60], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 60], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 63]-142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 105], 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 107]

Weil, T. Eliot, 2n [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 2], 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 89n [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 38], 90n [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 101n [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 103n [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 112n [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 127n [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 150n [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 166n [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 191n [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 193n [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92] Goa dispute, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]-148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 65]

Weiner, Benjamin, 318n [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 419n [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 216]

World Bank. See International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

Wriggins, W. Howard, 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Wright, Edwin, 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 327], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 329]

Yugoslavia, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 30], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 60]-135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Yusuf, Mohammed, 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 106], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 106], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]

Zafrulla Khan, Sir Mohammed, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 83], 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 111], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 114]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 114], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 144]

Zahir Shah, Mohammed, King of Afghanistan, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8] Afghanistan: Bowles' visit (1962), 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 106]

neconomic situation, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 327]

political situation, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 327]-660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 327]

Afghan - Soviet relations, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 327]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 327], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 329]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

Kennedy - Zahir correspondence, 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

Pakistani - Afghan border/transit dispute: Afghan position, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 47], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

mediation, U.S. offer re, 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]-103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 47], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 114n [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

reestablishment of relations, proposals for, 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 301], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

Zahir's assessment of, 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 327]-658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 327], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 329]-670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 329]

visit to U.S. (1963), 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]-486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 327]-660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 327], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 329]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]
