Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume XXIX, Part 1, Korea (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 2000)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1964-68v29p1).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Korea (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume XXIX, Part 1)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968

Volume XXIX, Part 1

Korea

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 30, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

Korea (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume XXIX, Part 1)Contents

Preface

Sources

Abbreviations

Persons

KoreaKorea (Documents 1-211)

Pueblo Crisis (Documents 212-331)

U.S. Efforts To Encourage Normalization of Relations Between the Republic of Korea and Japan (Documents 332-369)

Index

Preface Preface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The series documents the facts and events that contributed to the formulation of policies and includes evidence of supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.

The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. This documentary editing proceeds in full accord with the generally accepted standards of historical scholarship. Official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series were first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.

A new statutory charter for the preparation of the series was established by Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by President George Bush on October 28, 1991. Section 198 of P.L. 102–138 added a new Title IV to the Department of State's Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 USC 4351, et seq.).

The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the series should include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government. The statute also confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purposes of concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded. The editors are convinced that this volume meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selection and editing.

Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series

This volume is part of the subseries of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the last five years of the administration of Lyndon B. Johnson. The subseries presents in 34 print volumes a documentary record of the major foreign policy decisions and actions of President Johnson's administration.

This volume presents the documentary record of U.S. policy toward the Republic of Korea in three separate chronological chapters. The first and largest compilation traces the bilateral relations between the United States and the Republic of Korea from 1964 through 1968. The second compilation on the Pueblo crisis documents the crisis occasioned by North Korea's seizure of the U.S.S. Pueblo and its crew in early 1968 and the subsequent diplomatic efforts and tortuous negotiations with North Korea to win the crew's release by the end of the year. The final and smallest compilation documents successful U.S. efforts to encourage a settlement of issues between the Republic of Korea and Japan unresolved since World War II. The result was a treaty that normalized relations between the two principal Northeast Asian allies of the United States. This volume is part 1 of a larger volume that was to have included a compilation on U.S. bilateral relations with Japan. As explained in the section on declassification review below, part 2 of this volume will be published when and if key documentation on Japan is declassified.

Principles of Document Selection for the Foreign Relations Series

In preparing each volume of the Foreign Relations series, the editors are guided by some general principles for the selection of documents. Each editor, in consultation with the General Editor and other senior editors, determines the particular issues and topics to be documented either in detail, in brief, or in summary.

The following general selection criteria are used in preparing volumes in the Foreign Relations series. Individual compiler-editors vary these criteria in accordance with the particular issues and the available documentation. The editors also apply these selection criteria in accordance with their own interpretation of the generally accepted standards of scholarship. In selecting documentation for publication, the editors gave priority to unpublished classified records, rather than previously published records (which are accounted for in appropriate bibliographical notes).

Selection Criteria (in general order of priority):

1. Major foreign affairs commitments made on behalf of the United States to other governments, including those that define or identify the principal foreign affairs interests of the United States;

2. Major foreign affairs issues and activities, including dissenting or alternative opinions to the process ultimately adopted, undertaken on behalf of the United States by government officials and representatives in all agencies in the foreign affairs community;

3. The decisions, discussions, actions, and considerations of the President, as the official constitutionally responsible for the direction of foreign policy, including important information that attended Presidential decisions;

4. The discussions and actions of the National Security Council, the Cabinet, and special Presidential policy groups, including the policy options brought before these bodies or their individual members;

5. The policy options adopted by or considered by the Secretary of State and the most important actions taken to implement Presidential decisions or policies;

6. Diplomatic negotiations and conferences, official correspondence, and other exchanges between U.S. representatives and those of other governments that demonstrate the main lines of policy implementation on major issues;

7. The main policy lines of intelligence activities if they constituted major aspects of U.S. foreign policy toward a nation or region or if they provided key information in the formulation of major U.S. policies;

8. The role of the Congress in the preparation and execution of particular foreign policies or foreign affairs actions;

9. Economic aspects of foreign policy;

10. The main policy lines of U.S. military and economic assistance as well as other types of assistance;

11. The political-military recommendations, decisions, and activities of the military establishment and major regional military commands as they bear upon the formulation or execution of major U.S. foreign policies;

12. Diplomatic appointments that reflect major policies or affect policy changes.

Sources for the Foreign Relations Series

The Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation on major U.S. foreign policy decisions and significant U.S. diplomatic activity. It further requires that government agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government engaged in foreign policy formulation, execution, or support cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. Many of the sources consulted in the preparation of this volume have been declassified and are available for review at the National Archives and Records Administration. The declassification review and opening for public review of all Department of State records no later than 30 years after the events is mandated by the Foreign Relations statute. The Department of State and other record sources used in the volume are described in detail in the section on Sources below.

Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, Volume XXIX, Part 1

Research and compilation of this volume was completed in 1997. The first section of the volume deals with U.S.-Republic of Korea relations during a period of strife and violence on the Korean peninsula unknown since the Korean War. The year 1964 was marked by an internal crisis within the Republic of Korea as students and opponents of the government of President Pak Chong-hui (Park Chung Hee) took to the streets in violent opposition to the government's alleged corruption and the potential treaty between the Republic of Korea and Japan. The government responded with the imposition of martial law. After the end of 1964, internal opposition lessened, but the threat from North Korea grew. In 1967, border clashes along the 38th parallel and infiltration of North Korean saboteurs increased. The culmination of this campaign occurred in January 1968 when North Korean commandos attacked the Blue House (the presidential residence in Seoul) in a brazen attempt to assassinate President Pak. A few days later North Korea seized the U.S.S. Pueblo and its crew. The United States was faced with South Korean demands for retaliatory action, and a serious crisis of confidence in Seoul. The volume documents how the Johnson administration responded, both in this first compilation and in the one on the Pueblo, to the strong possibility of renewed war on the Korean peninsula. The basic theme of the compilation is the Johnson administration's de-escalation of the crisis. The final major theme of this first compilation is the close personal relationship between Presidents Pak and Johnson and how this resulted in South Korea's support for the war in Vietnam. What began as a token South Korean presence in Vietnam in 1964 grew under the unrelenting pressure of President Johnson to a commitment in 1968 of almost 45,000 ROK troops to fight in South Vietnam. The process by which the United States convinced South Korea and compensated it for its support is fully documented.

The second compilation, on the Pueblo crisis, begins with records of the almost daily meetings of President Johnson with his key military, intelligence, and diplomatic advisers to examine contingency options, none particularly good and some that were dangerous. After it became clear that a military response was unacceptable, the United States relied on a campaign of diplomacy, including using whatever influence the Soviet Union would bring to bear on North Korea, shows of U.S. force, and direct negotiations with North Korea at Panmunjom. The latter course proved the one that eventually succeeded. The Pueblo compilation traces the long, frustrating negotiation with North Korea in enough detail to indicate its difficulty, but without subjecting the reader to the same tedium endured by the U.S. negotiators and policy makers.

The final and smallest section of the volume documents U.S. efforts to convince both Japan and Korea to settle their outstanding differences and sign in June 1965 and ratify that December a Treaty on Basic Relations. The compilation documents the high-level pressure brought by the Johnson administration on the two allies to resolve their long- standing differences. Underlying this effort was the assumption that without this normalization of Korean-Japanese relations, northeast Asia would not be secure and would not prosper.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time or, in the case of conferences, in the order of individual meetings. Memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents in the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the source text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the source text are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the source text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume.

Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after declassification review (in italic type). The amount of material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source text that were omitted. Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes have been accounted for and are listed by headings, source notes, and number of pages not declassified in their chronological place. The amount of material omitted from a particular document because it was unrelated to the subject of the volume, however, has not been delineated. All brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes.

The first footnote to each document indicates the document's source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. This note also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates whether the President or his major policy advisers read the document. Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published, and, if so, this information has been included in the source footnote.

Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts has been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record.

Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation

The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established under the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the preparation and declassification of the series. Although the Advisory Committee does not attempt to review the contents of individual volumes in the series, it does monitor the overall process and makes recommendations on particular problems that come to its attention.

The Advisory Committee has not reviewed part 1 of this volume.

Declassification Review

The Information Response Branch of the Office of IRM Programs and Services, Bureau of Administration, Department of State, conducted the declassification review of the documents published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12958 on Classified National Security Information and applicable laws.

Under Executive Order 12958, specific information may be exempt from automatic declassification after 25 years if its release could be expected to: 1) reveal the identity of a confidential human source, or reveal information about the application of an intelligence source or method, or reveal the identity of a human intelligence source when the unauthorized disclosure of that source would clearly and demonstrably damage the national security interests of the United States;

2) reveal information that would assist in the development or use of weapons of mass destruction;

3) reveal information that would impair U.S. cryptologic systems or activities;

4) reveal information that would impair the application of state of the art technology within the U.S. weapons system;

5) reveal actual U.S. military war plans that remain in effect;

6) reveal information that would seriously and demonstrably impair relations between the United States and a foreign government, or seriously and demonstrably undermine ongoing diplomatic activities of the United States;

7) reveal information that would clearly and demonstrably impair the current ability of U.S. Government officials to protect the President, Vice President, and other officials for whom protection services, in the interest of national security, are authorized;

8) reveal information that would seriously and demonstrably impair current national security emergency preparedness plans; or

9) violate a statute, treaty, or international agreement.

The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security as embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific documents of those governments.

The editors believe the volume presented here is a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major U.S. foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity toward Korea. The most substantive declassification problem arose not among documents selected for publication on Korea, but for those selected for Japan. It was the unanimous view of the Advisory Committee, the Historian of the Department of State, and the editors that given the number and significance of documents selected for publication in the Japan compilation that must still remain classified, the Japan part of the volume did not constitute a “thorough and accurate, and reliable documentary record of major United States foreign policy decisions,” the standard set by Public Law 102–138 of October 28, 1991 (22 USC 4351, et seq.). Part 2 of this volume on Japan will not be printed until it meets these standards. The Historian and the Advisory Committee will continue to seek declassification of the documents withheld.

The declassification review of part 1 of this volume, which was completed in 1999, resulted in decisions to withhold from publication 2.2 percent of the documentation selected. Nine documents were denied in full. One of these is Document 26, but a number of related documents with similar information are printed. Documents 113, 121, 131, 163, 170, 249, and 359 concern limited and varied intelligence matters and actions whose deletions do not appreciably affect the volume. Although these covert actions and relationships existed, none was of such importance that it had a major effect on U.S. policy toward the Republic of Korea. Document 203 contains material with formerly restricted data, and its release is prohibited by law. Most of the 2.2 percent withheld is accounted for by these deletions, although there are additional minor excisions in other documents.

Acknowledgements

The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of the following in facilitating research of the volume: archivists at the Lyndon B. Johnson Library, especially Regina Greenwell and Charlaine Burgess, and those at the National Archives and Records Administration; Sandra Meagher of the Declassification Branch, Department of Defense, and the historians at the National Security Agency.

Karen Gatz did the research, compiled, selected, and annotated this volume under the supervision of Edward C. Keefer, Chief of the Asia and Americas Division, and General Editor of the Foreign Relations series, David S. Patterson. Susan C. Weetman coordinated the declassification, and Vicki E. Futscher did the copy and technical editing. Breffni Whelan prepared the index.

William Slany
The Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

August 2000

Sources Sources

The editors of the Foreign Relations series have complete access to all the retired records and papers of the Department of State: the central files of the Department; the special decentralized files (“lot files”) of the Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the Department's Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of international conferences and high-level official visits, correspondence with foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and memoranda of conversations between the President and Secretary of State and foreign officials; the files of overseas diplomatic posts; and the sensitive intelligence files maintained in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research. All the Department's indexed central (or subject-numeric) files for these years have been permanently transferred to the National Archives and Records Administration (Archives II) at College Park, Maryland. Many of the Department's decentralized office (or lot) files covering this period, which the National Archives deems worthy of permanent retention, have been transferred or are in the process of being transferred from the Department's custody to Archives II.

The editors of the Foreign Relations series also have full access to the papers of President Johnson and other White House foreign policy records. Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Presidential libraries include some of the most significant foreign affairs-related documentation from other federal agencies, including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Department of State historians also have access to records of the Department of Defense, particularly the records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretaries of Defense and their major assistants.

The Central Intelligence Agency provides access to Department of State historians to high-level intelligence documents from those records in the custody of that Agency and at the Presidential libraries. This access is arranged and facilitated by the History Staff of the Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency, pursuant to a May 1992 memorandum of understanding. Department of State and CIA historians continue to work out the procedural and scholarly aspects of identifying the key portions of the intelligence record.

Intelligence-related material in this volume comes primarily from the unretired historical files of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (INR/IL), retired INR lot files, and from the records of the National Security Agency, especially the Center for Cryptologic History's files and the CCS Archives Pueblo collection.

The Department of State arranged for access to the audiotapes of President Johnson's telephone conversations, which are in the Johnson Library. Most of the tapes on Korea relate to the Pueblo crisis, and those that were printed or cited in the footnotes were used to augment the written records of President Johnson and his advisers meeting on the Pueblo.

Some general observations can be made about the specific sources that proved especially useful for each compilation in this volume. For the compilations on U.S.-ROK bilateral relations and the Korean-Japan relations, the Department of State Central Files were the most important single source, followed by the records of the Johnson Library. Because of the strong Department of Defense interest in Korea, the records of the Secretary of Defense (various OSD files) and the records of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (various OASD/ISA files) were important sources for all three sections of the volume. The first part of the Pueblo crisis compilation draws heavily upon the Johnson Library meeting notes files. The records of the National Security Agency provided valuable context for the compilation.

The following list identifies the particular files and collections used in the preparation of this volume. The declassification and transfer to the National Archives of these records is in process. Many of the records are already available for public review at the National Archives. The declassification review of other records is going forward in accordance with the provisions of Executive Order 12958, under which all records over 25 years old, except file series exemptions requested by agencies and approved by the President, should be reviewed for declassification by 2002.

Unpublished Sources

Lyndon B. Johnson Library, Austin, Texas Papers of Lyndon B. Johnson National Security File Agency File, Senior Interdepartmental Group

Country File, Japan, Korea, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vietnam

Head of State Correspondence

Intelligence File, Pueblo, January 1968

International Meetings and Travel

Name File

National Security Action Memoranda

National Security Council History, Pueblo Crisis, 1968

National Security Council Meetings

Office of the President File

Files of Walt W. Rostow

Files of Bromley Smith

Special Head of State Correspondence

Special Files Papers of Clark Clifford

Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings

Papers of Robert W. Komer

Meeting Notes File

President's Daily Diary

Recordings and Transcripts of Conversations and Meetings

Department of State Central Files. See National Archives and Records Administration below. Lot Files. Additional Department of State Lot Files are under National Archives and Records Administration below. Bundy Files; Lot 85 D 240 Files of William P. Bundy, 1962–1970, mostly covering the period when he was Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, 1964–1968.

INR/IL Historical Files Unretired Intelligence Liaison files for the 1950s to the 1970s, Bureau of Intelligence and Research. Of particular value are the Country Files, East Asia and Pacific General Files, Country Files for Japan and Korea, the records of 303 Committee meetings with related papers, and the Pueblo Files.

INR/EAP Files: Lots 90 D 99 and 90 D 110 National Intelligence Estimates, Special Intelligence Estimates and related documentation, 1952–1985, Office of Research and Analysis for East Asia and the Pacific, Bureau of Intelligence and Research.

Central Intelligence Agency, Langley, Virginia DCI Files: Job 80–B01285A Files of Directors of Central Intelligence John A. McCone (1961–1965), William F. Raborn (1965–1966), and Richard M. Helms (1966–1973)

ODDI Registry: Job 79–RO 10112A National Intelligence Estimates and Special National Intelligence Estimates

National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, Maryland

RG 59, General Records of the Department of State Subject-Numeric Indexed Central Files AID (KOR S) VIET S: South Korean aid to South Vietnam

AID (US) KOR S: US aid to South Korea

AID (US) 15–9 KOR S: US Title II assistance to South Korea

AID VIET S: aid to South Vietnam

DEF 1 KOR S: general South Korean defense policy, plans and readiness

DEF 12–2 KOR S: South Korean defense stockpiling and storage

DEF 12–5 KOR S: South Korean military procurement and sales

DEF 4 KOR S–US: US–ROK defense pact

DEF 15 KOR S–US: US bases and military installations in South Korea

DEF 15–3 KOR S–US: status of US forces in South Korea

DEF 19 KOR S–US: US military assistance to South Korea

DEF 19 KOR S–VIET S: South Korean military installations in South Vietnam

DEF 19–2 KOR S–VIET S: reports of South Korean military installations in South Vietnam

DEF 19–3 KOR S–VIET S: organization of South Korean military installations in South Vietnam

DEF 19 US–KOR S: US military assistance to South Korea

DEF 19–2 US–KOR S: reports of US military assistance to South Korea

DEF 19–3 US KOR S: organization of US military assistance to South Korea

DEF 19–8 US–KOR S: US military equipment and supplies to South Korea

DEF 19–8 US–VIET S: US military equipment and supplies to South Vietnam

ORG 7 FE: visits of Department of State officials to East Asia

ORG 7 OSD: foreign visits of Department of Defense officials

POL 7 JAPAN: visits and meetings of Japanese officials

POL JAPAN–KOR S: general Japanese-South Korean relations

POL 1 JAPAN–KOR S: general Japanese-South Korean relations

POL 4 JAPAN–KOR S: Japanese-South Korean treaty

POL 33–4 JAPAN–KOR S: Japanese-South Korean dispute over territorial waters

POL JAPAN–US: general US-Japanese relations

POL 27 KOR; military operations in the Korean peninsula

POL 27–14 KOR: armistice negotiations in Korea

POL 32–4 KOR: unification of Korea

POL 27 KOR/UN:UN military operations in Korea

POL 27–14 KOR/UN:UN armistice negotiations

POL 32–4 KOR/UN:UN efforts for Korean unification

POL KOR N–KOR S: general relations between North and South Korea

POL 32 KOR N–KOR S: North Korean and South Korean boundaries

POL 33–6 KOR N–US: North Korean-US dispute over seizure on the high seas (Pueblo)

POL 1 KOR S: general developments in and policy towards South Korea

POL 2 KOR S: reports on South Korea

POL 2–1 KOR S: Joint Weekas (weekly political) reports on South Korea

POL 7 KOR S: visits and meetings of high level South Korean officials

POL 12 KOR S: political parties in South Korea

POL 13–8 KOR S: military organizations in South Korea

POL 14 KOR S: elections in South Korea

POL 15 KOR S: executive government in South Korea

POL 15–1 KOR S: President of South Korea

POL 15–2 KOR S: National Assembly of South Korea

POL 23–1 KOR S: internal security plans and programs in South Korea

POL 23–3 KOR S: internal security forces and organizations in South Korea

POL 23–8 KOR S: demonstrations, riots, and protests in South Korea

POL 27 KOR S: military operations in South Korea

POL 27–3 KOR S: use of South Korean military forces

POL 29 KOR S: South Korean political prisoners

POL 30 KOR S: South Korean expellees

POL KOR S–JAPAN: South Korean-Japanese relations

POL 23–7 KOR S/UN: infiltration and sabotage against UN forces in South Korea

POL KOR S–US: US-South Korean relations

POL 1 KOR S–US: US-South Korean relations

POL 17 KOR S–US: US-South Korean diplomatic representation

POL 33–4 KOR S–US: South Korea and the United States and territorial waters

POL 7 US: visits of US officials

POL 7 US/BUNDY: visits of Assistant Secretary of State Bundy

POL 7 US/HUMPHREY: visits of Vice President Humphrey

POL 7 US/JOHNSON: visits of President Johnson

POL 7 US/LODGE: visits of Ambassador Lodge

POL 7 US/VANCE: visits of Deputy Secretary of Defense Vance

POL 27 VIET S: military operations in South Vietnam

POL 27–3 VIET S: use of third country forces in South Vietnam

RAD 6; radio stations

UN 3 SC: UN Security Council meetings

Lot Files Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110 Records of officials visits by heads of governments and foreign ministers to the United States and international conferences and meetings attended by the President and Secretary of State, 1961–1964, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305 Records of international conferences attended by the President, Vice President, and Secretary of State for 1965 as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Visits Files: Lot 67 D 587 Records of the visit of foreign heads of state and other high officials to the United States, October 1966–May 1967, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192 Files of Secretary of State Dean Rusk, 1961–1969, including texts of speeches and public statements, miscellaneous correspondence, and memoranda of telephone conversations.

Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330 Memoranda of conversations of the Secretary of State and Acting Secretary of State, 1961–1964, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

S/PC Files: Lot 72 D 139 Files of Walt Rostow and Henry Own of the Policy Planning Council, 1964–1967.

Senior Interdepartmental Group Files: Lot 70 D 263 Files of the Senior Interdepartmental Group of the National Security Council, March 1968–January 1969.

National Security Agency, Fort Meade, Maryland Center for Cryptologic History, Historical Files, Pueblo NSA/CSS Archives, Pueblo Collection

NSA, The Capture of the USS Pueblo and Its Effect on SIGINT Operations, United States Cryptologic History, Special Series, Crisis Collection, Vol. 7, 1992.

NSA, Technical Research Ships, 1956–1969: An Historical Study, United States Cryptologic History, Special Series, No. 2, undated.

National Defense University, Fort McNair, Washington, D.C. Maxwell Taylor Papers

Washington National Records Center, Suitland, Maryland RG 330, Records of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and Assistant Secretaries of Defense (ISA) OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023 Top secret files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs for 1964.

OSD/Admin Files: FRC 70 A 1265 and FRC 70 A 1266 Top secret and secret files of the Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and their Special Assistants, for 1965.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 3717, FRC 70 A 5127 Top secret and secret files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs for 1965.

OSD/Admin Files: FRC 70 A 4443 Top secret and secret files of the Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and their assistants, for 1966.

OASD/ISA: FRC 70 A 6648 and FRC 70 A 6649 Top secret and secret files for the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, for 1966.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 71 A 4546 Secret files for the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, for 1967.

OSD/Admin Files: FRC 72 A 2467 and FRC 72 A 2468 Top secret and secret files of the Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and their assistants, for 1966.

OSD/Admin Files: FRC 73 A 1250 and FRC 73 A 1304 Top secret and secret files of the Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and their assistants, for 1968.

OSD Files: FRC 91–0017 Top Secret sensitive files of the Secretaries of Defense, 1949–1969.

Published Sources

U.S. Congress, House Committee on International Relations. The Investigation of Korean-American Relations. Ninety-fifth Congress, Second Session, Appendixes to the Report, vol. I: Background to the Investigation of Korean-American Relations and Conduct of the Investigation; Listing of Congressional Documents Frequently Cited, Supporting Documents. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1978.

———, House Committee on Armed Services, Special Subcommittee on the USS Pueblo. Hearings on the Inquiry into the USS Pueblo and EC–121 Plane Incidents. Ninety-first Congress, First Session, 1969, Committee Print 91–10.

———, Joint Committee on Defense Production, Deterrence and Survival in the Nuclear Age (The “Gaither Report” of 1957). Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1976.

U.S. Department of State, American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964–1967. Washington, U.S. Government Printing Office, 1967–1969.

———, Department of State Bulletin, 1964–1968.

United Nations, Yearbook of the United Nations, 1968.

Abbreviations Abbreviations

A–A, Afro-Asian Conference

ABM, anti-ballistic missile

ADB, Asian Development Bank

AEC, Atomic Energy Commission

AID, Agency for International Development

AP, Associated Press

APD, high-speed transport

ARVN, Army of the Republic of (South) Vietnam

ASPAC, Asian and Pacific Council

ASW, anti-submarine warfare

BN, battalion

BOB, Bureau of the Budget

BOP, balance of payments

Cactus, identification for contacts between the United States and North Korea

CAS, controlled American source

CCNE, Communist Chinese Nuclear Explosion

CG, Commander General

CHICOM, Chinese Communist

CHIEFMAAG, Chief, Military Assistance Advisory Group

CI, counterinsurgency

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

CIGCOREP, Counter-Insurgency Communications Reequipment Program

CINCPAC, Commander-in-Chief, Pacific

CINCPACAF, Commander-in-Chief, Pacific, Air Force

CINCPACFLT, Commander-in-Chief, Pacific Fleet

CINCUSARPAC, Commander-in-Chief, United States Army, Pacific

COMNAVFORJAPAN, Commander, Naval Forces, Japan

COMSEVENTHFLT, Commander, Seventh Fleet

COMUSJAPAN, Commander, United States Forces, Japan

COMUSKOREA, Commander, United States Forces, Korea

COMUSMACV, Commander, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

CONCOM, Consultative Committee

CONUS, Continental United States

CRP, Civil Rule Party (Republic of Korea)

C/S, Chief of Staff

CT, Country Team

CY, calendar year

DA, Department of the Army

DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission, United States Embassy

Deptel, Department of State telegram

DIA, Defense Intelligence Agency

DIRNSA, Director, National Security Agency

DL, development loans

DMZ, Demilitarized Zone

DOD, United States Department of Defense

DOS, United States Department of State

DPM, Deputy Prime Minister

DPRK, Democratic Peoples' Republic of Korea (North)

DRP, Democratic Republican Party (Republic of Korea)

DRV, Democratic Republic of Vietnam (North)

DSP, Democratic Socialist Party (Japan)

E, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

EA, Office of East Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

EA/J, Officer in Charge of Japanese Affairs, Office of East Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

EAP, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

ECONCOM, Economic Committee, used with reference to U.S.-Japan Committee on Trade and Economic Affairs

Embtel, Embassy telegram

EPB, Economic Planning Board

EURATOM, European Atomic Energy Community

Exdis, exclusive distribution

FBI, Federal Bureau of Investigation

FE/IRG, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Interdepartmental Regional Group

FRD, Formerly Restricted Data

FROKA, Forces of the Republic of Korea, Army

FY, fiscal year

FYI, for your information

G, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

G/PM, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs

GA, General Assembly of the United Nations

GATT, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

GOJ, Government of Japan

GRC, ground resolution camera

GRI, Government of the Ryukyu Islands

GRVN, Government of the Republic of Vietnam

GVN, Government of (South) Vietnam

HICOM/HICOMRY, High Commissioner of the Ryukyu Islands

IAEA, International Atomic Energy Association

IBRD, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank)

ICJ, International Court of Justice

IMAF, International Military Assistance Forces (to South Vietnam)

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

INR/IL, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of Intelligence Liaison, Department of State

IO, Bureau of International Organizational Affairs, Department of State

IRG, Interdepartmental Regional Group

IRG/EA, Interdepartmental Regional Group, East Asian and Pacific Affairs

IRG/FE, Interdepartmental Regional Group, Far Eastern Affairs

ISA, Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense

JAEC, Japanese Atomic Energy Commission

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

JCSM, Joint Chiefs of Staff Memorandum

JDA, Japanese Defense Agency

JDO, Joint Duty Officer, Military Armistice Commission

JFY, Japanese fiscal year

JGLO, Japanese Government Liaison Office, Ryukyu Islands

JSA, Joint Security Area

JSDF, Japanese Self-Defense Forces

JSP, Japanese Socialist Party

KATUSA, Korean Augmentation to the United States Army

KCIA, Korean Central Intelligence Agency

KCP, Kim Chong-pil, South Korean statesman

KFT, Korean Task Force

KFX, Korean Foreign Exchange (South)

KLSC, Korean Logistic Service Corps

KNP, Korean National Police (South)

KPA/CPV, Korean Peoples' Army (North)/Chinese People's Volunteers

L, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

L/FE, Assistant Legal Adviser for Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

LDCs, less-developed countries

LDP, Liberal Democratic Party (Japan)

Limdis, limit distribution

LOC, lines of communication

LST, landing ship, tank

MAAG, Military Assistance Advisory Group

MAC, Military Armistice Commission, United Nations Command, Korea

MACV, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

MAP, Military Assistance Program

MDL, Military Demarcation Line (Korea)

MI, military intelligence

MND, Minister/Ministry of National Defense (Republic of Korea)

MOFA, Minister/Ministry of Foreign Affairs

NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NDP, New Democratic Party (Republic of Korea)

NK, North Korea

NNSC, Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission of the United Nations

Nodis, no distribution

Noforn, no foreign distribution

NPG, Nuclear Planning Group

NPT, Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty

NSA, National Security Agency

NSA/CSS, National Security Agency/Central Security Service Archives

NSC, National Security Council

OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

OPCON, operational control

OSD, Office of the Secretary of Defense

OSD/ISA, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

OSP, Offshore procurement

PACOM, Pacific Command (United States)

PM, Prime Minister

POL, petroleum, oil, and lubricants

POLAD, Political Adviser

PRC, Peoples' Republic of China

PriMin, Prime Minister

PROVMAAG, Provisional Military Assistance Command/Korea

QR, quota restriction

RCT, Regimental Combat Team

Reftel, referenced telegram

Rep, representative

ROC, Republic of China (Taiwan)

ROK, Republic of Korea (South)

ROKA, Republic of Korea, Army

ROKFV, Republic of Korea Forces in Vietnam

ROKG, Government of the Republic of Korea

RVN, Republic of Vietnam (South)

S, Office of the Secretary of State

S/S, Executive Secretariat, Office of the Secretary of State

SA, Supporting Assistance

SC, Security Council of the United Nations

SCC, United States-Japan Security Consultative Committee

SEA, Southeast Asia

SecDef, Secretary of Defense

Secto, series indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State or his party to the Department of State

Septel, separate telegram

SIG, Senior Interdepartmental Group

SOFA, Status of Forces Agreement

SPECAT, special category

SSN, nuclear-powered submarine

Stat., United States Statutes at Large

SUBROC, submarine missile (nuclear)

SVN, South Vietnam

TCN, troop contribution nations (to Vietnam)

TDY, temporary duty

TE; TOE, Table of Equipment

TO/TD, Table of Organization/Table of Distribution (of military units)

Tosec, series indicator for telegrams to the Secretary of State or his party from the Department of State

TOVAN, series indicator for telegrams to Cyrus Vance during his mission to Seoul

U, Under Secretary of State

UK, United Kingdom

UN, United Nations

UNCMAC, United Nations Command, Military Armistice Commission, Korea

UNCURK, United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea

UNGA, United Nations General Assembly

USFK, United States Forces in Korea

USFY, United States fiscal year

USG, United States Government

USIB, United States Intelligence Board

USIS, United States Information Service

USOM, United States Operations Mission

USUN, United States Mission to the United Nations

UST, United States Treaties and Other International Agreements

UW, unconventional warfare

VANTO, series indicator for telegrams from Cyrus Vance to the Department during his mission to Seoul

VC, Viet Cong

VN, Vietnam

VUNC, Voice United Nations Command

WH, White House

WPB, William P. Bundy

Persons Persons

Ball, George W., Under Secretary of State January 30, 1962–September 30, 1966

Barnett, Robert W., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs until October 1966; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, November 1966–June 1968

Beach, General Dwight E., USA, Commanding General United States Eighth Army, Commander U.S. Forces, Korea, and Commander-in-Chief of United Nations Command, Korea, 1965–1966

Berger, Samuel D., Ambassador to Korea until July 10, 1964; Deputy Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern (later East Asian and Pacific) Affairs, July 1965–January 1968; Director of the Korean Task Force, January–February 1968

Bohlen, Charles E., Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs from February 1968

Bonesteel, General Charles H., III, Commanding General, United States Eighth Army, Commander U.S. Forces, Korea, and Commander in Chief of United Nations Command after 1966

Brown, Winthrop G., Ambassador to Korea July 31, 1964–June 10, 1967; thereafter Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs; also member and Director of the Korean Task Force, February 1968

Bundy, McGeorge, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs November 1963–February 1966

Bundy, William P., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs until March 14, 1964, thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (as of November 1, 1966, title changed to Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs)

Chang Chang-kuk, Chairman of the Republic of Korea Joint Chiefs of Staff from April 1965

Choe Kyu-ha (Ch'oe Kyu-ha, Choi Kyu-hah), Republic of Korea Foreign Minister from June 1967

Ch'oe Yong-hui (Choe Yong-hui), Republic of Korea Minister of Defense from February 27, 1968

Choi Doo Sun (Ch'oe Tu-son), Republic of Korea Prime Minister until May 1964

Choi Gyu-ha, Korean Special Envoy to Japan after February 1964

Chong Il-kwon (Chung Il-kwon), Republic of Korea Prime Minister from May 1964; concurrently served as Foreign Minister from May to July 1964 and again from December 1966 to June 1967

Chong Il-yong, Republic of Korea Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs after September 1964

Christian, George, Press Secretary to President Johnson from February 1, 1967

Clifford, Clark, Secretary of Defense March 1, 1968–January 29, 1969

Dobrynin, Anatoliy F., Soviet Ambassador to the United States

Enthoven, Alain, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis, after September 10, 1965

Eisenhower, Dwight D., President of the United States, 1953–1961

Fearey, Robert A., Acting Director, Office of for East Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, until May 1965; Deputy Director, Office of Asian Communist Affairs, May 1965–July 1966

Fleck, Benjamin A., First Secretary and Political Officer of the Embassy in Korea until August 1964; Officer-in-Charge of Korean Affairs, Bureau of East Asian Affairs after September 1965; Country Director for Korea, June 1966–May 1968

Goldberg, Arthur J., Representative to the United Nations, June 1965–June 1968

Goodpaster, Lieutenant General Andrew J., USA, Assistant to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff until July 1966; Director of the Joint Staff August 1,1966–March 31, 1967

Green, Marshall, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs until June 4, 1965, thereafter Ambassador to Indonesia.

Gromyko, Andrei M., Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs

Habib, Philip C., Counselor for Political Affairs, Embassy in Korea until June 6, 1966; Political Officer, Embassy in Vietnam, until April 1967; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs after June 1967

Harriman, W. Averell, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Department of State until March 1965; thereafter Ambassador at Large

Helms, Richard M., Deputy Director for Plans until April 1965, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, April 29, 1965–June 30, 1966; thereafter Director of Central Intelligence

Howze, General Hamilton H., USA, Commanding General, United States Eighth Army, Commander U.S. Forces, Korea, and Commander in Chief, United Nations Command, Korea, 1963–July 1965

Ikeda, Hayato, Japanese Prime Minister until November 1964

Jenkins, Alfred LeS., staff member of the National Security Council from July 1966

Johnson, U. Alexis, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs until July 1964; Deputy Ambassador to Vietnam, July 1964–September 1965; Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, November 1965–October 1965; Ambassador to Japan after November 1966

Katzenbach, Nicholas deB., Under Secretary of State, Department of State September 30, 1966–January 20, 1969

Kim Chong-O (Kim Chong-Oh), Chairman of the Republic of Korea Joint Chiefs of Staff April 1964–April 1965

Kim Chong-pil (Kim Chong-p'il), member of the Republic of Korea National Assembly and Chairman of the Korean Democratic Republican Party

Kim Chung Yul (Kim Chong-yol), Republic of Korea Ambassador to the United States until October 1967

Kim Dong-Jo (Kim Tong-jo, Kim Tong-cho), Republic of Korea Ambassador to the United States after November 1967

Kim Hyon-chol, adviser to President Pak Chong-hui

Kim Hyong-uk, Director of the Republic of Korea Central Intelligence Agency

Kim Il-Sung, Premier of the People's Republic of Korea

Kim Song-un (Kim Sung-eun), Republic of Korea Minister of National Defense until February 27, 1968; thereafter Special Assistant to the President for Defense Matters

Kim Tong-cho, Republic of Korea Ambassador to Japan

Komer, Robert W., staff member of the National Security Council Staff until September 1965; Deputy Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, October 1965–March 1966; Special Assistant to the President March 1966–May 1967

Kosygin, Alexi N., Vice Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers until October 15, 1964; thereafter Chairman of the Council

Lathram, L. Wade, Deputy Chief of Mission, Embassy in Korea after September 1968

Lee Ton-won (Yi Tong-won, Lee Dong-won), Republic of Korea Foreign Minister until May 1964; and July 1964–December 1966

McConnell, General John P., USAF, Chief of Staff of the Air Force after February 1, 1965

McNamara, Robert S., Secretary of Defense until February 29, 1968

McNaughton, John T., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, July 1964–July 19, 1967

Moorer, Admiral Thomas J., USN, Chief of Naval Operations after August 1, 1967

Nitze, Paul H., Deputy Secretary of Defense after July 1, 1967

Norred, Christopher A., Jr., Officer in Charge Korean Affairs, Bureau of East Asian Affairs until August 1965

Pak Chong-hui (Pak Chung-hui, Park Chung Hee, Pak Jung-Hui), President of the Republic of Korea

Pak Chung Kuk, Major General, Korean People's Army, North Korean Senior Member of the Military Armistice Commission

Poats, Rutherford M., Assistant Administrator for the Far East, Agency for International Development, until May 1967; thereafter, Deputy Administrator

Porter, William J., Ambassador to the Republic of Korea after June 9, 1967

Read, Benjamin H., Executive Secretary, Department of State

Reischauer, Edwin O., Ambassador to Japan until August 19, 1966

Rostow, Walt W., Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Staff until March 31, 1966; thereafter Special Assistant to the President

Rusk, Dean, Secretary of State

Sato, Eisaku, Japanese Prime Minister after November 1964

Sharp, Admiral Ulysses S. Grant, USN, Commander in Chief, Pacific, until July 31, 1968

Sisco, Joseph J., Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs after September 10, 1965

Smith, Rear Admiral John V., USN, Senior Member of the Military Armistice Commission, United Nations Command, until April 1968

Solbert, Peter, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Department of Defense

Steadman, Richard C., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1967–1968

Taylor, General Maxwell D., USA (ret.), Special Consultant to the President, July 1965–January 1969

Thompson, Llewellyn E., Ambassador at Large, until December 26, 1966; thereafter Ambassador to the Soviet Union

Toon, Malcolm, Counselor for Political Affairs at the Embassy in Moscow until September 1965; thereafter Country Director for the Soviet Union, Bureau of European Affairs

Warnke, Paul C., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Department of Defense, after August 1, 1967

Wheeler, General Earle G., USA, Chief of Staff of the Army until July 2, 1964; thereafter Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Woodward, Major General Gilbert H., USA, Senior Member of the Military Armistice Commission, United Nations Command, after May 1968

Yi Tong-won, see Lee Tong Won

Yun Po-son, President of the Korean Civil Rule Party

KoreaKorea

Contents

KoreaKorea

1. Telegram from the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, January 21, 1964, 8 p.m

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15 KOR S-US. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

Washington, January 22, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. I. Secret. An L on the memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

3. Airgram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 5, 1964.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 1 KOREA S-US. Secret. Drafted by Fleck; cleared by Doherty and Rosa; and approved by Habib. Repeated to Tokyo and CINCPAC for POLAD.

4. Airgram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 13, 1964.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 1 KOR S-US. Secret. Drafted by Habib and Fleck; cleared in draft by Rosa, Doherty, and Killen; and approved by Habib. Repeated to CINCPAC, CINCPAC for POLAD, and Tokyo.

5. Editorial Note

6. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, United Nations Command, Korea (Howze) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)

Seoul, March 26, 1964, 0245Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. I. Top Secret; Flash. Repeated to CINCPAC, CIA, Department of State, which is the source text, and the White House.

7. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 26, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. I. Secret.

8. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 21, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. I. Secret.

9. National Security Action Memorandum No. 298

Washington, May 5, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Robert W. Komer, Korea, December 1963 to March 1966 [2 of 2]. Secret. Copies were sent to McCone, McGeorge Bundy, Komer, Bator, and Charles Johnson.

10. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, May 20, 1964, 3 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S. Secret; Priority; Limdis; No Distribution Outside Department.

11. Editorial Note

12. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, June 3, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. I. Secret.

13. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, June 3, 1964, 10:30 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 23–8 KOR S. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD, and Tokyo and passed to the White House.

14. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, June 4, 1964, 3 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 23–8 KOR S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD and Tokyo and passed to the White House.

15. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, June 6, 1964, midnight.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 23–8 KOR S. Secret; Immediate;Limdis. Repeated to Tokyo,CINCPAC, and USUN; passed to the White House,OSD, JCS, and CIA.

16. Editorial Note

17. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, June 8, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 298. Secret. U. Alexis Johnson sent McGeorge Bundy a copy of the draft memorandum and the draft study written in reply to NSAM 298, noting that the drafts had not been approved by Rusk or McNamara. (Memorandum from Johnson to Bundy, June 12; ibid.)

18. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, July 6, 1964, 6 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 15–1 KOR S. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Tokyo and CINCPAC for POLAD.

19. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, August 11, 1964.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–14 KOR/UN. Secret. Attached to an October 1 letter from Green to Henry S. Rowen, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, and to an August 21 letter from Rowen to William Bundy.

20. Editorial Note

21. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secreatary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Seoul, September 3, 1964.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15–3 KOR S-US. Confidential; Official-Informal. At the top of this document Bundy added a handwritten notation to Green: “MG—for your use. I gather Bob [Fearey] hopes to pull this together. WPB.”

22. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, September 21, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, 381 Korea. Top Secret.

23. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Seoul, September 21, 1964.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S. Confidential; Official-Informal.

24. Editorial Note

25. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Barnett) to the Chief of the Military Assistance Division of the Agency for International Development (Black)

Washington, October 5, 1964.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19 US–KOR S. Secret.

26. Airgram A–232 From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, November 2, 1964.

27. Editorial Note

28. Memorandum of Conversation

Seoul, December 19, 1964, 11 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19–3 KOR S-VIET S. Secret. This memorandum along with another recording Brown's conversation with Pak concerning the MAP transfer program were transmitted in airgram A–296 from Seoul, December 21. The meeting was held at the Blue House.

29. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, December 21, 1964, 4 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 30 KOR S. Secret; Limdis.

30. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, December 30, 1964, 7 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19–2 KOR S-VIET S. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated to Saigon for COMUSMACV, Department of Defense, and CINCPAC for POLAD and passed to the White House.

31. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, January 22, 1965.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, S/P Files: Lot 72 D 139, Country Files. Secret; Controlled Dissem. According to a note on the cover sheet, the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Atomic Energy Commission, and the National Security Agency participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred with this estimate on January 22 except the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside its jurisdiction.

32. Editorial Note

33. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, March 15, 1965, 5 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19–2 US–KOR S. Secret; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD and the Department of Defense.

34. Editorial Note

35. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, March 19, 1965.

Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 99, SNIE 10–4–65. Top Secret; Controlled Dissem; Limited Distribution. According to a note on the cover sheet, the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense and of the National Security Agency participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred with this estimate on March 19 except the representatives of the Atomic Energy Commission and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

36. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, March 22, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 1266, Korea 013. Secret.

37. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, March 30, 1965, 7 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Nodis.

38. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Vance)

Washington, April 13, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330,OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 1266, Korea 013. Secret. A copy of the attachment was sent to the Secretary of Defense.

39. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, April 15, 1965.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. No time of transmission appears on the telegram.

40. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, April 26, 1965, 2:51 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Bundy, cleared by Hilliker, and approved by Bundy. Repeated to Saigon.

41. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, April 27, 1965.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. No time of transmission appears on the telegram. Also sent to the White House and repeated to Saigon for Lodge.

42. Memorandum of Conversation

Seoul, May 6, 1965.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S. Secret. Attached to airgram A–551 from Seoul, May 13. The meeting was held at the Ministry of National Defense.

43. Memorandum of Conversation

Seoul, May 12, 1965.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S. Secret. Attached to airgram A–550 from Seoul, May 13. The meeting was held in the Prime Minister's Office.

44. Memorandum From James C. Thomson of the National Security Council Staff and the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, May 14, 1965, 5:25 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Park Visit Briefing Book. Secret.

45. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, May 14, 1965.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15–3 KOR S–US. Confidential; Priority. No time of transmission appears on the telegram. Also sent to the Department of Defense and repeated to Tokyo, Taipei, Manila, CINCPAC for POLAD, and SJA USARPAC.

46. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, May 17, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Park Visit, May 1965. Secret.

47. Memorandum From James C. Thomson of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

Washington, May 17, 1965, 4 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Park Visit Briefing Book. Secret.

48. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 17, 1965, 5:15–5:51 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. II, July 1964 to August 1965. Secret. Drafted by Crane, and approved by the White House May 28. The meeting took place in the Oval Office. The time and place of the meeting are from the President's Daily Diary. (Ibid.) Earlier in the day the President and Mrs. Johnson hosted the arrival ceremony for Pak, his wife, and members of his party on the South Grounds of the White House at 11:40 a.m. (Ibid.) The remarks made by Presidents Johnson and Pak at that time are in Department of State Bulletin, June 14, 1965, pp. 950–952.

49. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 18, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330,OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 3717, 333 Korea. Confidential.

50. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 18, 1965, 10 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. 11, July 1964 to August 1965. Confidential. Drafted by Norred and approved in S on May 25. The meeting took place in the Secretary's Office.

51. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 18, 1965, 5:03–5:41 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. II, July 1964 to August 1965. Secret. Drafted by Thomson and Fearey and approved by the White House on June 5. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room at the White House. The time and place of the meeting are from the President's Daily Diary. (Ibid.) After the meeting Johnson and Pak met with members of the media. (Ibid.)

52. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 18, 1965, 6–6:30 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330,OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 3717, 333 Korea. Secret. Drafted by Boyes, and approved by McNaughton on May 21. The meeting was held in McNamara's office at the Pentagon.

53. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, June 3, 1965.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19 KOR S–VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. No time of transmission appears on the telegram.

54. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, June 4, 1965, 1000Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19–2 US–KOR S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to Tokyo.

55. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, June 14, 1965.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Saigon and passed to the White House. No time of transmission appears on the telegram.

56. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, June 23, 1965, 1300Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19 KOR S-VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to Saigon, CINCPAC for POLAD, and COMUSMACV.

57. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, July 10, 1965, 0510Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

58. Editorial Note

59. Memorandum From the Assistant Director of the United States Operations Mission to Korea (Brown) to the Director of the United States Operations Mission to Korea of the Agency for International Development (Bernstein)

Seoul, September 23, 1965.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 12–5 KOR S. Secret. Attached to a September 28 letter from Roger Ernst, Acting Director of the United States Operations Mission to Korea, to Barnett.

60. Editorial Note

61. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, December 7, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. III. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Bundy and approved in S/S on December 8.

62. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, December 16, 1965, 0930Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Saigon Eyes Only for the Ambassador, Department of Defense for McNaughton, and CINCPAC.

63. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, December 22, 1965, 1135Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

64. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, December 24, 1965.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. No time of transmission appears on the telegram. Repeated to the Department of Defense, CINCPAC, and Saigon and passed to the White House.

65. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, December 28, 1965, 0730Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD, Department of Defense, and Saigon.

66. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, December 28, 1965, 0935Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Limdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense, CINCPAC for POLAD, and Saigon.

67. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, December 30, 1965, 0945Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense, CINCPAC, and Saigon. This telegram and the referenced telegram (see footnote 2 below) were retyped and given to President Johnson as attachments to a December 30 memorandum from Bromley Smith. Smith's memorandum indicates that Johnson read the telegrams. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. III)

68. Memorandum From Vice President Humphrey to President Johnson

Washington, January 5, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council File, National Security Council Meetings File. No classification marking.

69. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, January 5, 1966, 0830Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Limdis. Repeated to Saigon and CINCPAC for POLAD and passed to the Department of Defense.

70. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, January 6, 1966, 0935Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15–3 KOR S-US. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to the Department of Defense and CINCPAC.

71. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, January 10, 1966, 1010Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD, Saigon, and Tokyo and passed to the Department of Defense.

72. Telegram from the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, January 15, 1966, 0630Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD, Tokyo, and Saigon.

73. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, January 21, 1966, 1010Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff, CINCPAC for POLAD, Tokyo, and Saigon.

74. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, January 22, 1966, 0415Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Tokyo, Saigon, CINCPAC, and the Department of Defense.

75. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, January 27, 1966.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Korea 370.02. Secret. Attached to a January 27 transmittal note from Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense Alvin Friedman to McNamara. In that note Friedman indicated that McNaughton harbored significant reservation about paragraph (a) of his memorandum and intended to fight its implementation unless absolutely necessary. (Ibid.)

76. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, January 27, 1966, 7:51 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Boyes at (DOD) and Fleck; cleared by Fearey, Poats (AID), in draft by Rubin, Heinz, and Friedman (all DOD), in draft by Baker (JCS), in draft by Gibson (DASD), and for substance by Rowan (BOB), and Cooper at the White House; and approved by Berger. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD, COMUSKOREA, COMUSMACV, Tokyo, and Saigon.

77. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 1, 1966, 0915Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Also sent to DOD and repeated to Saigon, Tokyo, CINCPAC for POLAD, and COMUSMACV.

78. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, February 3, 1966, 6:25 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. III. Secret.

79. Telegram From the Consulate in Hong Kong to the Department of State

Hong Kong, February 13, 1966, 0850Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Seoul, COMUSKOREA, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

80. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the White House

Seoul, February 23, 1966, 0945Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 US/HUMPHREY. Top Secret; Flash;Nodis.

81. Editorial Note

82. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, March 18, 1966, 0745Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority;Limdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense, COMUSMACV, CINCPAC also for POLAD, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

83. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 9, 1966.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15–3 KOR S–US. Secret.

84. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, April 26, 1966, 1010Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15–3 KOR S–US. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

85. Editorial Note

86. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 16, 1966.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, East Asia and Pacific General File, East Asia, FE Weekly Meetings, January through July 1966. Secret. Drafted on June 21. Koren sent this memorandum to Hughes, Denney, and Evans.

87. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 22, 1966, 2:35–3:40 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330,OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 4443, Korea 091.112. Secret. Drafted by Boyes and approved by McNaughton on June 28. The meeting took place in McNamara's office at the Pentagon.

88. Editorial Note

89. Memorandum From William J. Jorden of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

Washington, August 15, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. III, November 1965 to December 1966. Confidential.

90. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Seoul, August 26, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, East Asia General. Secret. The letter indicates that Bundy saw the document and had a copy of it sent to Rusk, Katzenbach, Rostow, Kohler, and Harriman.

91. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs (Berger) to the Ambassador at Large (Harriman)

Washington, September 22, 1966.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 32–4 KOR/UN. Secret. Drafted by O'Donohue (FE).

92. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Honolulu, October 10, 1966, 0115Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. III, November 1965 to December 1966. Secret;SPECAT. Repeated to CINCUARPAC. Passed to the White House, Department of Defense, Department of State, and Defense Intelligence Agency.

93. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, October 19, 1966, 0233Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 US/JOHNSON. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Manila Eyes Only for Secretary and Bundy and passed to the White House.

94. Memorandum of Conversation Between President Johnson and President Pak

Manila, October 23, 1966, 7:15–8 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Walt W. Rostow, Asian Trip, Memoranda of Conversations, October–November 1966. Secret. Johnson and Pak were in Manila to attend the conference on Vietnam. Their conversation took place in Johnson's suite.

95. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, October 25, 1966, 0940Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 32–4 KOR/UN. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Bangkok for the Secretary and Bundy and USUN.

96. Memorandum of Conversation Between President Johnson and President Pak

Seoul, November 1, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Walt Rostow, Asian Trip, Copies of Memos, etc. Secret. The memorandum indicates that the staffs of both Presidents were present.

97. Editorial Note

98. Intelligence Memorandum

Washington, November 8, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. III, November 1965 to December 1966. Secret; No Foreign Dissem/Background Use Only. Prepared by the Office of Current Intelligence of the Central Intelligence Agency and coordinated with the Office of National Estimates.

99. Telegram From the Commanding General, United States Eighth Army, Korea, and the Commander in Chief, United Nations Command, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Seoul, November 10, 1966, 0817Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. III, November 1965 to December 1966. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Repeated to Sharp and Beach at CINCPAC and to General Johnson, Chief of Staff-Army, Washington; forwarded by the Defense Intelligence Agency to Helms at the Central Intelligence Agency, Rusk at the Department of State, and Rostow at the White House.

100. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, November 19, 1966, 6:56 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority;Exdis. Repeated to Saigon and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Drafted by Steadman (DOD), cleared by General Brown (JCS), and by Shostal (S/S), and approved by Bundy.

101. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, November 22, 1966, 0315Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. IV, January 1967 to August 1967. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Passed to the Department of Defense. Attached to an undated memorandum from Jorden to Rostow in which Jorden expressed his complete agreement with Brown's views and advocated against pushing “the Koreans too hard. None of our other friends has nearly as good a record. A good deal more would not be unreasonable for the Australians, New Zealanders, Filipinos, Thai, Malaysians—to say nothing of our 'staunch' European friends.”

102. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, November 29, 1966, 0830Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–14 KOR/UN. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to USUN and Moscow.

103. Editorial Note

104. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, December 1, 1966.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, East Asia and Pacific General File, Weekly Staff Meetings, August through December 1966. Secret. Drafted on December 5. McAfee sent this memorandum to Hughes, Denney, and Evans.

105. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)

Seoul, December 13, 1966.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19 KOR S–US. Confidential.

106. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, December 19, 1966.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL KOR S–US. Confidential. Drafted by Fleck and approved in S on January 4. The memorandum is Part I of II.

107. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Smith) to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, January 19, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Top Secret. According to an attached memorandum from Donald Ropa of the NSC Staff to Smith, January 19, both he and Walter Jenkins of the NSC Staff did not object to the proposed telegram.

108. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 22, 1967, 0325Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority;Exdis; Louisiana. Repeated to Saigon.

109. Memorandum From the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg) to President Johnson

New York, undated.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Secretary's Miscellaneous Correspondence. Secret. Attached to a March 9 letter from Goldberg to Rusk transmitting the memorandum as a supplement to Goldberg's “oral report to the President on my trip to Asia” and noting that he “restricted its distribution because of its sensitive nature to the President” and to Rusk.

110. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 14, 1967, 12–12:40 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 KOR S. Secret; Nodis. The meeting took place in the Oval Office. The Prime Minister, accompanied by the Minister of Defense and the Minister of Commerce, visited the United States March 14 and 15. U.S. objectives of the visit were to maintain close and warm relations with the ROK, to continue bilateral U.S.-Korean relations on Vietnam, to assure Korea of continued U.S. military and economic support, and to demonstrate U.S. support for Pak. (Memorandum from Rusk to Johnson, March 11; ibid., POL 15–1 KOR S) A summary of the topics discussed and the U.S. responses was transmitted in telegram 157793 to Seoul, March 17. (Ibid., POL 7 KOR S) A joint statement issued at the conclusion of this meeting is in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1967, pp. 775–776.

111. Editorial Note

112. Letter From President Johnson to President Pak

Washington, March 23, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Special Head of State Correspondence, Korea, November 1, 1966 to March 31, 1967. Secret.

113. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 23, 1967.

114. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, April 21, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Confidential. The memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

115. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, May 1, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Confidential. The memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

116. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)

Seoul, May 2, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Secret. Attached to a memorandum from Rostow to the President, May 8, in which Rostow noted that the campaign showed “much progress between 1963 and 1967 in a working democracy.” The memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

117. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, June 7, 1967, 0841Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Secret; Nodis. Attached to a memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson, June 7, in which Rostow noted that the telegram contained “a wise observation” on approaching the Koreans for more troops “with perhaps a bit more iron than he suggests.” The memorandum indicates the President saw it.

118. Editorial Note

119. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 22, 1967.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, East Asia and Pacific General File, East Asia, FE Weekly Meetings, 1967. Secret. Drafted on June 29. Sent to Hughes, Denney, and Evans.

120. Report Prepared by the Office of National Estimates of the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, June 23, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Secret. Transmitted to the White House under cover of a June 24 memorandum from the CIA Operations Center to Rostow.

121. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 29, 1967.

122. Editorial Note

123. Memorandum From Alfred Jenkins of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, July 26, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Secret.

124. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, August 3, 1967, 1420Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to Saigon and CINCPAC.

125. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, August 23, 1967, 0945Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense and CINCPAC for POLAD.

126. Editorial Note

127. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 15, 1967.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, East Asia and Pacific General File, East Asia, FE Weekly Meetings, 1967. Secret. Drafted on September 19. Sent to Hughes, Denney, and Evans.

128. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, September 19, 1967, 0755Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis.

129. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, September 19, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. V. Top Secret; Exdis. Attached to a September 21 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson that indicates the President saw it. The source text is the retyped copy given to the President. Telegram 1392 is in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S.

130. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, September 21, 1967.

Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 99, SNIE 14.2–67. Secret; Controlled Dissem. According to a note on the cover sheet, the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense and of the National Security Agency participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred with this estimate on September 21 except the representatives of the Atomic Energy Commission and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

131. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Kohler)

Washington, undated.

132. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 31, 1967, 1630Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US/HUMPHREY. Secret; Immediate;Exdis.

133. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 13, 1967.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27 VIET S. Confidential. Drafted by Fleck and approved in S on November 17. The memorandum is Part III of VII. Memoranda of the remaining parts of the Rusk-Choe conversations are: Part I, “Korean Question in the United Nations” (ibid., POL 32–4 KOR/UN); Part II, “ROK Assistance Program in Africa” (ibid., AID(KOR S) 8 AFR); Part IV, “ROK Internal Developments” (ibid., AID(US) 15–9 KOR S); Part V, “ROK-Japan Relations” (ibid., POL JAPAN–KOR S); Part VI, “Summit Conference” (ibid., POL 27 KOR); and Part VII, “ROK Retaliation Against North Korea” (ibid., POL KOR N–KOR S). During his visit Choe also met with Bundy on November 13 and with McNamara on November 16. Memoranda of those conversations are ibid., POL 7 KOR S, and Washington National Records Center, RG 330,OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 72 A 2468, KOREA 091.112, respectively.

134. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, November 25, 1967, 0528Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis.

135. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, November 29, 1967, 0400Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S. Secret. Repeated to the Department of Defense and CINCPAC for POLAD.

136. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, November 30, 1967, 2356Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret. Also sent to Saigon and Tokyo. Drafted by Bundy; cleared by Rostow, Meehan (S/S), and McNamara; and approved by Rusk.

137. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, December 6, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. V. Secret; Nodis. Attached to a memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson, December 7, which indicates that the President saw it. The source text is the retyped copy given to the President.

138. Memorandum From the Director of Defense Research and Engineering (Foster) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, December 7, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 72 A 2468, Korea 370.64. Secret. The memorandum indicates that McNamara saw it.

139. Telegram From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State

Canberra, December 21, 1967, 3:05 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL KOR S-US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

140. Notes on Conversation Between President Johnson and President Pak

Canberra, December 21, 1967.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL KOR S-US. Secret. Prepared by Walt Rostow on December 26.

141. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, December 29, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Special Head of State Correspond- ence, Korea, April 1, 1967 to December 31, 1967. Secret; Nodis.

142. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, January 5, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 1967–1969, 5D(2), Allies, Troop Commitments and Other Aid. Top Secret.

143. Editorial Note

144. Editorial Note

145. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, January 24, 1968, 1031Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Exdis. President Johnson received a retyped copy of this telegram attached to a January 24 memorandum from Rostow stating, “This will give you the flavor of President Pak's reaction to recent events in Korea.” The memorandum indicates that President Johnson saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. V)

146. Telegram From the Commander in Chief of the United Nations Command and of United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Seoul, January 24, 1968, 1240Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Events Leading up to; … . Secret; Immediate; Limdis; Specat; Exclusive. Also sent to CINCPAC.

147. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, January 25, 1968, 0325Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–14 KOR/UN. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Rusk; cleared by Berger, Rostow, and McNamara; and approved by Rusk.

148. Telegram From the Commander in Chief of the United Nations Command and of United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Seoul, January 27, 1968, 1025Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Military Cables, Vol. I, January 1968. Secret; Immediate. Also sent to CINCPAC.

149. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis (Enthoven) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, January 31, 1968.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 370. Secret.

150. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 3, 1968, 0245Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

151. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, February 4, 1968, 0006Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Head of State Correspondence, Park Correspondence, Vol. I. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by the Korean Task Force, cleared by Read and Rostow, and approved by Rusk.

152. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 4, 1968, 1344Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus II, Cactus Seoul Cables, January 29 to February 9, 1968. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Cactus. Attached to a February 4 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson, that indicates the President saw it.

153. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis (Enthoven) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, February 5, 1968.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSA/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 370. Secret.

154. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson

Washington, February 5, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part. A. Secret. Attached to a February 5 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson, transmitting this memorandum as well as a February 5 letter from Warnke to Rostow on the same topic. Rostow's memorandum indicates the President saw it.

155. Letter From President Pak to President Johnson

Seoul, February 5, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Head of State Correspondence, Korea, Park Correspondence, Vol. I. Secret. The source text, which is on Pak's letterhead, is a translation. Porter acquired an advance copy of this letter, which he transmitted to the Department in telegram 3976 from Seoul, February 5. Rostow forwarded the telegram to the President with a note commenting on the “great courtesy” contained in Pak's reply and pointing out that the letter made “a strong plea for retaliatory action against North Korean incursions into South Korea.” (Ibid., Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus II, Cactus Seoul Cables, January 29 to February 9, 1968)

156. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 6, 1968, 0850Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis.

157. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, February 6, 1968, 2151Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis. Drafted by Rusk, cleared by Read, and approved by Rusk.

158. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, February 7, 1968, 0603Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Also sent to CINCPAC and repeated to COMUS/K. Drafted by Doherty, cleared by Warnke and Bromley Smith, and approved by Walsh. Smith submitted drafts of this telegram and Document 159 to the President, who approved both drafts. Smith recorded the President's reservation to this telegram: “President asked that Porter make clear to Park that arms package et al. is linked to keeping Korean contribution to South Vietnam effort unchanged. Berger informed and will revise second cable—i.e., instructions to Porter. With this change, both cables cleared. BKS” (Memorandum from Smith to Johnson, February 6; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Miscellaneous, Vol. I. Secret)

159. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, February 7, 1968, 0619Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Text received from the White House, cleared by Smith and approved by Walsh.

160. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Seoul, February 7, 1968, 0945Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Military Cables, Vol. II, February 1968 to March 1968. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Repeated to Wheeler who forwarded it to Rostow, Rusk, and to each of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

161. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 8, 1968, 0905Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Nodis; Cactus. President Johnson was given a typed copy of this telegram along with a February 8 memorandum from Rostow, who noted that the message “indicates the depth of our problem with the South Koreans.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus II, Cactus Seoul Cables, January 29 to February 9, 1968)

162. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 8, 1968, 1114Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

163. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Washington, February 8, 1968.

164. Editorial Note

165. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Honolulu, February 9, 1968, 0405Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vance Mission to Korea (B), February 9 to 15, 1968. Top Secret; Priority; Noforn; Specat Exclusive. Repeated to COMUSKOREA, CINCUSARPAC, CINCPACFLT, and CINCPACAF.

166. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 9, 1968, 0955Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

167. Paper Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, undated.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vance Mission to Korea (B), February 9 to 15, 1968. Top Secret. Attached to a February 9 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson. Rostow's memorandum indicates that the President approved the instructions for Vance, which had also been approved by Rusk.

168. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Seoul, February 9, 1968, 1337Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vance Mission to Korea (B), February 9 to 15, 1968. Top Secret; Noforn; Eyes Only. Repeated to Wheeler who passed it to Rostow, Rusk, Helms, and each of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Attached to a February 9 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson.

169. Memorandum Prepared by the Department of State

Washington, February 9, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret. A handwritten note on the memorandum reads: “Pres. approved & added points directly to Vance 2/10. BHR [Read] from WWR [Rostow]” A typed note on the memorandum indicates it was approved by Rusk.

170. Message From the Central Intelligence Agency

Seoul, February 9, 1968.

171. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 10, 1968, 0350Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Nodis; Cactus.

172. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Commander of United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel)

Honolulu, February 10, 1968, 0400Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Military Cables, Vol. II, February 1968 to March 1968. Top Secret; Noforn; Eyes Only. Repeated to Wheeler who passed it to Rostow, Rusk, Helms, and to each of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

173. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 10, 1968, 0410Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Nodis; Cactus. A retyped copy of this telegram was given to President Johnson under a February 10 covering memorandum from Rostow that indicates the President saw the telegram. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968)

174. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 10, 1968, 1110Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. A typed copy of this telegram was given to President Johnson under a February 10 covering memorandum from Rostow that indicates that the President saw the telegram. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968)

175. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, February 11, 1968, 2335Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Rusk, cleared by Rostow and Houdek (S/S), and approved by Rusk. The TOVAN and VANTO designator was used to identify cable traffic to and from Vance in Seoul.

176. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 12, 1968, 1147Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IIa, Cactus Seoul Cables, February 10 to February 28, 1968. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Cactus. Attached to a February 12 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson, that indicates the President saw the telegram. Telegram 4178 from Seoul, February 12, also attached to Rostow's memorandum is discussed below.

177. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, February 12, 1968, 2029Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US/VANCE. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Berger, cleared by Read and Steadman, and approved by Katzenbach.

178. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 13, 1968, 1316Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US/VANCE. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus.

179. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 14, 1968, 0603Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IIa, Cactus Seoul Cables, February 10 to February 28, 1968. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus. Attached to a February 14 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson, that indicates the President saw the telegram.

180. Notes of the President's Meeting With Cyrus R. Vance

Washington, February 15, 1968, 6:06–7 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson Meeting Notes, Cyrus Vance Meeting. Top Secret. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room at the White House.

181. Memorandum From Cyrus R. Vance to President Johnson

Washington, February 20, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vance Mission to Korea (B), February 9 to 15, 1968. Top Secret. Forwarded to the President under a February 21 covering memorandum from Rostow that indicates that the President saw the report. Vance prepared a second version of this report, virtually identical to the first, except it was written in the third person and included numerous supporting documents, for dissemination to Rusk, McNamara, Clifford, Katzenbach, Nitze, Wheeler, and a select group of staff members working on Korea. A copy of that report with attachments was requested by and given to President Johnson. (Ibid., Vance Mission to Korea (A), February 9 to 15, 1968) a precis of the report was prepared for Senator J. William Fulbright, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, in response to his request for information about the Vance mission. (Letter from William B. Macomber, Jr., to Fulbright, March 4, 1968; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US/VANCE)

182. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Porter) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)

Seoul, February 27, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Ambassadors' Private Correspondence, 1967–1968. Secret. Attached to a March 4 memorandum from Bundy to Rusk, indicating Bundy sent a copy to Katzenbach, Berger, Brown, and the Korea Country Director.

183. Telegram From the Commander of United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Seoul, February 29, 1968, 1028Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. V. Confidential; Eyes Only. Repeated to Wheeler and to CINCUSARPAC, Hawaii. Passed by Wheeler to Rostow, Clifford, Rusk, and to each of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

184. Memorandum to Holders of Special National Intelligence Estimate Number 14.2–67

Washington, February 29, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council History, Pueblo Crisis, 1968, Vol. XI, Background Documents. Secret; Controlled Dissem. According to a note on the cover sheet, the Central Intelligence Agency, the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, and the National Security Agency participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred with this estimate on February 29 except the representatives of the Atomic Energy Commission and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

185. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson

Washington, March 7, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. VI. Secret; Nodis. The report was forwarded to the President under a March 7 covering memorandum from Rostow that indicates that the President saw the memorandum.

186. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, March 8, 1968, 1045Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. A typed copy of the telegram was forwarded to President Johnson with a March 9 memorandum from Rostow. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. V) With reference to discussing the matter with Pak, President Johnson penned at the bottom of Rostow's memorandum, “Why not meet him in Korea—LBJ”.

187. Information Memorandum From the Chairman of the Korean Task Force (Brown) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, March 12, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Fleck and cleared by Steadman (DOD). Copies were sent to Katzenbach, William Bundy, and Habib.

188. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, March 15, 1968, 0105Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis.

189. Editorial Note

190. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson in Texas

Washington, April 13, 1968, 1706Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel [Meeting with Park], April 1968. Secret.

191. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Seoul, April 16, 1968, 0205Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. VI. Top Secret; Specat Exclusive; Immediate. Repeated to the Department of State for William Bundy. Rostow added a handwritten note at the top of this telegram that reads: “Mr. President: This Porter cable suggests why it may be useful to meet Park tonight. Bill Bundy strongly recommends. Courtesy may make it easier to be tough on the new demands and the light division.” The President went to the airport to greet Pak upon his arrival in Honolulu the evening of April 16. (Ibid., President's Daily Diary)

192. Talking points for President Johnson

Honolulu, April 16, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel, [Meeting with Park], April 1968. Secret. The paper indicates the President saw it.

193. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Seoul, April 16, 1968, 0335Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, DEF 1 KOR S. Secret; Immediate; Specat. Repeated to the Department of State for Bundy, which is the source text.

194. Summary of Conversations Between President Johnson and President Pak

Honolulu, April 17, 1968, 10:10 a.m.–12:30 p.m. and 5–6:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. VI. Top Secret; Nodis. The two Presidents met in the Library of Kaiser Estate, Koko Head, Honolulu. Prepared by Read from a lengthy memorandum of conversation. (Memorandum from Read to Rostow, April 29, and memorandum of conversation; both ibid.) This summary was forwarded by Rostow to the President, who reviewed and corrected the text; see footnotes 2 and 3 below. Pak also met with Vance and Wheeler in Honolulu April 17 1:15–4:15 p.m. The focus of their discussion was the situation in Vietnam and the need for additional Korean troops there. (Memorandum of conversation; ibid.)

195. Intelligence Information Cable From the Central Intelligence Agency

[location not declassified], April 23, 1968, 1520Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. VI. Secret; Priority; No Foreign Dissem; Controlled Dissem; No Dissem Abroad; Background Use Only.

196. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, May 2, 1968, 0700Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. VI. Confidential; Exdis. Attached to a May 2 memorandum from Rostow to the President that indicates that the President saw the telegram.

197. Editorial Note

198. Action Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, May 9, 1968, 2 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. VI. No classification marking.

199. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, May 14, 1968, 0130Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 32–4 KOR. Secret; Limdis.

200. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, May 16, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council History, Pueblo Crisis, 1968, Vol. XI, Background Documents. Secret; Controlled Dissem. According to a note on the cover sheet, the Central Intelligence Agency, the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, and the National Security Agency participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred on May 16 except the representatives of the Atomic Energy Commission and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

201. Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning Council of the Department of State

Washington, June 15, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Senior Interdepartmental Group Files: Lot 70 D 263. Secret. According to the preface, the study originated from a recommendation made by Vance after his trip to Seoul in February. The Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Joint Staff, the CIA,AID, and the Bureau of the Budget contributed to the paper, although no agency was “in any way committed to the analysis and recommendations presented in the study.” SIG members were asked to review the study prior to a SIG meeting to discuss it. (Memorandum from Arthur A. Hartman to SIG members, June 26; ibid.) The paper was reviewed in the Department by the East Asian and Pacific Interdepartmental Regional Group (EAP/IRG), which discussed some of the problems inherent in the study on July 25, including the timing of several actions, funding of ROK forces, and potential withdrawal of U.S. forces from Korea. Minutes of the meeting, prepared on August 2, and a summary of IRG comments, prepared on August 6, are ibid. Jenkins sent Rostow the study and relevant documentation under cover of a September 16 memorandum prior to the September 19 SIG meeting. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, Senior Interdepartmental Group, Vol. 7, 43rd Meeting, September 19, 1968) The JCS reviewed the study and opposed its military components and recommendations in an August 21 memorandum to Clifford. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 91–0017, Korea 092 [Sensitive])

202. Information Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, June 19, 1968, 10:30 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Cambodia 5E(3), November 1968 to January 1969. Secret.

203. Memorandum From the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Atomic Energy (Walske) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze)

Washington, August 8, 1968.

204. Report Prepared by the Department of State

Washington, August 14, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S. Secret. Attached to an August 14 memorandum from Read to Rostow that states the report was prepared in response to a request from the President. Rostow forwarded the report to the President by telegram. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. VI)

205. Action Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, October 9, 1968, 7 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos Vol. VI. Confidential.

206. Intelligence Note From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, October 22, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 32–4 KOR. Secret; No Foreign Dissem.

207. Intelligence Note From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, November 8, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Controlled Dissem.

208. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (McCain) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Honolulu, November 16, 1968, 0538Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. IV. Secret; Noforn; Eyes Only. Repeated to COMUSKOREA and DIA and forwarded by Wheeler's office to Rostow, Rusk, and Helms.

209. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 20, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, DEF 19–8 US–KOR S. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Bardach.

210. Action Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, November 22, 1968, 6:26 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Confidential.

211. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson

Washington, December 23, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 1 KOR S–US. Secret; Sensitive; Nodis.

1. Telegram from the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1. Telegram from the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, January 21, 1964, 8 p.m

953. 1. I do not know exactly where US policy now stands on reduction of ROK armed forces level and withdrawing part of US forces, but have impression both are under active consideration with possibility of decision at any time.2 If this so, and since this item will be on agenda of Secretary's meeting with President Pak,3 I offer my latest thinking on this subject.

2. We are forcing or trying persuade ROK Govt to make number of difficult decisions during first half this year: A tough economic stabilization program alongside reduced US aid; a ROK-Japan settlement; and devaluation. Within Korea price inflation of past year has produced under threat of strikes, demands for higher wages for civil servants and employees of govt enterprises and restlessness among junior military officers and NCOs with families. Govt will have to raise salaries and pay soon, but increases will fall short of price rise. To add to these difficulties price of rice is now beginning move upward (from 2,750 to 3,100 won per bag within last week) which is both earlier and higher than normal seasonal pattern, and we expect further rises before barley crop is harvested in June. Spring months are always lean food months and time of greatest economic difficulty and restiveness in country.

3. New govt is just getting under way. There is no doubt that it is preparing to take some of tough decisions required of it, i.e. economic stabilization, ROK-Japan settlement, and devaluation. Opposition tactics are to maintain continuous barrage of irresponsible criticism in order capitalize on govt's difficulties and public restlessness in effort bring govt down. Our effort it seems to me should be to encourage govt to act courageously and constructively in these next few months and, insofar as possible, to help it by US statements and actions.

4. In these circumstances, I think it would be prudent in next few months to avoid any announcement of reduction in US forces and to avoid loading on govt requirement to reduce ROK forces. This does not mean we should not take decisions, but timing of any announcements and consultation with ROKG on force reductions should be decided in light of complex of factors described above. I would hope that our actions on these two matters could be deferred until the second half of CY 1964.

5. Simultaneous announcement that both ROK and US forces will be reduced would come as severe jolt, with psychological and political repercussions that could jeopardize stability of ROKG. Accordingly, if both are to be reduced, the sequence should be for ROK forces to be reduced first and after public has adjusted to this shock, to deal with any US force reduction.

6. Ideally reduction in ROK and US forces should be accompanied by sound plan for restructuring and repositioning of two forces in order maintain or improve defense capability. In my 2 1/2 years here I have heard repeatedly from our military that too large a proportion of both US and ROK forces and reserves are in forward areas and that main lateral line of supply through Inchon and main supply depot at Ascom are dangerously vulnerable in event of attack. Furthermore US installations are far too numerous and too dispersed for military effectiveness or for economical administration. I am told what is needed and what has long been advocated is a repositioning of the forces, a consolidation of installations, and a speeding up of program now under way to develop our supply depots in south. The argument is invariably advanced that repositioning installations would be costly, but this ignores fact that our troops are presently installed in antiquated structures, some dating back to 1953. Many of these are falling apart and annual maintenance and replacement cost already running in millions annually and will go higher as obsolescence rate increases. I do not see economic, let alone military, wisdom of putting millions of dollars every year into existing installations which have inherent weaknesses described above. Therefore would hope that any ROK and US forces reduction will not be done by axe method of simply chopping off numbers and reshuffling rest into existing installations but would be part of a considered reorganization for improved defense of Korea.

7. Am aware that achieving reductions through a coordinated plan involving restructuring and repositioning might take time to work out in face of pressures to effect economies quickly. Nonetheless, urge that Washington take time to work out both US and ROK reductions in coordinated way that will meet all requirements: military, economic and political.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15 KOR S-US. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 An undated State-Defense-AID study of U.S. and ROK force reductions had been completed and an undated draft memorandum for the President had been prepared. U. Alexis Johnson submitted a copy of the latter to Rusk under cover of a January 14 memorandum in advance of a meeting on the question scheduled between Rusk and McNamara for 5 p.m. that day at the Pentagon. (Ibid.) Rusk's Appointment Book contains no reference to the meeting, and no further record of that meeting has been found.

3  Rusk was in Tokyo January 24–28 to attend the meeting of the Joint U.S.-Japan Committee on Trade and Economic Affairs. Before returning to Washington, Rusk stopped in Korea and met with Pak on January 29.

2. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 2. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 22, 1964.

This is for background, because Rusk and McNamara plan to take up with you shortly force cuts in Korea.2

They met yesterday and reportedly agreed that rather than cut both ROK and US forces we should cut neither now! McNamara does favor both a 70,000 man cut in the 580,000 man ROK army (phased over two years) and a 12,000 man cut in US forces by the end of 1964. This is a big step forward from the military's previous adamant position.

Rusk was perfectly willing to buy the ROK cut; State feels that such a small reduction probably would have little adverse political implication. But Rusk is strongly opposed to a simultaneous US cut, announced now. He fears it would upset the Japs and Koreans, and even worry all our Asian allies that we're disengaging from Asia.

So McNamara then said that if we didn't cut US forces he didn't want to cut ROK forces either; this would be hard to defend on the Hill because it ran counter to our MAP theory of buying cheap infantry (i.e. why cut local forces instead of bringing our boys home?).

It would be a pity to postpone entirely once again a long-needed shift which would also save some money. There is never a good time to cut, but the plain fact of the matter—no longer denied by anyone—is that we're overinsured militarily in Korea at a time when we need strength much more elsewhere. The big danger area is in Southeast Asia not Northeast Asia, and has been ever since the Korean War.

Since the issue seems to be more one of timing than of substance, why can't we take a decision in principle now, while allowing ourselves tactical flexibility in execution? We ought to be able to devise some way of fuzzing up our action enough to forestall the adverse reactions State fears. For example, we could: 1. Decide now to go ahead with the ROK cut, but play it in low key so as to avoid the problem bothering McNamara. Rusk could tell the ROK when in Seoul that we desire a gradual streamlining of their forces, but feel that they and we should handle it in such a way as to minimize any political splash. The ROKs have as much incentive as we to avoid publicity. And a cut of only 35,000 per year out of 560,000 could be presented here if necessary as revamping, not a main cut.

2. Decide now within the USG, at least tentatively, on a substantial cut in US forces by the end of 1965, if not 1964. Planning should begin, but no announcement of any kind would be made until State and DOD present a final plan to you for decision by 30 June 1964.

3. State and Defense should work out together the optimum timing for such a cut, with an eye to mitigating any adverse political impact in the area. Perhaps doing it in several bites over an 18-month period would help. We could also begin to lay the public relations groundwork by pointing out the erosion of Chicom military capabilities as a result of the Sino-Soviet split, and how we're over-insured in Northeast Asia so may need some redeployment to increase the forces available for Southeast Asia.

While any force cuts will always entail some pain, and I don't wish to play down State's concerns, we cannot always let this be an excuse for no action at all. So I urge you keep the pressure on State and Defense via some such proposal as that described above.

Bob Komer

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. I. Secret. An L on the memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

2 At the Daily White House Staff Meeting of February 5 McGeorge Bundy reported that Rusk and McNamara decided not to approach the President on the question at this time. At that meeting Bundy, Forrestal, and Komer discussed the problem and agreed that “some action on force levels in Korea “ should be taken, that U.S. and Korean forces should not be reduced simultaneously, and that Korean forces should be reduced before U.S. forces were cut. (Memorandum for the record, February 5; National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Chairman's Staff Group, Box 25)

3. Airgram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 3. Airgram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 5, 1964.

A–553. Subject: Aide-Mémoire from ROKG in Connection with Secretary of State's Visit. Ref: Seoul's A–540, January 31, 1964.2

1. Submitted as an enclosure to this airgram is the text of an Aide-Mémoire handed by the Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs to the Counselor for Political Affairs on January 30, the day following the visit to Seoul for the Secretary of State. Prior to the Secretary's arrival, there had been frequent mention in the press of a memorandum, setting forth the ROK Government's position on problems of mutual US–ROK interest, which was to be presented to the Secretary during his visit. No such presentation took place and it is presumed that the Aide-Mémoire is the document in question. Why the Korean officials did not go through with their original plan to present the paper while the Secretary was in Seoul is not known at this time.

2. The Aide-Mémoire covers four main subjects: (a) The Level of Military Forces; (b) ROK-Japan Talks for the Normalization of Diplomatic Relations; (c) Economic Stabilization and Development Plan; and (d) Status of Forces Agreement, these being at the present time the four principal areas of concern of the ROK Government in its relations with the United States. All except the fourth were raised with the Secretary by President Pak Chong-hui.3 Although not discussed, the Status of Forces Agreement negotiations were recognized by the President and the Secretary to be a subject of major interest and, accordingly, were mentioned prominently in the Joint Communiqué issued following their conversation.4

3. It should be noted that while, with one exception noted below, all of the points made by the President in his discussion with the Secretary are contained in the Aide-Mémoire, there are a number of items in the Aide-Mémoire which the President did not take up with the Secretary. It is not known whether the omissions, listed below, were the result of a conscious decision by Pak to concentrate only on the points which he did mention, either for emphasis or because of the shortness of time available, or whether they were inadvertent.

4. On the subject of military force levels, Pak spoke exclusively about the necessity for retaining present levels. He did not refer to the questions of improvement of the equipment of the ROK armed forces, maintenance of local procurement by the U.S. armed forces at last year's level, or the supply of P.L. 480 products to the ROK armed forces, which are discussed in subparagraphs (b), (c), and (d), respectively of paragraph 5, Section I of the Aide-Mémoire.

5. With regard to the ROK-Japan normalization issue, Pak did not mention to the Secretary the proposal to speed up the payment of the property claims settlement, the question of the legal status of ROK residents of Japan, or the dispute over Tok-to (Takeshima Island), discussed in subparagraphs (b), (e), and (f), respectively of paragraph 3, Section II. While omission of the latter two subjects appears appropriate in view of the limited time available for the conversation, it is surprising that the President did not refer to his Government's desire for U.S. intervention with the Japanese to obtain speedier payment of the property claims settlement, particularly since the Minister of Foreign Affairs had specifically told the Ambassador a few days prior to the visit that this would be one of the requests which Pak would make to the Secretary.

6. In discussing the general topic of economic stabilization and U.S. aid, Pak did not make the references to the ROK Five Year Plans contained in the Aide-Mémoire, nor did he cover the points concerning fertilizer imports [Section III, para. 3(b)],5 maintenance of the present exchange rate [3(c)], and offshore procurement [3(d)]. In discussing the MAP transfer program, Pak suggested suspension for two or three years instead of the 5 years recommended in the Aide-Mémoire [3(e)]. He did ask for the creation by the U.S. Government of favorable conditions for Korean imports but did not refer specifically to the problem of textile quotas [3(f)].

7. It was during his discussion of this general topic that Pak deviated from the subjects covered in the Aide-Mémoire by asking for an additional 20 million to 30 million dollars of aid in order to check the price spiral (para 28, refair).6 The degree of seriousness with which the ROKG regards this request is as yet undetermined, but it can be presumed that we will be faced with further references to the need for additional economic assistance including supporting assistance throughout the year.

8. Some of the topics included in the Aide-Mémoire were also discussed at the separate conferences attended by Secretary of Commerce Hodges, Secretary of Labor Wirtz and other members of the party. The substance of these conferences is being reported separately.7 A study of the gist of these conferences, Pak's conversation with the Secretary, and the Aide-Mémoire should afford a comprehensive view of the stance currently being taken by the ROKG with regard to its relations with the United States Government.

For the Ambassador: Philip C. Habib
Counselor of Embassy for
Political Affairs

Attachment8

Seoul, January 29, 1964.

AIDE-MEMOIRE

On the occasion of the visit to Korea of Mr. Dean Rusk, Secretary of State of the United States of America, the Government of the Republic of Korea wishes to present its views and position on the following problems of mutual interest to the Governments of the Republic of Korea and the United States.

1. The Level of Military Forces

1. The North Korean regime has recently reinforced its combat resources by not only activating a new Army Corps but also expanding arsenals, ammunition and military vehicle manufacturing factories. On the other hand, the Communist regime has been maintaining close ties with bellicose Communist China and is constantly preparing for its renewal of an invasion against the Republic of Korea.

2. The existing armistice agreement has merely been a military measure for temporary cease-fire and the flagrant violation of the armistice committed by the Communists along the demarcation line is causing serious uneasiness in Korea.

3. In view of the present situation in South East Asia, particularly military instability in Laos and fruitless anti-guerrilla warfare in South Viet-Nam, the presence of the U.S. armed forces and the maintenance of powerful ROK military forces are essential for checking further Communist expansion in this part of the free world.

4. Although there has been a partial withdrawal of the U.S. armed forces in Europe particularly from West Germany, the security of Europe will not be affected owing to the presence of the effective North Atlantic Treaty Organization. However, since there is no such collective security organization so firmly established as NATO in the Far East, the existing Korea-U.S. Mutual Defense Treaty alone would not be sufficient enough to relieve the feeling of uneasiness from the Korean people.

5. As the new Government has just been established in Korea, it requires considerable time to lay down solid democratic foundation in political, economic and social fields.

Taking into account the above mentioned internal and external situations confronting Korea, the following are presented for favorable consideration by the U.S. Government: a. The strength of ROK military forces and the U.S. armed forces in Korea should continuously be kept at present level. The reduction of the military forces might be considered only after having examined both internal and external situations in the future.

b. The improvement of ROK military equipments should be implemented promptly. The incident of January 14, 1964, in which an F–86 jet was shot down by the North Koreans, clearly indicates that the Communist forces in the North have superior weapons.

c. The military procurement by the U.S. armed forces in Korea should not be reduced from the level of last year, as any reduction in the amount of the U.S. military procurement is bound to have a direct and profound effect upon the stability of Korean economy.

d. In order to alleviate the hardship suffered by the men in uniform due to the low salary allowance, it is desired that the U.S. Government would continue to supply U.S. surplus agricultural products to ROK military forces.

II. ROK-Japan Talks for the Normalization of Diplomatic Relations

1. As the United States and other free nations desire, the Korean Government firmly stands by its basic policy to realize an early normalization of diplomatic relations between Korean and Japan from a broader scope of view-point that it would be of significant benefit to Korea and Japan as well as to the general free world interests.

2. However, the Korea-Japan normalization question has recently become a serious domestic political issue in Korea due to the national sentiment, derived from the past relations of the two countries, and the negative attitude from certain segments of the opposition parties. Primary reasons and commonplace belief attributable to such attitude of the opposition may be given as follows: a. They believe that the Korean fishing industry has been greatly handicapped by the Japanese monopoly of the fishery and their indiscriminate catch in the past, the consequences of which have resulted in curtailing the yearly per capita income of the Korean fishermen to mere 27 U.S. dollars at present. Under such circumstances, the Korean fishermen have naturally come to entertain a deep-rooted fear against the Japanese fishing industry. They also fear that any concession on the Peace Line would lead the Japanese fishery, overwhelmingly superior in number of fishing vessels, scale, equipment and technique, to indulge in random fishing activities, the result of which would undoubtedly bring about exhaustion of fishery resources and eventual ruin of the Korean fishery.

b. It is also feared that the Japanese economic cooperation which is to follow the normalization of the relations between the two countries may result in a reduction of the United States assistance to Korea.

c. They feel with resentment that the Korean Government is engaging in a low-postured diplomacy toward Japan at the expense of excessive concessions in an attempt to tide over the present economic crisis arising from inflation and shortage of foreign exchange in Korea.

It is feared that any venture to settle the matter under such unfavorable circumstances may bring about a crisis of the present Government. The Korean Government, however, is firmly resolved to settle the problem with grave determination.

3. It is, therefore, earnestly requested that the United States would render its utmost cooperation in support of the position of the Korean Government in the following lines: a. Attitude of Japanese Government

It is hoped that the Japanese Government fully realize the difficulties confronted by the Korean Government and show sincerity in seeking an early normalization of the relations between the two countries.

b. Property Claims Payment

It is desired that the property claims payment which is to9 be made in a shorter period and a larger portion of payment be made during initial period. In this connection, the good offices of the United States Government is solicited to urge the Japanese Government to consider favorably the request of the Korean Government.

c. United States Aid to Korea

The Koreans fear that an influx of the Japanese capital into Korea may result in what may be called “an economic invasion “ by Japan. In order to mitigate such sentiment entertained by the Korean public, it is desired that the United States would maintain present level of economic aid to Korea and encourage its positive investment in Korea.10

d. Fishery and Peace Line Question

The following are the basic principles of the Korean Government for the settlement of the fishery question. (1) It is deemed absolutely necessary to establish appropriate fishing regulatory measures for the purpose of preserving fishery resources in the waters adjacent to Korea. Only under this premise, Japan would be allowed to maintain status quo of their fishing activities on the basis of its past catch in the waters within the Peace Line.

(2) The Korean fishermen should not be made victims of the pressure of the Japanese fishing activities, leading to an eventual ruin of the Korean fishery.

(3) Extreme gap between the fishery capabilities of the two countries being the primary deterrent to the settlement of the fishery and the Peace Line question, it is desirable that Japan offer assistance to Korea as fishery cooperation at least in the amount of over 100 million dollars to improve Korean fishery capability. In this connection, it is earnestly hoped that the United States would advise the Japanese Government that the recent instructions given to the Korean delegation on this subject were made in full consideration of the Japanese position and therefore no further concession is possible on the part of the Korean Government.

e. Legal Status of Korean Residents in Japan

The Korean Government maintains that the question of legal status of the Korean residents in Japan must be solved with due consideration of the historical background that has led to their presence in Japan and they should be given a special legal status and more favorable treatments than those accorded to ordinary aliens in Japan.11 Since it is expected that the solution of this question in line with the above principles would stimulate the affiliation of the Communist-inclined Korean residents in Japan to democratic camp, especially during the Tokyo Olympic games, it is desired that the Japanese Government would favorably consider the Korean position on this question.

f. Question of Dok-To Island 12

The question being out of the scope of the Korea-Japan normalization talks, the Japanese Government should refrain from taking up the subject at the negotiations aimed at an early normalization of the relations between the two countries.

III. Economic Stabilization & Development Plan

1. It is the prevailing view of the Korean Government that the first five year economic development plan has achieved considerable progress. Especially, the economic development plan has contributed a great deal to the development of key industries and manufacturing fields as well as in the expansion of import-saving industry and the increase of export productions. At the same time, the Government notes that in the course of planning and implementation there have been many setbacks resulted from a series of unexpected changes in the economic climate and high growth rate of population. However, the Korean Government is firmly determined to carry out the current five year economic development plan through supplementary adjustments and reasonable modifications.

Furthermore, the Government is contemplating a more practical and effective second year economic development plan which would be based upon the achievements and experiences gained through the implementation of the preceding one.

2. One of the most urgent tasks confronting with this Government is to stabilize price levels and to overcome the extremely unfavorable balance of international payment.

In an effort to cope with such a situation, the Korean Government, in consultation with the United States Operation Mission, had established a financial stabilization program in the fiscal year 1963, and exerted utmost efforts to maintain and strengthen those measures. As in the case of last year, the Government has set up another stabilization program for the fiscal year 1964 and will effectively implement the program in cooperation with the United States Operation Mission.

However, with respect to the international balance of payment, it is noted with regret that this country, in spite of all the efforts being made, still has to go a long way to reverse the current unfavorable trend.

From the beginning of the fiscal year 1962, the United States economic aids have been steadily kept on the downward trend. The heavy cuts in the aids have come not only in the field of Supporting Assistance but also in such indirect fields as Military Assistance Program Transfer, off-shore procurement of United Nations forces and restrictive quota system on certain Korean products for export to the United States of America.

These reductions simultaneously effected in the aids have inevitably brought tremendous and unbearable pressures upon all the segments of the Korean economy.

Above all, the Korean Government wishes to remind the United States that the Republic of Korea, being at the forefront of anti-Communist struggle, has constantly to be on the alert and to maintain a strong military, economic and political posture to cope with ever-increasing menace in the Far East.

3. Therefore, the Korean Government, in the light of general economic situation set forth in the above, would like to take this opportunity to urge the Government of the United States to take into immediate and favorable consideration the following requests: a. The Supporting Assistance should be maintained at 1963 level at least for five years hereafter.

b. The fertilizer import through Supporting Assistance and grain import under PL–480 program should be expedited so as to meet the seasonal demands.

c. The dollar-won exchange rate should be maintained at the present level to prevent any possible impacts that may effect upon price levels such as inflationary trend and psychological chain reaction.

d. The proper measures should be taken to ensure the present level of the U.S. offshore procurement program.

e. The initiation of overall Military Assistance Program Transfer should be suspended for five years, as it would create heavy burden on the Korean economy.

f. The overall trade and commercial policy toward Korea should be re-examined in more favorable terms and the restriction imposed on the quota for the Korean textile goods should be relaxed.

g. The Supporting Assistance funds should be timely released in the future as was the case of recent release of 15 million dollars of Supporting Assistance fund which has greatly relieved the economic difficulties in Korea.

IV. Status of Forces Agreement

1. It is recalled that prior to the resumption in September 1962 of the current negotiations for an agreement covering the status of the United States armed forces in Korea, the Republic of Korea and the United States announced that the conclusion of the agreement would await the restoration of civil government.

2. It need not reiterate the sincere desire of the Korean peoples for an early conclusion of such an agreement in order to seek reasonable and equitable solution of many problems arising from the stationing of the troops in Korea. It is also to be noted that the Korean populace has shown, particularly after the civil government was restored in Korea, an increased concern over the progress of the present negotiations. The Korean Government, therefore, would like to urge the United States Government to render its fullest cooperation possible so as to arrive at the conclusion of the said agreement at an earliest possible date.

3. In particular, the Korean Government desires to complete discussions, as soon as practicable, on all the important articles including the subject of criminal jurisdiction, the draft of which has not yet been tabled. The Korean Government further requests that, with regard to a pending issue of compensation to the owners of private facilities and areas used by the United States armed forces, the Government of the United States, taking into account current financial difficulties of the Korean Government, would bear the compensation with sympathetic understanding.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 1 KOREA S-US. Secret. Drafted by Fleck; cleared by Doherty and Rosa; and approved by Habib. Repeated to Tokyo and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Airgram A–540 from Seoul, January 31, transmitted the memorandum of the 3-hour conversation between Rusk and Pak on January 29 in Seoul. Documentation on Rusk's visit to Seoul is ibid., Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, Chronology of International Conferences Abroad, 1961–1964.

3  Rusk and Pak also discussed the implications of France's recognition of Communist China as well as threats posed to the Far East by Communist China. (Ibid.)

4 The joint communiqué is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 920–921.

5 All brackets in the source text.

6 Airgram A–540 makes no mention of Rusk's response to Pak's request, except to note that Rusk complimented Pak on his “courage to bite the bullet and take steps needed to get the Korean economy moving “ and mentioned several alternative methods available to promote economic development in Korea.

7 Memoranda of those conversations are in the National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, Chronology of International Conferences Abroad, 1961–1964.

8 Confidential.

9 be made over a period of 10 years. [Footnote in the source text.]

10  Rusk told the Korean Ambassador in Washington in late February that although “aid could not of course be permanent feature of US–ROK relations, its level for ROK will be determined by actual needs of situation; neither ROK nor US would wish permanent aid relationship. Nor do we have in mind a shift of aid burden to Japan, which ROK would not desire and Japan would not desire or accept. “ (Telegram 758 to Seoul, February 28; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S)

11 In 1964 approximately 600,000 Koreans, brought to Japan as laborers during World War II, resided in Japan. Defense intelligence analysts represented that both countries competed for control and influence over that population, which lived in “depressed circumstances “ and depended on relief from the Japanese Government. (DIA Intelligence Summary, March 25; Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Robert W. Komer, Japan-Korea, December 1963–March 1966)

12 Referred to as Takeshima by the Japanese, Dok-To (or Tokto), a barren island in the Sea of Japan, had long been a point of contention between Korea and Japan.

4. Airgram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 4. Airgram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 13, 1964.

A–574. Subject: Proposed U.S. Objectives in the Republic of Korea for 1964. Ref: Seoul's A–483, January 8, 1964.2

In the airgram under reference, the Embassy analyzed the present situation within the Republic of Korea, appraised the outlook for the near future, and suggested certain courses of action to be taken by U.S. Government agencies. Those suggestions were not presented in a systematic framework of specific policy objectives. In this message there is set forth in rough order of priority the objectives toward which the Embassy believes U.S. policies and actions in Korea should be directed in calendar year 1964.

Progress Toward Internal Stability

1. In the political field, our efforts should be concentrated on facilitating the successful functioning of constitutional government and democratic institutions which have now been re-established in the wake of military government. While discouraging the government, if necessary, from resorting to authoritarian methods, we should on the other hand make every possible effort to influence the opposition to act in responsible fashion. At the same time we should seek to avoid giving the impression that the United States is interfering in the internal political affairs of Korea.

2. In the economic sphere, the primary goal for 1964 should be the pursuit of sound monetary and fiscal policies and the stabilization of price levels. The exchange rate will have to be adjusted to a realistic level some time not later than mid-summer 1964.

ROK-Japan Normalization

3. It goes without saying that every effort should be made to encourage Korea and Japan to achieve a settlement this year.

Conclusion of a Status of Forces Agreement

4. Full agreement can be reached this year and the pace of negotiations on this agreement should be accelerated. Agreement will remove a vexatious and potentially harmful issue from US–ROK relations.

AID Policy and Effective Use of Available Resources by the ROKG

5. The Embassy and USOM hope that progress can be made during 1964 in persuading the ROK Government to make more efficient use of the resources available to it. We should continue pressing for an increase in exports and for adoption of a more restrictive import policy. We should also continue stressing the need for expansion of agricultural production and seek greater participation in ROK economic development by other governments and international agencies.

With respect to economic aid policy, U.S. assistance programs should continue to be linked to Korean implementation of agreed stabilization goals. The cumulative load of economic adjustments which the ROK economy is being called upon to bear in 1964 and after should be gauged so as not to impose a drag on progress or force a further serious deterioration of the foreign exchange position. We will also need to take into account the ability of the government to bear such adjustments politically in a given period. This will necessitate in the course of the year politico-economic judgements affecting the emphasis and timing of U.S. actions involving among other things the level of support assistance, the MAP transfer program, and the level of PL 480 support.

Force Levels

6. The decision has been made that the U.S. and ROK armed force levels should remain unchanged during 1964. Another review of the military, economic and political factors involved in force level reduction should be conducted toward the end of 1964 to determine whether reductions can be effected in 1965.

Unification Problem

7. In 1964 we should re-examine our position on the Korean unification question and decide whether our strategy should be reformulated in the light of that review.

Consolidation of the ROKG International Position

8. Continuing support should be given to ROKG efforts to expand its diplomatic relations and strengthen its international position through the widest possible recognition by non-communist governments particularly those African and Asian nations where the ROKG position vis-a-vis the North Koreans appears shaky at present. We should encourage the ROKG to cement relations with those governments with which it has already established diplomatic relations by opening or strengthening, wherever feasible, diplomatic or consular posts and providing technical assistance or training, within its available resources. We should continue to exert our utmost influence against the expansion of North Korean diplomatic relations. As necessary we should be prepared to defend Korea's position in the United Nations General Assembly taking into account any initiatives that may arise from the review proposed in paragraph 7 above.

For the Ambassador:
Philip C. Habib
Counselor of Embassy for
Political Affairs

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 1 KOR S-US. Secret. Drafted by Habib and Fleck; cleared in draft by Rosa, Doherty, and Killen; and approved by Habib. Repeated to CINCPAC, CINCPAC for POLAD, and Tokyo.

2 In airgram 483 from Seoul, January 8, the Embassy set its appraisal of the political situation in Korea in light of the transformation from military to civilian rule. It also recommended that the U.S. publicly state its objectives in Korea, recognize the threat represented by Pak confidante Kim Chong-pil, study the problem of Korean unification, and accelerate negotiations on a SOFA agreement. (Ibid., POL 2 KOR S)

5. Editorial Note 5. Editorial Note

In early March 1964 former Korean Prime Minister Kim Hyon-chol informed Ambassador Berger that the Republic of Korea might be willing to provide 3 or 4,000 troops to assist the United States and South Vietnam “in carrying war to North Vietnam. “ The proposal did not reflect the official position of the Korean Government; nevertheless, once informed of it by Ambassador Berger, Foreign Minister Chong Il-kwon appeared to support Korean participation in the war and suggested ways in which prohibitions hindering Korean troops from serving abroad could be overcome. The Ambassador cautioned that the ramifications of such an action must be thoroughly considered and raised the potential negative impact Korean involvement in Vietnam could have on negotiations with Japan. (Telegram 1128 from Seoul, March 7; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66,POL 7 KOR S)

In the following weeks contacts between Korea and South Vietnam increased. Kim Chong-pil, head of the Democratic Republican Party, traveled to Saigon in mid-March, and in early April a special Vietnamese military mission came to Korea to examine Korean military training and its governmental transformation from military to civilian rule. The Vietnamese diplomatic presence in Korea increased with additional embassy personnel. (Telegrams 1180, March 19, and 1276, April 9, both from Seoul; both ibid.)

In circular telegram 2043, May 1, the Department of State informed U.S. Ambassadors of President Johnson and Secretary Rusk's “conviction that it is important for more nations of the Free World to ‘show their flags’ in Viet Nam “ in order to create a unified stand against communism in Southeast Asia. Accordingly, the U.S. Government appealed to the Republic of Korea and other free world governments to contribute to the defeat of the Communist regime in North Vietnam by furnishing men, material, and other forms of support to the resources already devoted to that struggle by the United States. (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S) After being informed of the U.S. position the Korean Foreign Minister indicated he would seek Cabinet-level approval for supplying a field-hospital unit to Vietnam and raised the possibility of Korea also sending signal corps support as well. (Telegram 1436 from Seoul, May 8; ibid., DEF 19–2 KOR S-VIET S) The Embassy in Saigon advised that it would welcome Korean “advisers and selected military personnel who would share in the really dangerous work” and suggested using some of them “for the type of work where our men are getting killed and wounded. “(Telegram 2162 from Saigon, May 9; ibid.) The Department of State concurred, notifying the Embassy in Seoul to “urge ROK contribution of special-forces advisors (in addition to field-hospital unit and signal-corps support earlier mentioned).” (Telegram 1030 to Seoul, May 12; ibid.)

In June the United States and Korea agreed that the latter would send one field-hospital unit and 10 karate instructors to Vietnam as soon as the Korean Government received an official request from the Government of Vietnam. The Department of State instructed the Embassy in Seoul to urge the Korean Government “to assume as much of costs as possible” but noted that the United States was “prepared to underwrite whatever is needed to have ROK participate in Viet Nam in this fashion.” (Telegrams 2378 to Saigon and 1186 to Seoul, June 24, and telegram 5 from Seoul, July 2; all ibid., DEF 19 KOR S–VIET S) The Embassy in Seoul also reported that the Korean Government was “still interested in supplying combat troops,” and was apparently “at a loss to understand” why the United States was not “soliciting direct military participation.” (Telegram 1748 from Seoul, June 30; ibid.) In reply the Department of State explained that combat forces had not been requested by Vietnam and that the inherent nature of guerrilla warfare made use of ground forces, particularly those from a third country, inappropriate and unsuitable. (Telegram 12 to Seoul, July 3; ibid.)

On September 5 the United States and Korean Commands in Vietnam signed an agreement defining the terms and procedures applicable to Korean involvement in Vietnam. (Airgram A–455 from Saigon, December 14; ibid.) After those arrangements had been finalized, a Korean surgical-hospital unit, consisting of 34 officers and 96 enlisted men, and a team of karate instructors, consisting of 10 officers, departed for Vietnam on September 11. (Telegram 235 from Seoul, September 10; ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

Additional documentation covering discussions between the United States and Korea on this issue during 1964 is ibid. and DEF 19–2 KOR S-VIET S.

6. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, United Nations Command, Korea (Howze) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) 6. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, United Nations Command, Korea (Howze) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)1

Seoul, March 26, 1964, 0245Z.

60213. For General Taylor from General Howze. References: A.UK 50558, 24 Aug 63; B. JCS 2535, 18 Sep 63.2 Student demonstrations in Seoul 24 March (about 5,000 strong) and 25 March (15,000 to 20,000 strong), ostensibly against government action to conclude a normalization agreement with Japan, are expected by ROK Chief of Staff to be followed today and on subsequent days by others much larger in size. Demonstrations have also occurred in other cities.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] has information from a usually very reliable and responsible ROK opposition source that the student demonstrations are part of a plan which is positively designed to bring down the current ROK Government, and will continue until that end is achieved. The same ROK source indicated [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that he hoped very much that CINCUNC would hold the combat forces of the army firmly in place in order that the anti-government effort might succeed.

Yesterday troops of the Seoul security command (old capital defense command) were deployed behind the lines of ROK National Police to stop student surges in direction of Presidential mansion. At request of ROKA Chief of Staff, to cope with the numbers expected today, I have indicated no objection to reinforcement of troops in Seoul by provisional battalions from cadres of the two locally stationed rear area security divisions and from the Special Forces Group also located nearby.

I have consulted with the Ambassador, who confirms the fact that the current government, being a duly elected one, enjoys the recognition and support of the United States Government and concurs in my decision.

We have no evidence of prospective attack by external Communist forces against the ROK.

I intend therefore, in absence of other instructions, to proceed according to the intentions expressed in paragraphs 16, 17, 18, and 19 of Reference A3 and in consonance with the instructions of Reference B.4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. I. Top Secret; Flash. Repeated to CINCPAC, CIA, Department of State, which is the source text, and the White House.

2 The text of reference A was repeated to the Department of State in JCS telegram 260651Z, March 26; the text of reference B was repeated to the Department in JCS telegram 181428Z, March 18. (Both in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 23–8 KOR S)

3 These paragraphs established that troops were to be released to a recognized ROK Government to suppress a coup or an uprising. If pro-U.S. factions requested troops to overthrow the ROK Government, however, troops would be released only after authorization from JCS was received; the Ambassador was to be kept fully informed of all developments and consulted before any decisions were implemented; if warranted by the nature of the situation, decisions were to be made locally; and U.S. forces were to maintain a position of neutrality in any power struggle.

4 Telegram 2535 acknowledged JCS concurrence with the procedures outlined by CINCUNC and instructed that U.S. authorities were “to support those elements in ROK armed forces who are pro-US oriented” and “to keep ROK armed forces responsive to [U.S.] operational control.”

7. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 7. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, March 26, 1964.

Mac—

Korean student riots, ostensibly against ROK-Jap settlement but actually against ROKG, are getting worrisome. No one expected they'd reach such intensity (students are normally feisty this time each year).

Marshall Green, who knows his ROKs, sees better than even chance that ROK/Jap settlement is scuttled for 1964. Too bad if so, since gradual Jap cooling toward bailing out ROK has made us look on 1964 as year of decision. Also Pak government be in danger and nothing as good in sight.

All in all, instead of urging Pak and his Rasputin, Kim Chong-pil to be more democratic, maybe we ought to tolerate a little more dictatorship in this messy fief. Korea is still a mess (one of our great failures despite billions in pump priming). So I'd settle for a bit more stability, which would permit us to cut our bill some more (still around $300 million per annum, all told). I'll sing this song to WPB and Green. Perhaps you could too.

RWK

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. I. Secret.

8. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 8. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, April 21, 1964.

Mac—

We may have an internal crisis in Korea shortly (Seoul 1330).2 The students, obstreperous ever since they triggered overthrow of Rhee in 1960, are demonstrating again. If Pak's police kill a few we may have a “student revolt.”Equally dangerous is internal split within ruling DRP between supporters and opponents of Kim Chong Pil, Pak's “eminence grise”

Berger, who's always detested Kim Chong Pil (and almost seems to carry on personal vendetta against him), is worried. He doubts Pak will dump Kim, but can't see how Pak can cure internal split in DRP without doing so.

All this clouds prospects for ROK/Jap settlement. Since Kim is great promoter of this (for graft involved, partly) opposition is opposing settlement largely as means of getting at Kim. ROKG in turn is thinking of imposing martial law.

Am keeping in touch, and keeping State's eye on ROK/Jap angle. Will clue you if any WH-type problem arises.

RWK

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. I. Secret.

2 In telegram 1330 from Seoul, April 20, Berger detailed the political struggle taking place within Korea and the mounting pressure on the Pak government to remove Kim Chong-pil from political office. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 15 KOR S)

9. National Security Action Memorandum No. 298 9. National Security Action Memorandum No. 2981

Washington, May 5, 1964.

TO

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Administrator, Agency for International Development

SUBJECT

Study of Possible Redeployment of U.S. Division now Stationed in Korea

This is to request that the Secretary of State coordinate a joint State-AID-Defense study which will enable me to weigh and resolve the choices facing us with respect to the possible redeployment2 of one of the U.S. Divisions now stationed in Korea. The study should explore what sequence of U.S. actions, involving economic assistance, military assistance, diplomatic communications, and public statements, would minimize the negative effects and maximize the benefit of such a redeployment, taking into account

—Korea's military security

—Korea's short-term political stability

—the long-term U.S. objective of stimulating sustainable economic expansion and strengthening Korea's social and political institutions.

Specific requirements follow: 1. In considering changes in the level and composition of U.S. assistance, the study should offer both a bare-bones minimum program and a more generous variant which would fully compensate the Korean Government for the loss of a U.S. Division. In connection with the latter, attention should be given to the internal economic and military measures by the ROK which we might bargain for—measures that might appreciably shorten the period of Korea's dependence on extraordinary economic assistance.

2. The study should assess the value of such a redeployment for the balance and flexibility of the U.S. military posture.

3. The study should contain estimates of the budgetary gains and costs.

4. As regards the U.S. balance of payments, the study should estimate both the gross gain of withdrawing a U.S. Division, and the net gain that will result, after account is taken of the recommended changes in U.S. assistance.

5. The study should include recommendations as to the steps we should take, in the event of a redeployment, (a) to avoid any misreading of our intentions in Japan, Southeast Asia, Europe—and in Russia and Communist China, and (b) to explain the good sense of the move to the Congress and the U.S. public.

6. As regards timing, I should like two alternatives to be explored: one with a decision date of June 1, 1964; the other with a decision date of December 1, 1964. With respect to each alternative, the study should elaborate a detailed plan of action, giving announcement dates and implementation dates for all major actions.

The study should be completed in time for NSC consideration on May 23

The White House staff officer assigned to follow the study will be Mr. Robert Komer. Mr. Francis Bator will act in his stead until Mr. Komer's return.

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Robert W. Komer, Korea, December 1963 to March 1966 [2 of 2]. Secret. Copies were sent to McCone, McGeorge Bundy, Komer, Bator, and Charles Johnson.

2 President Johnson instructed that the words “to Hawaii” be removed here and in paragraph 2 below so that redeployment proposals would not be restricted to that destination. (Memorandum to holders of NSAM No. 298 from McGeorge Bundy, May 11; ibid.)

3 Accepting the views of McNamara and Rusk expressed in discussions with McGeorge Bundy that the time was not right to address this issue, the President agreed to postpone the requested study until an unspecified future date. (Memorandum from U. Alexis Johnson to Bundy, June 6; ibid., National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 298) Since a draft report had already been prepared, Bundy suggested it be circulated. (Memorandum from Bundy to Rusk and McNamara, June 9; ibid., Files of Robert W. Komer, Korea, December 1963 to March 1966 [2 of 2]) The JCS also recommended postponing any decision on redeployment until ongoing studies had been completed. (Memorandum from Taylor to McNamara, May 30; ibid.)

10. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 10. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, May 20, 1964, 3 p.m.

1501. Ref: Embtel 1470.2

1. Toward end of my talk with President Pak May 13 after telling me that Kim Chong-pil would not go to U.S. (reftel), he hesitated and then said he wished tell me something in utmost confidence.

2. He said he is going to remove KCP as chairman of DRP (govt party). Said I may wonder why he has not done so already. There were two reasons: First, he had received several letters from Ohno3 warning him that if KCP removed there would be no settlement with Japan. Pak said he hoped settlement could be made in next month or two and some time thereafter KCP would be removed. Pak said if what he had in mind became known consequences would be “dangerous,” because KCP had his supporters and it could endanger talks with Japan. He asked me reveal this information to no one.

3. I gave him this commitment. Since Pak in making these remarks had spoken in tone of anger and emotion directed at KCP, I did not think it desirable for me to say anything on matter as personally sensitive as this one is and did not pursue matter further. Foregoing known here only to Doherty and Habib. Request Dept hold this information tight.

4. Comment: I have refrained from reporting this until I had time to consider what this meant. I am inclined to accept this as honest statement of Pak's present attitude and intentions and possibly explains his vacillations when he was under heavy pressure to remove KCP in April.4 We have had several reports that relations between Pak and KCP have been strained ever since. PriMin told me several times KCP will be removed in about two months. On May 18 PriMin told me he expects KCP will leave Korea in September for “six months” study abroad, adding that relations between Pak and KCP bitter.

5. Not only has Ohno's position added greatly to Pak's domestic difficulties, but whether Pak will or can remove KCP when time comes remains to be seen. KCP's plan is to stay on the scene and we expect that before long he may mount a campaign against his enemies and that they in turn will resume the attack on him. At present there is a lull in the fight, which Pak arranged by personal appeals to both sides.

Berger

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S. Secret; Priority; Limdis; No Distribution Outside Department.

2 In telegram 1470 from Seoul, May 13, Berger reported on Kim Chong-pil's planned trip to the United States in June and Pak's belief that Kim should not leave Korea at the present time. (Ibid.)

3  Bamboku Ohno was Vice President of the Liberal Democratic Party in Japan and had met with Kim during the latter's trip to Tokyo in March. (Telegram 2785 from Tokyo, March 25; ibid.)

4 Telegram 1374 from Seoul, April 28, detailed the opposition to Kim and the pressures exerted on Pak to remove him. (Ibid., POL 23–8 KOR S)

11. Editorial Note 11. Editorial Note

Conversations with several Korean officials on May 23 and May 24, 1964, reinforced Ambassador Berger's view that a serious crisis was rapidly evolving within the Republic of Korea and threatening the existence of the government of President Pak. (Telegram 1534 from Seoul, May 24; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 23–8 KOR S) The Ambassador reported that the “situation in Korea has again reached a peak of uncertainty, unrest and disarray,” and described the current mood as being the “most grave and fraught with difficulty since the May 16, 1961 coup.” The effects of the increasingly strong attacks from the political opposition intended to bring about the collapse of the government as well as the escalating threat posed by continuous student demonstrations were compounded by a paratrooper action suspected of being deliberately provoked by extremist supporters of Kim Chong-pil with President Pak's tacit approval. (Telegram 1532 from Seoul, May 24; ibid., POL 2 KOR S)

The paratrooper incident occurred on May 21 when 13 armed men wearing army airborne unit uniforms stormed the court house where student demonstrators were being detained and processed. They also forcibly entered the home of the judge handling the cases and demanded he order the arrest of all students in custody. (Telegram 1519 from Seoul, May 21; ibid., POL 23–8 KOR S) Eight of the paratroopers were subsequently arrested, but Army Chief of Staff General Min hinted that a similar action could occur, if demonstrations continued. (Telegram 1526 from Seoul, May 22; ibid.)

12. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 12. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, June 3, 1964.

Mac—

FYI, Marshall Green thinks ROK rioting quite serious.2 Pak will probably impose martial law, which we oppose. We fear it will only bottle up popular resentment, which will burst out even more violently sometime later. [4 lines of source text not declassified]

We're worried lest we be over-identified with yet another repressive campaign by one of our Asian clients. This may also spell the end of ROK-Jap settlement hopes this year.3 It's regrettable that irresponsibility of a minority of the students, egged on by an irresponsible opposition, is undermining the ROK's real future hopes. This country isn't ready for democracy yet, any more than it was for Rhee-style dictatorship in the Fifties. Our Korean policy has been a mess from the beginning, except for the war period itself.

RWK

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. I. Secret.

2  Green's views derived from his meeting with Yum Suk Heun, Minister of the Korean Embassy, on May 29. Green informed William Bundy that “Yun predicted that, unless immediate steps are taken to get rid of Kim Chong Pil and improve the Government's standing before the people, the populace led by the students would topple Park Chong Hui's Government within a matter of weeks.” (Memorandum from Green to Bundy, June 1; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 15 KOR S)

3  Yun also informed Green that popular opposition to a settlement was “not because of hatred of Japan but because Kim Chong Pil and company are obviously turning these negotiations to their own personal financial profit,” making a settlement impossible. In Yun's view, if his government attempted to conclude an agreement with Japan, “the lid would blow.” (Ibid.)

13. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 13. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, June 3, 1964, 10:30 p.m.

1593. Ref: Embtel 1589.2

1. Following are details of President's Pak's meeting with General Howze and me afternoon June 3 (see reftel).

2. Pak said: A. Govt has up to today been patient and lenient in treating with student demonstrations; student aim now is to bring govt down.

B. Today's demonstrations had turned into rioting with police stations destroyed, govt trucks and jeeps seized and a police armory broken into. Police had suffered many casualties. (During meeting report came in that a policeman had been killed by students.)

C. President of Seoul National University, main source of student activity, today sent message to President through Vice Speaker Na Yong-kyun (opposition) that he had info 65 students and a number of professors encouraging demonstrators were Communists. He had been afraid to pass this info but was doing so in view of today's rioting.

D. President had summoned PriMin, other Cabinet members concerned, Chiefs of Armed Services, and members National Security Council to special meeting this afternoon, which came to conclusion that martial law required. It would be imposed tonight, and he requested General Howze to release 6th and 28th divisions.

E. Martial law would be confined to Seoul initially, but might have to be extended to other areas depending on how situation developed. In that case more troops might be required.

3. In response my request for details of martial law, Pak said: A. All schools down to primary would be closed at outset, and would be reopened gradually as situation permitted.

B. Manipulators of students would be investigated and indicted by prosecutor general.

C. Press censorship would be established.

D. Civil cases would be tried by civil courts. More important cases by military courts.

E. General Min Ki-sik would be martial law commander.

F. He could not say how long martial law would be kept on. He hoped not too long.

4. I said National Assembly now in adjournment, but could be convened by members. Assembly would want to debate martial law decision. In view divisions in Assembly govt action might face heavy criticism in Assembly adding confusion to situation. Pak said DRP leaders had met today and pledged full support of this action. I asked if this was DRP assemblymen or party action. He said party leaders which include some assemblymen.

5. I said we recognized situation had become serious as result today's rioting but martial law was no solution to basic problems. What further measures did President contemplate to deal with student and public grievances. Pak said immediate problem was to deal with rioting and he had not given consideration to further aspects of problem.

6. I said we of course hoped that law and order would be quickly restored under martial law, but in light of April 1960 experience there was danger of massive students and popular action in streets. Should this be case it would create for U.S. Government a very serious problem of supporting his government face of general public disapproval. He said he recognized this, but if faced with uncontrollable popular opposition he would have to resign.

7. I said would it not be better to try to head off this possibility by announcing measures that would meet popular grievances. He repeated this must wait until law and order was restored. I then said “Mr. President, I know how painful this subject is but the situation is serious, and it is important that we speak frankly. Since March 23 at least a dozen Korean leaders, who support you, have told me that if martial law is invoked, you and your government will be in serious danger unless Kim Chong-pil is removed. I want to make clear that I am not saying he should be removed, but this is what some of your most loyal supporters are saying.”

8. Pak replied that he was aware that KCP “has lost the confidence of many people, including some in the armed forces and in the party.” He then recounted events of May 31–June 2: his meeting with KCP on May 31 to discuss resignation; KCP's resignation June 1; the danger of conflict in DRP if he did resign; the meeting with DRP leaders June 1 where only one voice, Chang Kyong-sun, supported resignation; Pak unsure what decision to make and decided to leave it to the DRP party convention this summer. He said as I knew from previous conversation with him, he believes KCP should resign as Chairman of DRP, but not until this summer after ROK-Japan settlement made. I did not pursue the matter except to say that public animus was directed at KCP and not Pak.

9. General Howze then referred to Pak's request to release two divisions and said he prepared do so with my concurrence.3 I agreed. General Howze then compared current situation with April 1960, when he was in Korea, saying at that time there was universal hostility to fraudulently elected govt; this not the case now. However, Korean military forces were close to people and reflected their views and feelings. In April 1960 martial law people cheered arrival of armed forces. Gen Howze was not sure this would be the case this time. It would be unfortunate if people came to think that govt required presence of armed forces in order stay in power.

10. General Howze was assured that tanks would not be brought into Seoul and that live ammunition would be held by regimental commanders. Pak said armed forces would not fire except with his express authority.

11. I then said question will arise as to whether US Govt approved or disapproved martial law. I wanted make clear that President had not asked for our approval but asked for release of troops. I wished his govt could avoid any statement that implied our approval or agreement. This action was taken by ROK Govt in its sovereign capacity. President agreed.

12. I then repeated points we had made so there would be no misunderstanding. A. We agreed situation was serious.

B. Invocation of martial law was decision of Korean Govt.

C. We agreed to release of troops at Korean Govt's request.

D. Martial law would not solve basic problems.

E. We hoped President would consider what measures might be announced to deal with popular grievances. In this connection that Kim Chong-p'il must be removed along with martial law had been expressed to me by Korean leaders who supported President.

13. President, Kim Chong-O and Min Defense said they understood clearly the views we had expressed.4

Berger

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 23–8 KOR S. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD, and Tokyo and passed to the White House.

2 In telegram 1589 from Seoul, June 3, Berger provided a brief overview of his meeting with Pak. (Ibid.)

3  Howze's report on this meeting was transmitted in telegram 60432 from CINCUNC, Seoul, June 3. (Ibid.) The ROK divisions released from UNC operational control were the 6th and the 28th.

4 The Department of State approved of the positions taken by Howze and Berger in this meeting and commented that the United States wanted to prevent repression and further disorders in Korea while urging the government to implement reforms to address grievances. (Telegram 1109 to Seoul, June 3; ibid.)

14. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 14. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, June 4, 1964, 3 a.m.

1597. Ref: Embtel 1593 rptd Tokyo 688 CINCPAC 665.2

1. Large student demonstrations with some civilian participation followed by declaration of martial law June 3 pose question what we should do and say.

2. Martial law may succeed in restoring public order but situation might quickly worsen if students resist, populace joins in, and troops are forced to extreme measures. April 1960 precedent might then be repeated. Govt expects next two or three days will be critical, since all information indicates students intend challenge martial law.

3. Should situation develop on these lines Pak govt might be able head it off by announcing immediate measures that will impress upon public that govt is serious about dealing with legitimate grievances.

4. Our effort should be directed to trying to help govt stabilize situation hence Gen Howze and I agreed to release of troops. If govt resorts only to force without remedial measures and is faced with a mass uprising, question will arise whether we can continue to support it in such circumstances. Time therefore has come for us to recommend to ROKG what actions it must take if it expects to weather difficulties and count on our support.

5. In this situation I recommend US take following position and so inform Pak: A. US regards martial law as an emergency step to deal with public disorder.

B. Pak must take the necessary measures to establish public confidence in govt. These measures would include following: (I) Martial law should be lifted as soon as possible. Govt must make plain it does not intend substitute martial law for normal processes over extended period of time.

(II) Govt should appeal to responsible leaders of opposition who are willing to cooperate in national crisis. Pak should call meetings with opposition leaders and leaders those elements (press, university, military) of community who command public respect and seek their advice on how to deal with situation. He should also make a personal effort to establish a favorable image of himself before the public, in the process explaining the government's position on each pressing issue.

(III) Kim Chong-p'il should resign from political offices and leave the country.

(IV) Democratic-Republican Party should be reconstituted, its corruption eliminated, its Secretariat vastly reduced, and its unwarranted interference in govt ended.

6. Govt's past ineptitude, corrupt practices, and subsequent loss of public confidence have caught up with it. We are no longer confident that Pak able control situation for any length of time. We do not predict that Pak govt cannot survive immediate situation, but indications are that he may try to do so by use of force and suppression opposition press, students, and possibly even national assembly. This would be neither acceptable nor viable solution.

7. With Dept's concurrence I intend see Pak at appropriate time and convey sense of foregoing.3 I plan to tell him that unless he takes actions of this sort we foresee that ROKG will soon find itself in situation where it can survive only by repressive and authoritarian measures in which USG will find it difficult continue to support him. By taking recommended measures promptly and vigorously, he will be acting to save his govt and preserve constitutional democracy in ROK.

8. I do not intend issue any public statements here other than those given Embtel 15914 and suggest Dept follow suit along with indication our concern and watchfulness at this point.

9. Gen Howze concurs.

Berger

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 23–8 KOR S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD and Tokyo and passed to the White House.

2  Document 13.

3 The Department of State, with the concurrence of the Department of Defense, agreed with Berger's recommendation, adding only general suggestions. The Department of State believed Pak should undertake genuine reform of the DRP, with a solution to the problem of Kim Chong-pil part of the reform process, cautioning, however, that the United States must “avoid overplaying our hand with Pak on KCP.” (Telegram 1110 to Seoul, June 3; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 23–8 KOR S)

4 In telegram 1591 from Seoul, June 3, the Embassy reported that it had issued public statements reflecting its position that the “declaration martial law is matter for Korean Government to decide” and acknowledging that General Howze had released two ROK divisions after receiving a request to do so from the Korean Government. (Ibid.)

15. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 15. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, June 6, 1964, midnight.

1620. Pass White House, OSD, JCS, CIA. Ref: Embtel 1619 rptd Tokyo 704 CINCPAC 677 USUN 67.2

1. General Howze and I called on President Pak to ask how he viewed developments since martial law invoked and what was outlook.

2. He said next two or three days would be critical. Most university students had been sent home. He expected they would try to stir up trouble in the country. But if situation remained quiet, outlook would be favorable. He gave us numbers of “troublemakers” arrested in various categories which I am reporting separately.3 He then mentioned the several measures taken to remove popular grievances which he hoped would help stabilize situation: National reconstruction movement abolished; DRP Secretariat and staff cut back; legislation to be drafted to provide for publication of contributions to party funds; and Kim Chong-p'il resignation as Chairman DRP. In a few days five hundred corrupt govt officials would be removed.

3. I said Gen Howze and I not only wished have his view of situation, but also wished tell him of disturbing reports which had come to us in last three days. Essence these reports was that some people were thinking in terms of maintaining martial law indefinitely because this was only way to govern Korea. Under martial law press and other criticism could be curbed, critics arrested, Assembly abolished if necessary, and it would then even be possible to settle with Japan. I asked President to comment on these reports.

4. He said it impossible govern Korea under martial law and hoped it could be lifted soon. At same time he has worried as to what would happen when martial law lifted. If this meant more rioting, resumption (sic) irresponsible Assembly criticism, continuing Assembly sabotage of govt administration by requiring continuous appearance of Ministers in Assembly, and unrestrained press criticism, it would only lead to renewed rioting and martial law would have to be invoked again. He had to confess he was worried; he hoped martial law could be lifted soon. When Assembly met June 10 he expected it would vote for lifting martial law, but this did not seem a solution and he could not say when it would be possible.

5. To this evasive remark, I said I could not understand why he could not govern. He was elected as President. He had vast powers under the new constitution. His party with 110 of 175 [seats] had an easy majority in Assembly. Why could they not organize the work of the Assembly? Why could he not govern constitutionally? As for those [garble] spoke of martial law as the only solution, I could tell him that it would not be acceptable to the Korean people, to the Korean armed forces, or to Korea's friends abroad, including the US. We were committed to constitutional govt in Korea and were not prepared to support unconstitutional measures.

6. He said he agreed it was impossible to govern by force or by martial law. The trouble was that the public had lost confidence and trust in his govt.

7. I interrupted at this point and said General Howze wished to say something about yesterday's incident involving paratroopers breaking into Donga Ilbo newspaper office (in which they threatened to sabotage printing press). Gen Howze said he was deeply disturbed by this second incident involving special forces. This was a political act and it was apparent these troops were not properly disciplined. Washington authorities would take a serious view of this second incident. We were not prepared to use MAP funds to support undisciplined troops which threaten orderly processes. Pak said he had ordered an investigation of the matter. Gen Howze said that the troops should be withdrawn from capital security command and returned to their normal garrison.

8. I picked up thread of my part of conversation by saying I agreed basic problem was public distrust his govt and would be impossible stabilize situation or govern normally until confidence restored. I said I had been in Korea nearly three years. USG had done its utmost to be sympathetic to his problems and to help him both in days of military govt, during critical times last year, and since election.

I would now speak in way I had never done before. Most of his problems during past three years came from activities of Kim Chong-pil. He had been a disturbing and divisive force and his controversial activities had so occupied and distracted everyone's energies and attentions that the govt had never got down to its real job which is to govern the country. I reminded Pak of his frequent mention to me many difficulties KCP has caused him.

9. Present situation was terribly serious and once again KCP was the source of most of President Pak's trouble. He had once and for all to free himself of KCP so that he could restore people's confidence and get down to business of governing.

10. Freeing himself of a problem which had plagued and distracted him for so long was only way I could see to save objectives for which he had worked so hard for three years, his govt and constitutionalism. It would be a decisive move that would restore public confidence in him. It would bring back those who had been alienated in the last two years and enable him to broaden the basis of his support.

11. General Howze interjected at this point and said the armed forces were loyal to Pak but in a critical situation would not support KCP. This division in their loyalties could become a serious problem. General Howze seriously doubted in the circumstances that the armed forces would shoot civilians to keep KCP in office. He said KCP speaks of himself as though he were running Korea. It was essential that Pak assert it is he who is President and responsible for country, not KCP.

12. Pak asked if it were possible to arrange for KCP to go to US for study. I said we had made such arrangements in other cases for the President and could do so again. I suggested KCP should take his family and plan to stay for one or two years so as to give President freedom to govern and chance to stabilize situation without ever- present worry of KCP's imminent return. I stressed importance of an early departure.

13. Pak said he would speak to KCP tonight “and try to persuade him” to remove himself. I said it was in the interest of the country, Pak, constitution, and even KCP himself that he leave as quickly as possible. If he left soon there was a chance of internal stability and unity, a chance to reestablish Pak as a popular leader of the country, and a chance for a Japanese settlement. If he stayed I saw nothing but continuing trouble ahead.

14. As we got up to go I said casually that ten minutes before coming to Blue House I had been given a report that a list of Assemblymen slated for arrest was being prepared, which included a large number of anti-KCP members of the Assembly as well as some opposition leaders. I asked if he knew anything of this. He said he did not. I said he and [I] had been caught by surprise several times by actions taken here over the last three years which we knew nothing about. I hoped this was not going to be repeated. He said with a smile that such arrests would require his signature. I smiled back and said if such arrests occurred there would be real trouble in Korea and we could not remain silent.

15. Comment: I have no certainty that Pak will follow the lead we have given him. We are letting our position be known to key govt and military leaders on whom Pak relies and who will reinforce our advice to him. KCP remains capable of desperate action but may very probably come to realize balance of forces is strongly against him. In that case he will go quietly. If so we will need to cooperate in making possible one or two years of study in US for KCP and possibly one or more of his associates.

Berger

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 23–8 KOR S. Secret; Immediate;Limdis. Repeated to Tokyo,CINCPAC, and USUN; passed to the White House,OSD, JCS, and CIA.

2 Telegram 1619 from Seoul, June 6, discussed the situation surrounding Kim Chong-pil and his supporters in the wake of Kim's resignation as chairman of the DRP and potential options available to Pak to handle increased tensions and restore his authority. (Ibid., POL 15–1 KOR S) Although relinquishing his position as party chair, Kim retained his membership within the party as well as his seat in the National Assembly.

3 In telegram 1624 from Seoul, June 8, Berger reported that Pak indicated a “total of 1344 civilians and 523 students had been arrested” and an additional 191 students were being sought. The telegram also contained detailed information about those arrests. (Ibid., POL 29 KOR S)

16. Editorial Note 16. Editorial Note

President Pak informed Ambassador Berger on June 7, 1964, that Kim Chong-pil agreed to leave Korea and study in the United States. (Telegram 1621, June 7; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 15–1 KOR S) Kim expressed an interest in attending a summer seminar followed by study of economics at a “good university” in the United States. He also suggested he be awarded a Department of State Leader Grant, which would, given the prestige associated with the grant, cloak his sudden departure and exile in respectability. (Telegram 1632 from Seoul, June 10; ibid.) The Embassy and the Department of State agreed that Kim was an unsuitable candidate for a Leader Grant, since it allowed only short-term study and extended an official status to the grantee that the United States did not intend to offer Kim. (Telegram 1635 from Seoul, June 10; ibid.)

The Department of State secured a private sponsor—the Southwestern Research Society in Dallas, Texas—enabling Kim to attend the 6-week International Seminar conducted by Henry Kissinger at Harvard that summer and to undertake academic study in the fall. Kim was scheduled to depart Seoul for Cambridge on June 18. (Telegrams 1133 and 1134 to Seoul, and telegram 1647 from Seoul, all June 11; all ibid; and telegram 1660 from Seoul, June 15; ibid., POL 7 KOR S) Ambassador Berger advocated that Kim's presence in the United States not be viewed merely a means to “keep him out of way” but the time utilized as an “opportunity to train him and to alter his views.” (Telegram 1632 from Seoul, June 10; ibid., POL 15–1 KOR S)

17. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 17. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1

Washington, June 8, 1964.

SUBJECT

Study of Possible Redeployment of U.S. Division Now Stationed in Korea

Attached pursuant to your request in NSAM No. 298 is a coordinated State-AID-Defense study of a possible redeployment of one of the two U.S. divisions now stationed in Korea. Appended to the study is a time-phased plan for carrying out the redeployment if such a decision is made.2

Defense Department Views

Secretary McNamara has taken into consideration the recommendation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that a decision on the possible withdrawal, and on the manner of accomplishing it, not be made at this time, pending completion of studies on costs, prepositioning and relocation sites which are now under way.3 He has considered also the view of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the withdrawal entails specific risks, and is feasible only if combined with early use of nuclear weapons. Secretary McNamara's conclusion is that the decision to redeploy should be made now and implemented over the next 18 months.4 He believes that freeing a division from its static commitment in Korea would appreciably improve the U.S. defense posture not only in the Pacific area but world-wide. It is desirable to retain the division as far forward as possible on U.S. territory in the Pacific, but final determination as to the relocation site should await completion of the above-mentioned studies. In Secretary McNamara's judgment, the redeployment would not alter the U.S. strategic position in Korea or restrict the range of alternatives open to us in the event of renewed aggression there. He considers that the U.S. troops that would remain in Korea (over 40,000 at present manning levels), our ability rapidly to augment these forces, improvements in our tactical air capability, the improved flexibility of our over-all military posture in the Pacific and our other actions to counter communism in Asia would constitute convincing evidence of our purpose and will. Secretary McNamara estimates that a maximum annual savings of $22 million in balance of payments expenditures and $8 million in budgetary costs could be realized under the most favorable redeployment conditions. This maximum savings would be reduced to the extent that new facilities were constructed, the Forward Floating Depot augmented, or the Korean economy compensated for the U.S. withdrawal.

State Department Views

My own view is that the proposed redeployment would not be in U.S. interest at this time, as the risks are disproportionate to the relatively small balance of payments and military gains (if any). However, I do agree that the matter periodically be reviewed, possibly again this coming December.

My view may be summarized as follows:

Consequences for Our Over-all Far Eastern Position—Our position in Asia is under heavy strain this year. A move of the sort proposed would entail the considerable danger of injecting further unsettling effects. Particularly at a time when our position in Southeast Asia is so critical, I would wish to avoid any semblance whatsoever of an implied U.S. willingness to withdraw our power from the Far Eastern area. I believe that Peiping's strategy is directed at having us tire of the frustrating problems in that area of the world, and I would not want to encourage them in the erroneous belief that they are succeeding. If it were possible to have the entire division deployed in a forward area in the Pacific such as Okinawa, Guam or the Philippines, this might have a positive political and psychological effect. However, such a deployment would entail major construction costs and other difficulties. The alternative of withdrawal to the U.S. of all or even a large portion of the forces would give exactly the wrong political signal. While I do not challenge the view of the Secretary of Defense that we may have the capacity5 of redeploying the forces in question to the Far East as required, the principal issue is not our capabilities but what both our allies and the Communists read as our intentions. Withdrawal of a U.S. division from the Far East, no matter what our technical capabilities may be, will be read as a U.S. intention to disengage.

Consequences in Korea—Moreover, the redeployment would undermine Korean confidence in U.S. military capabilities and intentions just as the reorganized civil Government addresses itself with apparent determination and new promise to a settlement with Japan, economic stabilization and, largely through these means, strengthening of its own position and achievement of a measure of political stability. Realization of all these goals, in which the U.S. has so large a stake, would be seriously jeopardized. The withdrawal would also inevitably and undesirably focus attention throughout the Far East on the already heavy nuclear emphasis in our Korean posture. In my recent discussions with Chiang Kai-shek he sharply rejected any possibility of the use of nuclear weapons by the U.S. in Asia as being completely contrary to U.S. interests. Our other allies could be expected to take an even more vigorous stand in opposition. Since the Joint Chiefs of Staff do not endorse a reduction of U.S. forces in Korea unless a prior commitment to a nuclear strategy is accepted, the entire military rationale of the proposal gives me serious concern. In this connection, if the elements of the division which it is proposed be sent to Alaska are given responsibilities in terms of Alaskan defense, it is doubtful that they will be immediately available for rapid deployment to the Far East in case of need.

Financial Consequences—As for the effects of such a redeployment upon the U.S. balance of payments and budget, Secretary McNamara's savings estimates specifically do not take into account construction of pre-stockage facilities on land and sea or the providing of necessary funds to compensate the Korean economy and stabilization program for the loss of income (estimated at $15 million) from the redeployed division. The studies of AID and State staffs indicate that the net annual balance of payments benefit after these factors are taken into account would be very small (probably negative if a brigade were deployed to the Philippines) and that there would be a definitely adverse effect on the U.S. budget—initial one-time budgetary costs ranging from $92 million to $370 million, and annual budgetary costs of from $7 million to $26 million.

Possible Solution

At the same time I fully share the view of the Secretary of Defense that our force posture in Korea results in inflexibilities in the use of our military resources. I have given considerable thought to this problem and am persuaded that we can find a way which is politically feasible, assuming it is also militarily feasible, to develop a more responsive force posture in the Far East. Basically, my proposal is that we transform one of the two divisions in Korea into a mobile reserve stationed in Korea but available for meeting crises elsewhere in the Far East. I do not feel that we must accept complete inflexibility in our Korean deployment, particularly when events are making clear the potential requirement for U.S. ground forces elsewhere in the Far East.

I recognize that there may be a reluctance on the part of the Koreans to see us transform one of our divisions into a mobile Far Eastern area reserve. However, I think we can make a strong case that the most effective way to deter Communist adventurism anywhere in the Far East, including Korea, is by demonstrating our ability to deal immediately and effectively with aggression wherever it occurs throughout the region.

It seems to me time to make this adjustment in the use of our military resources which are, after all, not unlimited. I am prepared to explore the feasibility of this proposal with Secretary McNamara and, if found militarily feasible, to work out a specific plan for your approval.

Dean Rusk 6

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 298. Secret. U. Alexis Johnson sent McGeorge Bundy a copy of the draft memorandum and the draft study written in reply to NSAM 298, noting that the drafts had not been approved by Rusk or McNamara. (Memorandum from Johnson to Bundy, June 12; ibid.)

2 The study with appendix is attached but not printed.

3 The views of the JCS are set forth in a May 22 memorandum to McNamara, JCSM-440–64. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330,OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, 370.5 Korea)

4 According to the attached study, the redeployment involved one division consisting of 12,000 troops as well as 3,000 support personnel. McNamara received a copy of the draft report, but felt the matter should be postponed for a few months “because of the situation in Southeast Asia.” (Memorandum from Solbert to McNamara, and memorandum from Stroud to Solbert, both June 5; ibid.)

5 The word “capacity” is double underlined.

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

18. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 18. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, July 6, 1964, 6 p.m.

12. I spent July 2–3 in Chinhae with President Pak and had an opportunity for frank and friendly discussion on following matters.2

1. Economic Stability: I listed favorable economic developments and prospects since devaluation,3 i.e., reversal of capital flight, record-breaking exports in June, better than anticipated earnings from US/UN forces, improved KFX position, leveling off of prices within five weeks, bumper barley harvest, large food imports this year to provide reserve, and good rice crop prospects. Korea now had another opportunity to build on a solid economic foundation if wise policies were followed, but if inflationary policies again resumed there will be neither economic nor political stability, and he would have nothing but renewed domestic trouble in future. Urged him especially to keep a tight rein on Chang Ki-yong4 and Min. Agriculture.

2. U.S. Assistance: President asked me to comment on requests made by Chang Ki-yong to Killen, and I ticked them off:5 A. No prospect of additional SA this year;

B. Development loans for fertilizer plants would be sympathetically considered along with any other good projects;

C. Buying POL from Ulsan refinery for ROK and US forces presented difficult problems for us owing to world-wide policy, but matter was being studied;

D. Future of MAP transfer program under study, did not believe it would be suspended, but may be amended to provide for MAP funding of raw materials;

E. Request for support for large highway development program was new request. It was under study, but not likely to be given high priority;

F. Increased Korean Exports to Viet-Nam. In reply to his request for waiving “Buy American” policy in order to permit use of U.S. AID dollars to pay for Viet-Nam imports from Korea, I said our policy was likely to be flexible. Responsibility for finding items needed in Viet-Nam rested with Koreans, and I urged that a vigorous effort be made to sell in this market.

3. ROK-Japan: President said if U.S. could involve itself more openly and actively in the negotiations it would make it possible for him to overcome domestic, political and student opposition. Korean fear of Japanese economic domination, fear of being deserted by the U.S. and fear of “deals” between Korean and Japanese in respect of use of $600 million were real however unjustified. If U.S. would take initiative to form a consortium of consultative aid group and make long-term aid commitment to Korea it would be of immeasurable help in dealing with Korean fears. He appealed for Secretary Rusk to involve himself directly in talks with Japanese and Koreans to work out a solution on these lines by the end of this year. I said Dept anxious to be helpful and we are now exploring with Japanese and Germans possibilities for a new approach to ROK-Japan settlement on these lines. It unlikely Secretary would commit himself to direct involvement unless and until agreement reached beforehand. Meantime most hopeful line of attack was improved Japanese purchase of Korean exports. Reports from Japan suggested some progress might be made in this direction and we were doing our best to encourage it.

4. Martial Law: I urged him to lift martial law. I reminded him that Embassy had predicted student trouble week of June 1 when Kim Chong-pil, General Min Ki-shik and others were saying that gov threats to crack down on students had broken the back of the student demonstrations and that agitation would subside. I predicted that if his govt tried to bull-doze through the Assembly student control law, there would be most serious trouble in Assembly and in country. I urged him to support Assembly Speaker's efforts to develop agreements between govt and opposition moderates and to merge his own and PriMin's separate effort with those of the Speaker. I said that General Min Ki-shik's view that he could force these laws through the Assembly under martial law were dangerous and doomed to failure. This approach was opposed by every sensible person and by many of the commanding officers in the armed forces. I said General Min's bull-dozing and erratic behavior had lost him the confidence of General Howze and U.S. Govt.

5. President replied that he was aware of dangers and did not plan to try to bull-doze the laws through the Assembly under conditions of martial law. He and Chong Il-kwon were working together on this matter and would work with the Speaker of the Assembly in whom he had great confidence. They hoped to get agreement in principle with opposition that Assembly would pass such laws to deal with the possibility of renewed student and press agitation. Then he would lift martial law. I gathered from this and from a separate conversation earlier with PriMin that they were now engaged in feeling out the opposition, and testing how far they can go in passing restrictive legislation.

6. Kim Chong-pil: I said reports from Washington, Japan and Korea were coming in that Kim Chong-pil had stated he would return to Korea in Sept and that I was under instruction from the Dept to raise this matter with him. He said he had told Kim prior to his departure that he was to plan to stay away for a year or more and that he would look at this matter again in about a year's time. He said he had not made any statement on this in order to save Kim's face. I could assure the Dept that Kim would not return in less than a year.

7. Comment: Pak was relaxed, attentive and extremely friendly during all conversations. Only during discussion of martial law and cooperation with opposition did he become indecisive and slightly evasive. In my view he has not determined his final position on these questions. What is most worrying is that he remains particularly ill-disposed toward opposition and anti-govt press, and his tendency is to think in terms of force rather than compromise.

8. On economic questions I believe Pak readily appreciates importance of stabilization program and expect he will keep our views in mind when faced with inflationary tendencies on part some Cabinet ministers. Pak also made clear his continuing commitment to ROK-Japan normalization, but now is looking for a way to break impasse presented by student and political opposition.

Berger

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 15–1 KOR S. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Tokyo and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 In telegram 1732 from Seoul, June 26, Berger reported that Pak had invited him to Chinhae and outlined the approach he would take in discussing the possibility that Kim Chong-pil planned to return to Korea around September 20. Berger noted that he was “convinced that return of Kim will plunge this govt. and this country into another and ultimately dangerous domestic crisis.” He intended to tell Pak that Kim's prolonged absence was “essential to internal stability” of the ROK and to ask for Pak's assurance that Kim would not return soon. (Ibid.) The Department of State concurred, noting that Pak should be told of the importance of keeping Kim out of Korea for at least 1 year. (Telegram 1203 to Seoul, June 26; ibid.)

3 The Korean Government announced a devaluation of the won in May.

4 Deputy Prime Minister and Chairman of the Economic Planning Board.

5 The specific economic requests made by Chang to AID Director James S. Killen on June 17 and 18 were detailed in telegram 1071 from Seoul, June 22. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S)

19. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 19. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, August 11, 1964.

JCSM-683–64

SUBJECT

Guidance to the Commander in Chief, United Nations Command (U)

1. Recent communications from the Commander in Chief, United Nations Command (CINCUNC), indicate the need for guidance for his use in discussions initiated by Republic of Korea (ROK) Government officials concerning military force levels in Korea and the Korean Military Assistance Program. Inasmuch as these matters have political and economic as well as military implications, your approval of guidance to CINCUNC is desired.

2. On 17 and 18 June 1964, General Howze (CINCUNC) was visited by ROK Minister of Defense Kim Sung-eun, who indicated he had five proposals he would like to present to the US Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense and to the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, should he have the opportunity to visit Washington. These proposals were as follows: a. That ROK armed forces not be reduced.

b. That US forces in Korea not be reduced.

c. That military aid to Korea be increased.

d. That the MAP Transfer Program—Korea be suspended for at least two years.

e. That the United States support financially the needed pay increase for the Korean armed forces.

3. The views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the above subjects are summarized in the Appendix hereto.2

4. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have concluded that CINCUNC should be furnished the following guidance for use in discussions initiated by ROK Government officials: a. ROK Force Levels (1) In view of the current situation in Southeast Asia, the United States does not favor any reduction in military capability in the Far East. Therefore, the United States considers that ROK forces should remain at the current levels.

(2) Any announcement of reduction in ROK forces prior to an announcement to withdraw a portion of the US forces stationed in Korea could be expected to have an adverse effect on congressional support of the Korean MAP.

b. US Forces (1) The United States does not intend to lessen its over-all military capability in the Far East.

(2) No indication should be given ROK Government officials that the United States is considering withdrawing one division from Korea.

c. Korean MAP (1) There are no immediate prospects for relief from the pressures of reduced funding.

(2) There are many competing requirements for funds under MAP. The Department of Defense is obliged to seek a strategic balance world-wide within the dollar ceiling appropriated by the US Congress.

(3) The Department of Defense recognizes the contributions to Free World security being made by the Republic of Korea, and the ROK need for support under MAP.

d. MAP Transfer Program (1) The basic principle of the MAP Transfer Program, to encourage a country to shoulder more of the operations and maintenance cost of its defense burden, is valid. Through it a greater portion of the MAP can be devoted to investment purposes.

(2) The MAP Transfer Program must be applied with flexibility, submitting it to frequent review, extending its time phasing, or reducing it as necessary when continued implementation will result in further reduction in ROK forces below Joint Strategic Objectives Plan (JSOP) force objectives; but cancellation of the program should be avoided.

(3) As stipulated in the Military Assistance Manual, AID will support approximately two-thirds of the ROK defense budget, and the ROK defense budget should be permitted to increase to allow for the MAP Transfer.

(4) As stated in the message AIDTO Circular 573,3 execution of the MAP Transfer Program does not imply a concomitant decrease in the Korean MAP.

e. Korean Pay Raise

Provision of a pay raise is primarily an internal matter to be acted upon by the ROK Government. However, the Military Assistance Manual provides that AID will underwrite approximately two-thirds of the cost of a cost-of-living pay adjustment.

5. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that the guidelines listed above be approved. Upon approval, the Joint Chiefs of Staff will issue appropriate guidance to CINCUNC.4

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Earle G. Wheeler
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–14 KOR/UN. Secret. Attached to an October 1 letter from Green to Henry S. Rowen, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, and to an August 21 letter from Rowen to William Bundy.

2 Not printed.

3  AIDTO Circular 573, dated 16 December 1963. [Footnote in the source text; telegram in the National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19 US–S KOR.]

4  Rowen sent a copy of this memorandum to the Department of State for review and comment. Green replied on October 1 by suggesting that, although the JCS position differed from that of other agencies, the paper be sent to General Howze for his consideration. (Ibid., POL 27–14 KOR/UN)

20. Editorial Note 20. Editorial Note

On August 31, 1964, Korean Foreign Minister Yi Tong-won presented to Ambassador Brown an aide-memoire proposing a Foreign Ministers conference to be held in Seoul in April 1965 warranted by the “changing situation in Southeast Asia [that] has increased need for promotion of friendship and cooperation of free nations in area.” The Foreign Ministers of Australia, the Republic of China, Malaysia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Thailand, and South Vietnam, as well as Japan, if the attendees desired, were to be invited. The Koreans envisaged the conference serving to “maintain peace and prosperity in Asia, strengthen region's defense against Communist subversion, consolidate friendly ties, and promote economic and cultural cooperation.” The Foreign Office also believed the conference would enhance support within Korea for a settlement with Japan as well as enhance the international prestige of the Republic of Korea. (Telegram 197 from Seoul, August 31, and airgram A–135 from Seoul, September 1; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S) Initially the Department of State expressed misgivings about the feasibility of the proposal because of vagueness surrounding the purpose of the conference, doubt about the Foreign Minister's ability to organize and focus the conference, and uncertainty about the willingness of the invited countries to attend. (Telegram 196 to Seoul, September 1; ibid.)

After further consideration the Department responded that the conference could achieve positive results by fostering stronger ties among the Asian nations friendly to the United States and the Western powers, enhancing a sense of solidarity among the participants, and reducing the isolation of the Republic of Korea. (Telegram 434 to Seoul, November 18; ibid.) The Embassy in Seoul agreed in general, but believed the conference could be successful only if attended by most or all the invited Foreign Ministers. Ambassador Brown suggested that the Republic of Korea would support efforts by the United States to urge all countries to attend. (Telegram 494 from Seoul, November 24; ibid.)

On December 4 the Department of State informed the Embassy in Seoul and the other relevant Asian countries of its support for the proposed Foreign Ministers Conference. After stating the potential objectives of the meeting—strengthening intra-Asian relations, strengthening Korea's international position, reducing the feelings of isolation within Korea and the Republic of China—the Department provided a list of topics that could be fruitfully addressed at the conference: “1) security against Communist military threat”; “2) insurgency and counter-insurgency, including security, economic, social and psychological countermeasures”; “3) economic development”; and “4) expansion of regional collaboration in diplomatic, economic and perhaps other spheres.” The Department suggested that Ambassador Brown discuss those points and other aspects of the conference with the Korean Foreign Minister. (Telegram 485 to Seoul, December 4; ibid.)

Within a few days, Ambassador Brown had spoken to officials in the Foreign Office and informed Washington of Korea's ideas about the conference, of its receptivity to the Department's suggested topics and agenda, and similar matters. (Telegram 511 from Seoul, December 8; ibid.) As a result, the Department notified the Embassy in Seoul and in the Asian countries expected to participate in the conference of its renewed support for the conference. Although it did “not wish to get out in front or to appear to be promoting this conference,” the Department suggested that U.S. support for the meeting be made known and steps taken to ensure participation by as many countries as possible. (Telegram 497 to Seoul and repeated to other Asian capitals, December 10; ibid.)

21. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secreatary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 21. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secreatary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Seoul, September 3, 1964.

REF

Status of Forces, Embassy Airgram A–133, September 1, 19642

Dear Bill:

As you well know, one of our major current projects in Seoul is the negotiation of a Status of Forces Agreement. Since arriving here, I have been able to take a thorough look at these negotiations, which have been in course for two years. I find that they have now reached the stage at which the fundamental unresolved issue of waiver must be resolved or the negotiations will become deadlocked. I have just come out of a meeting with the Country Team in which we have approved a recommendation with respect to that issue which we hope may make agreement possible. This recommendation is contained in Airgram A–133.

While there are a number of unresolved differences of position, the determinative question now at issue is the very simple one of whether we continue to insist on an automatic advance waiver of jurisdiction by the Koreans in all criminal cases in which they have the right of primary jurisdiction. We have not asked, or at least we have not obtained, such a provision in any other Status of Forces Agreement to which we are a party.

All concerned here, including General Howze and his colleagues who have worked on this problem, are convinced that our proposed modification will adequately protect US interests. All of our negotiators are convinced that if we insist upon automatic advance waiver there will be no agreement. They do not think that a recess of negotiations will or can affect this basic situation.

Even after my short stay here, I do not see how any Korean government could defend in the Assembly the acceptance of such a waiver provision, involving as it does a relinquishment of sovereignty to an extent greater than that of any other country, including Japan, in which we have forces.

It is our desire to see this government negotiate and put into effect a settlement with Japan. To do so it needs every additional measure of public and legislative support which it can earn or otherwise obtain. Conclusion of a satisfactory SOFA will be a feather in its cap. Acceptance of our present waiver provision would almost certainly lead to its defeat on a major issue, if not to its downfall.

Allowing the negotiations to drag on fruitlessly would be harmful to both the government and ourselves, particularly if, as is most likely, the respective positions of the parties on the issue dividing us become known. This year we have already had student demonstrations protesting almost every issue except the SOFA negotiations. Should these negotiations now break down, it is not at all difficult to envisage future student demonstrations protesting U.S. “insincerity.”

What we propose in essence in our Airgram is that the Koreans agree in advance to grant our request for a waiver except in cases in which the ROK Government has a special interest. In our judgment these cases would be rare. However, provision would be made for a review, first by the Joint Committee which is to be set up to implement the agreement, and later by diplomatic negotiation, if necessary. If these consultations failed, the Koreans would not have to grant the waiver. We would, however, under the provision as we propose it, retain custody of the accused before, during, and after trial and through all appeal procedures. If we were convinced that someone was really being railroaded we could simply ship him out of the country, undesirable as this action would be.

Airgram A–133 was reviewed and approved by the Country Team. Because of the military chain of command, General Howze was unable to concur formally, but has informed CINCPAC of his agreement with the Embassy message. I have informally given Admiral Sharp my views during his recent visit to Korea.

Thus the position is that General Howze, all of his colleagues, and the Embassy are convinced that the provision we propose would adequately protect our personnel. We are equally convinced that insist- ence on automatic advance waiver will mean that there will be no agreement. We believe that the terms we propose, if accepted, will result in an agreement more satisfactory than SOFA's we have with other countries. We think that prompt conclusion of a SOFA is in our interest. We therefore bespeak your sympathetic consideration of our recommendation and favorable action on it.3

Sincerely yours,

Win

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15–3 KOR S-US. Confidential; Official-Informal. At the top of this document Bundy added a handwritten notation to Green: “MG—for your use. I gather Bob [Fearey] hopes to pull this together. WPB.”

2 Airgram A–133 from Seoul contained the Embassy's evaluation of the status of the SOFA negotiations and its examination of the Criminal Jurisdiction Article. (Ibid.)

3 The Department of State accepted the Embassy's approach to the issue, but redrafted the proposal to combine “an automatic advance waiver formula with a right of recall by the Korean authorities under certain specified circumstances.” The approach combined the formula contained in the SOFA agreement with the Federal Republic of Germany and the Republic of China. (Airgram A–86 to Seoul, December 1; ibid.)

22. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 22. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, September 21, 1964.

JCSM-815–64

SUBJECT

Alternative US Courses of Action in Korea Under Certain Contingencies (U)

1. In view of the possibility of a coup d'etat in the Republic of Korea (ROK) and its impact on the operational control of the Korean Armed Forces exercised by the United States through the Commander in Chief, United Nations Command (CINCUNC), the Joint Chiefs of Staff have given consideration to appropriate courses of action available to CINCUNC.

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the success of a coup may well be determined in the course of a few hours and that decisions as to the release of ROK troops and the nature of US involvement may have to be made by CINCUNC on short notice. CINCUNC should be provided appropriate guidance concerning approved courses of action available to him.

3. After considering the factors affecting the stability of the ROK Government and the nature of US involvement discussed in Appendix B hereto,2 the Joint Chiefs of Staff have concluded that: a. An attempted coup d'etat in the ROK is possible. The most likely source of successful action to unseat the present regime is the military.

b. A successful procommunist coup is unlikely due to the presence of strong United Nations and South Korean Armed Forces, effective internal security, and the anticommunist orientation of the people.

4. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that: a. The following alternative courses of action be approved and coordinated with the Secretary of State: (1) The US forces remain neutral in any power struggle by noncommunist factions, strive to avoid bloodshed, and maintain responsiveness within the ROK Armed Forces to the United Nations Command.

(2) Through the Military Assistance Program, continue current US support for pro-Western ROK Armed Forces and Government. Through the country team, support the Ambassador, as appropriate, to accelerate social and economic reforms and to eliminate corruption and illegal measures.

(3) In the event of a coup or uprising instigated by communist or other anti-US elements, the United States support the recognized government and/or those elements of the ROK Armed Forces who are unquestionably pro-US.

(4) In the event that the recognized government of the ROK requests release of ROK troops to suppress a coup or uprising, CINCUNC should comply provided it does not, in his judgment, unduly weaken his over-all military posture in Korea.

(5) On the other hand, should anti-Government leaders, even though pro-US and anticommunist, request release of ROK troops from CINCUNC control to aid in the overthrow of the ROK Government, the proposal will be referred to the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

(6) If necessary, CINCUNC as COMUS, Korea, in concert with the country team, should temporarily suspend POL and other items of the Military Assistance Program as the situation warrants.

(7) In carrying out any of the above courses of action, US support must not include the involvement of US military action without prior approval of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, except as authorized by CINCPAC OPLAN 85–63 which has been approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.3

(8) Approved US military action in support of US unilateral policy should be carried out under COMUS, Korea.

b. A memorandum substantially as contained in Appendix A hereto be forwarded to the Secretary of State.4

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Earle G. Wheeler 5
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, 381 Korea. Top Secret.

2 Appendix B, “Korean Coup Analysis,” discussed the widespread social discontent and political dissent pervading Korea stemming from economic adversity and political instability. A particular threat to the ROK Government noted in the analysis was Pak's continued support of Kim Chong-il, whose return from exile had the potential to “divide the military leaders and seriously jeopardize the stability of the regime.”

3 Appendix B explains that “CINCPAC OPLAN No. 85–63 provides for US military operations under COMUS, Korea, as a last resort, in concert with ROK forces to prevent seizure of the ROK Government in the event a coup were to be instigated by communists.”

4 Appendix A, “Alternative U.S. Courses of Action in Korea Under Certain Contingencies,” attached but not printed. William Bundy, who received a copy for review and comment, raised two objections to JCS recommendations 5 and 6 of this memorandum. Bundy believed CINCUNC and the Ambassador should retain authority to release ROK troops without channeling the request through the JCS, and he noted that, since Korea had its own refinery, a suspension of POL would be ineffective as a means to exert pressure on the ROK Government in the event of a crisis. (Letter from Bundy to Solbert, November 20; Washington National Records Center, RG 330,OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, 381 Korea) McNamara, the Department of State, and the Embassy in Seoul approved the proposal with slight modifications on July 1, 1965. (Memorandum from McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, July 1, 1965; ibid.: FRC 70 A 5127, 381 Korea)

5 Printed from a copy that indicates Wheeler signed the original.

23. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 23. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Seoul, September 21, 1964.

Dear Bill:

The Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister have spoken to me about President Pak's “intention” to visit the United States in April 1965. They requested that I consult Washington on such a visit. Obviously they are seeking an invitation for a state visit.

I am favorably disposed toward the idea. As you know, aside from his quick trip to attend President Kennedy's funeral, President Pak has not been to the United States since his official visit in 1961 when he was Chairman of the Supreme Council.

A visit in the spring of 1965 will be well-timed. I do not know what the future holds for our principle concern over the Korea-Japan question but there is no question that we will still be in the throes of trying to achieve the goal early next spring. In one way or another a Pak visit will provide the occasion for some support on the issue. If negotiations with Japan have been resumed by then and progress made, Pak will be looking for U.S. blessing to ease his task of gaining public acceptance in Korea. If the negotiations are on dead center, a visit may be used to get the ROKG moving again.

There are other matters of mutual interest that would benefit from the visit. It could be the occasion for some high level exchange on such things as force levels and economic stabilization. The Koreans would no doubt seek to gain reaffirmation of the U.S. commitment here. Moreover, President Pak will hope to use his visit to demonstrate U.S. acceptance of his government and himself. He can use such a vote of confidence and we are disposed to grant it in the interest of confirming our support for constitutionalism and orderly processes in Korea.

I am putting this proposal to you in this form in order to allow a little judicious exploring of the White House view prior to your coming here next month. If a visit from Pak in April or thereabouts is completely out of the question given President Johnson's desires and schedule, we will of course try and dissuade the Koreans. That will not be easy, as we can presume they have their hearts set on it or we would never have received the request.

We can discuss this further when you get here. We are all enthusiastically awaiting your arrival and the opportunity to share with you first hand our thoughts and interests.

Sincerely yours,

Win

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S. Confidential; Official-Informal.

24. Editorial Note 24. Editorial Note

Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs Bundy visited Seoul October 1–3, 1964. During his visit he held individual meetings with Minister of Foreign Affairs Yi, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of the Economic Planning Board Chang, Prime Minister Chong, President Pak, and Minister of National Defense Kim. The discussions focused primarily on relations between the Republic of Korea and Japan, but participants also exchanged views on defense issues, economic developments, and the unification of Korea. (Memoranda of those conversations are attached to airgram A–190 from Seoul, October 7; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, ORG 7 FE) The text of the joint statement issued by the Assistant Secretary and the Minister of Foreign Affairs on October 3 is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pages 929–930.

25. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Barnett) to the Chief of the Military Assistance Division of the Agency for International Development (Black) 25. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Barnett) to the Chief of the Military Assistance Division of the Agency for International Development (Black)1

Washington, October 5, 1964.

SUBJECT

Comments on Proposed Reduction of FY 1965 MAP for Republics of Korea and China

Korea

We are facing serious problems in trying to maintain the ROK military forces adequately with the original $146 million planned for Korea, which we believe is a rockbottom requirement.

The MAP for Korea in recent years had been in excess of $200 million, until FY 1964, when a cut to $153 million necessitated a sharp drop in investment funds. The additional $20 million cut now proposed for FY 1965 would in effect cancel all new modernization programs in 1965, with the exception of the introduction of F–5 aircraft. Some previously programmed projects probably would also be jeopardized. There would be no practical alternative to these cuts in investment, since the funding for operations has already been reduced to less than the necessary minimum. Ammunition, supplies and equipment are now in short supply for desired training programs. The Korean Government cannot at present increase its share of the burden. Partly because of the MAP Transfer Program, pressure on the Korean defense budget has made it necessary to maintain pay and allowances at a detrimentally low level.2

The present government's efforts to move forward with the settlement with Japan and with economic development are hindered by its limited public support. Of critical importance has been the support it has received from the military. The proposed cut would shortly become apparent to Korean military leaders and possibly to the political Opposition as well. It would be interpreted as evidence of lack of U.S. support of the Pak administration, and a confirmation of fears and allegations that the U.S. is engaged in a program of “withdrawal” from Korea. The capacity of the Pak administration to govern probably would be seriously impaired. The prospects for a Korean-Japanese settlement and economic progress would be greatly reduced, and the possibility that the government might be overthrown by a coup or revolt would be substantially increased.

[Here follows discussion of China.]

Robert W. Barnett 3

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19 US–KOR S. Secret.

2 At a meeting between Korean and Embassy officials on September 25, ROK Minister of Defense and Chief of Staff reported that “pay and allowance, clothing and subsistence so inadequate that commanding officers are forced to devote their efforts to morale problems at expense of troop training.” The Ambassador as well as the U.S. military leadership in Korea had been concerned about the problem for some time. (Telegram 289 from Seoul, September 26; ibid.)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

26. Airgram A–232 From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 26. Airgram A–232 From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, November 2, 1964.

[Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 1 KOR S. Secret; Limited Distribution. 4 pages of source text not declassified.]

27. Editorial Note 27. Editorial Note

Intelligence-gathering and covert political activities in Korea in 1964 were limited. Efforts were directed toward improving and coordinating intelligence collection relative to North Korea. (Memorandum from Stuart to Hughes, November 24; Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Country Files, East Asia and Pacific General File, FE Weekly Staff Meetings, 1964) Modest election and political support of less than $10,000 was extended to four moderate candidates running for seats in the National Assembly in the November 16, 1963, election. Each candidate received support in amounts ranging from $2,000 to $4,000 to supplement campaign funds from other sources. (Election and Party Support in the Far East, 1962–65, undated; ibid., East Asia Reviews, 1964 to 1966; Memorandum from Stuart to Hughes, October 25, 1963; ibid., FE Weekly Staff Meetings, 1963)

28. Memorandum of Conversation 28. Memorandum of Conversation1

Seoul, December 19, 1964, 11 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

President Pak Chong-hui

Ambassador Winthrop G. Brown

Mr. Yi Hu-rak, Secretary to the President

Colonel Cho Sang-ho, Interpreter

SUBJECT

ROK Assistance to Viet Nam

1. I told the President that we had received a very glowing report from Ambassador McGhee about the success of his visit to Bonn and the satisfaction of the German Government in it. I congratulated him on behalf of the Secretary. He said that he had been very pleased by the warmth of his reception by German officials.

2. I said the reason for my call was to deliver a message from President Johnson about Viet Nam.2

3. President Johnson was concerned about the situation in Viet Nam and was making a great effort to broaden and deepen the basis of international support for the present government. Fifteen nations and over a thousand non-Americans were already helping in Viet Nam and the presence of a ROK military unit there was very much appreciated. Nevertheless, the President was asking a number of other countries to give their support and was asking some countries, particularly Far Eastern countries, who were already contributing, to increase their contribution.

4. President Johnson was not asking for combat troops.3 This was not that kind of war. He had in mind possibly engineer or construction units, transport pilots, LST's, medical or service units. He would like to know if the Korean Government would feel able to increase its present contribution.

5. The President replied that his government wished to support the free world effort in Viet Nam in every possible way to the extent of its resources because he agreed that this was very important to the Free World and he supported the U.S. policy of helping the government of South Viet Nam. I said that President Johnson would deeply appreciate this reaction, at which point Yi Hu-rak intervened to say that the President would give his answer after he had consulted with his staff. I had already said that I did not expect the President to give me a firm answer right away, but asked that he let me know his decision soon so that General Howze could begin to discuss details with the Minister of National Defense. The President promised to do so.

6. The President said he did not know the new Viet Nam Prime Minister but had the impression that he was quite capable. I said that we felt that the Prime Minister had courage, the Deputy Prime Minister political skill, and that General Khanh was a good soldier, so we felt the government was promising. However, it had not yet achieved a firm political basis and we felt that its doing so was a fundamental prerequisite to success against the Viet Cong. Further support from the Free World would help materially in this respect.

7. The President said that he felt that more vigorous action by the United States would be helpful in defeating the Viet Cong and in getting the support of wavering neighboring countries. He said that Korea was willing to send two combat divisions if necessary. Moreover, there were a large number of recently discharged veterans in Korea who were willing to go to Viet Nam to fight if they could be equipped and transported.

8. I explained that we felt that the time had not yet come for introduction of outside combat troops but promised to pass on the President's views to President Johnson.

9. I thanked him again for his favorable reaction to our President's request.

10. Half an hour after getting back to my office I received a call from the Blue House saying that I could ask General Howze to get in touch with MND on this matter.4

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19–3 KOR S-VIET S. Secret. This memorandum along with another recording Brown's conversation with Pak concerning the MAP transfer program were transmitted in airgram A–296 from Seoul, December 21. The meeting was held at the Blue House.

2 Transmitted in telegram 531 to Seoul, December 17. (Ibid., AID VIET S)

3 The ROK Government was willing to send combat troops to Vietnam, as the Chairman of the ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff reminded the Embassy on November 3. (Telegram 425 from Seoul, November 4; ibid., DEF 19 KOR S-VIET S) The Embassy had also received information about the formation of the Freedom Defense Volunteer Corps. Being formed with support from the Korean branch of the Asian People's Anti-Communist League, the unit would purportedly fight in Vietnam or in any other country facing a Communist threat. (Airgram A–265 from Seoul, December 3; ibid., POL 13–8 KOR S)

4 After receiving information from Howze listing the Korean military-support units that could be sent to Vietnam without degrading Korean defenses, the Department of State authorized opening negotiations with the Korean Government. The Department of State noted its desire to have an “initial ROK force just over one thousand personnel” composed of engineers and similar types of units in Vietnam as soon as possible. Negotiations between Howze and General Kim Chong-O began on December 25. (Telegram UK 50915 from COMUSKOREA, December 19; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. XXIV; telegram 557 to Seoul, December 23, and telegram 573 from Seoul, December 26; both in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19 KOR S-VIET S)

29. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 29. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, December 21, 1964, 4 p.m.

557. Ref: Embtels 551 and 553.2

1. After courtesy call by Senator Monroney December 21 I took President Pak aside and said that I had thought over very carefully what he had said to me on December 18 about return of Kim Chong-p'il.3 I nevertheless continued to feel that it would cause a great deal of trouble for ROK-Japan negotiations and for political stability in Korea if KCP returned before the ROK-Japan negotiations were ended. I said that I wanted him to know that what I had said to him on Saturday was not only my own personal opinion but that I had conveyed to him this message by specific instructions of the Department of State.4

2. At these words, the President drew in his breath sharply, looked down at the floor for some time, shook his head and said: “I understand.”

3. At the door the President said that he could not force KCP to stay away but that he would try to find some way to advise him very strongly to do so. He could not say that it was because the US wanted him to stay away. Some other reason would have to be found. I agreed it would be a very great mistake if KCP were told that he would have to stay away because that was what Americans wanted. This was a Korean decision and I was simply giving the President, as a friend of his and a friend of Korea's, the advice that a friend would give when asked. I repeated that it would be a great mistake to attribute KCP's exile to pressure from the US. The President said he hoped that the US would not continue its opposition to KCP's return.

4. Above represents progress and indicates that President Pak got more of my message on December 19 than Yi Hu-rak indicated and had been thinking about it. But this battle is by no means yet won. I therefore renew recommendation para 2 Embtel 553.5

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 30 KOR S. Secret; Limdis.

2 In telegram 551 from Seoul, December 19, Brown reported on his meeting with Pak concerning the return of Kim Chong-pil, and in telegram 553 from Seoul, December 19, stated that the arguments made to Pak had not affected Pak's view that “Kim's return is now ‘set in concrete.'” (Both ibid.)

3 On December 18 Pak told Brown that he had no direct contact with Kim, that he heard from others that Kim planned to return, and that he could do nothing if Kim decided to come back to Korea. Pak also claimed that Kim's return would not affect the talks with Japan, since “Kim Chong-pil was not all that important.” (Telegram 551 from Seoul, December 19; ibid.)

4  Brown explained to Pak that Kim's “mere presence in the country would create controversy” and instability within Korea at a time when internal affairs and the talks with Japan were going well. He reminded Pak that student demonstrations earlier in the year focused on Kim's involvement in the negotiations with Japan and asked him if he wanted to risk a return of that situation by allowing Kim to reemerge in Korea. (Ibid.)

5 In telegram 553 Brown suggested that the Department of State hold a high-level meeting with Ambassador Kim to inform him that the U.S. views Kim Chong-pil's return as having a negative impact on all concerned and to instruct him to relay that message to Pak. In telegram 586 from Seoul, December 30, the Embassy reported that Kim's return was “an accomplished fact,” that Pak had reneged on his commitment to keep Kim out of Korea for at least one year, and that even the anti-Kim opposition found that “accommodation was easier than struggle.” (Ibid., POL 12 KOR S)

30. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 30. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, December 30, 1964, 7 p.m.

587. Ref: A. Embtel 578 rptd Saigon 23 CINCPAC unn; B. Deptel 572 rptd Saigon 1367 CINCPAC unn.2

1. Vice FonMin told DCM Cabinet unanimously approved proposal send non-combat troops to Vietnam late Dec 29. ROKG still hoping to receive request from GVN before Assembly action. To this end, ROK Amb Saigon has been instructed approach GVN urgently and GVN Charge Seoul called in and urged seek quick action by his govt.

2. Earlier indications were that ROKG intended submit resolution to National Assembly Dec 31 but Embassy informed late Dec 30 by Chairman ROK JCS General Kim Chong-O that submission for Assembly approval now definitely postponed until next session. Date of next session still indefinite but present indications are that it will be convened approximately Jan 10.3

3. Text of resolution drafted by ROKG for submission to Assembly being transmitted in separate message.4

4. Assume GVN will make appropriate public statement of appreciation and thanks following ROK National Assembly approval. We also recommend that statements by President and Secretary, praising ROK action as further indication of firm ROK spirit of unity with free world and support of other free world nations fighting Communist aggression.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19–2 KOR S-VIET S. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated to Saigon for COMUSMACV, Department of Defense, and CINCPAC for POLAD and passed to the White House.

2 In telegram 578 from Seoul, December 29, the Embassy reported that news of the request for Korean manpower for Vietnam had leaked to the press in Korea. In telegram 572 to Seoul, December 29, the Department of State suggested, in light of the premature publicity, that the Korean Government encourage the National Assembly to issue a resolution declaring its support for Vietnam and for dispatch of additional troops there. the Department also instructed the Embassy in Saigon to urge the South Vietnamese Government to submit its request for assistance to the Koreans. (Ibid.)

3 In telegram 576 to Seoul, December 30, the Department urged that the proposal come before the National Assembly prior to its adjournment for three reasons: (1) the United States wanted Korean troops in South Vietnam as soon as possible; (2) the request had already received publicity; and (3) United States and Korea were pressing the Vietnamese to submit their request for assistance. The telegram also requested that the Korean troops be increased to at least 2,000 men. (Ibid.)

4 Transmitted in telegram 588 from Seoul, December 30. (Ibid.) On January 8, 1965, the Korean Prime Minister of Public Information announced that the government would ask the National Assembly to approve a Vietnamese request, made on January 2, that 2,000 Korean noncombat troops be sent to South Vietnam. (Telegram 613 from Seoul, January 8, 1965; ibid.)

31. National Intelligence Estimate 31. National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, January 22, 1965.

NIE 42/14.2–65

THE KOREAN PROBLEM

The Problem

To estimate the outlook for the Republic of Korea (ROK), including the nature of the challenge from North Korea.

Conclusions

A. Certain hopeful signs appeared in South Korean political life over the past few months: President Pak has shown greater awareness of the value of persuasion and compromise in dealing with opposition; the parties are beginning to submerge factional differences, and some opposition elements have cooperated with the administration on certain less controversial issues. The economic situation has improved in certain respects, and the military has firmly supported the government. (Paras. 4–5, 15)

B. Nonetheless, there remain a number of underlying sources of instability and obstacles to achievement of a real sense of national unity and direction. The government has failed to convince many Koreans that it represents much more than a continuation of the unpopular and of the corrupt military junta which it replaced. It has shed its authoritarianism sufficiently so that active, often irresponsible, opposition elements have been able to block its initiatives and work sometimes openly for its downfall. Political conflict is often more a contest for personal power than a controversy over issues, and the regime remains ultimately dependent on the support of the ROK military. (Paras. 1–3, 11)

C. The ROK is not likely to enjoy genuine political stability in the foreseeable future, but there is at least an even chance that the next two or three years will prove reasonably tranquil if the regime can handle certain issues. Among the most critical of these are a settlement with Japan—economically desirable but politically unpopular; [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]; factionalism within the ruling Democratic Republican Party; and a variety of chronic popular grievances, particularly among students and intellectuals. Serious trouble could arise over any of these issues, and while the military is likely to support the regime in most circumstances, its support cannot be guaranteed in all cases. (Paras. 6–14)

D. Lasting stability is not likely unless further progress is made in improving a weak and imbalanced economy, heavily dependent on large-scale US assistance and burdened with serious problems of unemployment and a population growing at nearly three percent per year. Grounds for optimism are very limited, though a settlement with Japan—for which chances are about even during the next year—would help. In the best circumstances, however, the ROK will remain a petitioner for large and continuing US assistance for years to come. (Paras. 15–28)

E. We believe that, during the next few years, the unification issue is likely to represent a more insistent problem for the ROK leaders than in the past. The North will probably continue to keep the initiative on unification, and sentiment within the ROK will make it more difficult for Seoul to stand pat. Pyongyang may fare better in the UN than in the past, particularly if Communist China is admitted or otherwise significantly improves its international status. We do not believe, however, that the trend is likely either to bring about the fall of the ROK Government or move it to contemplate unification on Pyongyang's terms unless the ROK suffers a series of unprecedented domestic disasters or becomes convinced that US support is weakening. (Paras. 29–41)

[1 paragraph (5 lines of source text) not declassified]

[Here follow the Discussion section of the estimate, [text not declassified] and a map of Korea.]

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, S/P Files: Lot 72 D 139, Country Files. Secret; Controlled Dissem. According to a note on the cover sheet, the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Atomic Energy Commission, and the National Security Agency participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred with this estimate on January 22 except the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside its jurisdiction.

32. Editorial Note 32. Editorial Note

On January 26, 1965, the Korean National Assembly approved sending additional military personnel to Vietnam after contentious opposition by members of the Civil Rule Party and the Democratic Party. The Civil Rule Party, led by Yun Po-sun, distrusted the Pak regime and feared that the dispatch of more troops would leave South Korea vulnerable to North Korean subversion by weakening its defenses. Both opposition parties also criticized the Minister of Defense for making conflicting statements regarding the impetus behind the proposal, at times claiming that the Korean Government initiated the proposal to send troops to Vietnam, at others referring to a request from the Republic of Vietnam or from the United States. A Civil Rule Party member also privately informed the Embassy that because of “cuts in US foreign aid program it is doubtful USG really intends to persevere in Vietnamese war and that it is difficult to understand why ROK should send troops to become involved in situation which appears hopeless.” (Telegram 647 from Seoul, January 21; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27 VIET S; and telegrams 656 and 657, both from Seoul, January 22; ibid., DEF 19–2 KOR S-VIET S

When the proposal came before the Assembly for a vote, its passage was complicated by the Assembly's decision to vote by secret ballot. That decision prompted Yun Po-sun and 23 other members of the Civil Rule Party to walk out in protest. The dispatch of troops was approved by an overwhelming majority of the remaining members, all representing the ruling Democratic Republican Party. (Telegram 670 from Seoul, January 26; ibid.) Afterward President Pak issued a statement praising the results of the vote and characterizing it “as a signal for Korea to ‘to assume important role in world affairs.'” The opposition Civil Rule Party and Democratic Party accepted the outcome and hoped that the Korean troops would contribute to uniting the nations of the free world and to bringing peace and stability to the region. (Telegram 678 from Seoul, January 27; ibid.)

After the National Assembly approved the dispatch of additional troops, the Korean and United States Governments concentrated on the issue of the rate and method to be used to pay allowances to the Korean military personnel serving in Vietnam. In late February the United States acceded to a Korean demand for payment to be made to the Korean Government with an unvouchered cash grant to be disbursed in dollars to Korean troops. Although the United States urged that payment be limited to an allowance of one dollar per day per man, the Koreans rejected that amount as conflicting with previous promises made to the troops and as inappropriate for higher-ranking men and officers. (Telegram 768 to Seoul, February 18; ibid., DEF 19 US–KOR S) Korean officials agreed with the United States request to do everything possible to prevent disclosing that funding originated in the United States. The United States also agreed to assume all costs for the medical and tae-kwon-do units already in Vietnam. (Telegram 799 to Seoul, February 27; ibid., POL 27–3 VIET S) Additional documentation on the development of this issue is ibid.; DEF 19 KOR S-US; DEF 19 US–KOR S; and DEF 19 KOR S-VIET S.

The first of these troops, an advance party of approximately 600 men, arrived in Saigon on February 25. The remaining 1,400 troops were to arrive within the next month. (Telegram 2775 from Saigon, February 26; ibid., AID (KOR S) VIET S)

33. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 33. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, March 15, 1965, 5 p.m.

866. Country Team Message.

1. CT has considered various implications of cuts in US forces Korea which we understand are impending, for implementation between now and June 30, 1965. Our information stems from DA instructions received by COMUS Korea which indicate decision has been taken to subtract 9,000 spaces from present authorized strength of 8th US Army amounting to 51,000. The decision is reportedly based on balance-of-payments considerations.2

2. Cut of this magnitude represents reduction of about 18 percent in level of US Army Forces in Korea. This reduction in numbers of personnel would be likely sooner or later to attract public attention and give rise to rumors that US forces are “pulling out” of Korea. By the same token it would be virtually impossible to conceal fact and extent of reductions from ROKG. If we attempt to do this we are almost certain to fail, and to be accursed of bad faith by the ROKG. If, on the other hand, we inform ROKG at outset, result likely to be immediate leaks to press and National Assembly setting off widespread alarm that US is withdrawing its forces from Korea in anticipation of ROK-Japan settlement. It goes without saying that such a furor at this time would jeopardize prospect for successful conclusion that settlement which we have been expecting after so long this spring. As Dept aware, one of chief fruits ROKG seeking from forthcoming Washington visit President Pak is assurance that present US force levels will be maintained (Embtel 861).3 President and Foreign Minister have indicated that ROKG relying heavily on this and related assurances of continuing US commitment to Korea to help win public support for Korea-Japan settlement.

3. As indicated in previous para, failure on our part to give prior notification to ROKG of impending cut would give rise to accusation we not complying faithfully with our stated intention to consult with ROKG on this question. Most explicit assurance on this point was given personally by Secretary Rusk to President Pak at their meeting in January 1964 when Secretary said force reduction was not a current problem and US approach would be to examine question later on in consultation with Korean Govt (93540, para 32, Jan 31, 1964).4 Whether or not our recommendation given below that cut be postponed is accepted we believe that we must honor this commitment, at least by going through motions of consultation.

4. However, now is not a good time to hold such consultations. It would spoil the atmosphere which both we and the ROKG hope to generate for President Pak's forthcoming visit to Washington and for the successful conclusion Korean-Japan talks. A settlement with Japan is almost within grasp; the outcome will be known, probably with certainty, before June 30. We believe that this accomplishment which for years has been a paramount objective of US policy in East Asia is so vitally related to the US national interest that the balance of payments savings which would accrue from the contemplated reduction over the next few months can and should be foregone until the outcome of the current negotiations is decided one way or the other.

5. Our rough estimate is that the reduction contemplated might reduce total US military spending in Korea by somewhere between $5 million and $10 million annually depending on how the reductions are carried out.CT does not deprecate the contribution this reduction in spending would make to a solution of our balance of payments problem, although doubting that it will be entirely a net gain to US in view US position as residual supporter of ROK balance of payments. Meeting high priority US objectives for Korean economic development may require additional offsetting supporting assistance.

6. Ideally, as set forth in agreed language of draft national policy paper on Korea, now in process final revision Washington,5 we believe no reductions in either ROK or US forces should be considered until after Korea-Japan normalization. In accordance with that carefully thought out recommendation we strongly urge that any reduction in US Forces Korea be postponed until a suitable period after a settlement with Japan is reached this year. If a settlement is reached, say by June 1, our judgment is that a period of at least six months should be allowed for the dust of that action, and its ratification by the National Assembly, to settle. Consultations with the ROKG on reduction of US Forces could then begin toward the end of the year.

7. General Howze, as member Country Team, agrees with general sense of foregoing subject to qualification that as CG 8th Army he is not appealing decision to carry out strength cut.

Doherty

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19–2 US–KOR S. Secret; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD and the Department of Defense.

2 Reduction of forces in Korea was part of an effort to reduce U.S. military expenditures around the world, except in Vietnam, and improve the U.S. balance-of-payments position by maintaining overseas military forces at the September 30, 1964, level. Additional documentation on proposed reductions in Korea is ibid.

3 In telegram 861 from Seoul, March 12, the Embassy outlined the subjects Pak wanted to discuss during his Washington visit. With regard to Korea's security, Pak wanted to maintain U.S. and Korean force levels, increase MAP funds, and modernize Korean military equipment. (Ibid., POL 7 KOR S) The Minister of National Defense had also raised the issue of maintaining U.S. force levels in Korea during the negotiations in January on sending Korean forces to Vietnam. (Telegram 621 to Seoul, January 18, and telegram 658 from Seoul, January 22; ibid., DEF 19 KOR S-VIET S)

4 Not found, but telegram UK 60079 from CINCUNC, January 31, 1964, contains Rusk's comments to Pak on the question of force reduction. (Ibid., POL 27 KOR S) The joint communique released at the conclusion of Rusk's visit also addressed the issue; see footnote 4, Document 3.

5 The National Policy Paper on the Republic of Korea, consisting of Part 1, “U.S. Policy,” November 9, 1965, and Part 2, “Factors Bearing on U.S. Policy,” August 1965, is in the National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, S/P Files: Lot 72 D 139, Country Files.

34. Editorial Note 34. Editorial Note

Foreign Minister Yi Tong-won visited Washington March 15–17, 1965. He met with Secretary Rusk on March 15 to discuss current Korean problems, including the situation in Vietnam, the Korea-Japan settlement, North Korea, the pending Status of Forces Agreement, economic matters, and similar issues. On March 16 the Foreign Minister met separately with Vice President Humphrey, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs Bundy, and Secretary of Defense McNamara, with whom many of the same issues were discussed, particularly Vietnam and the settlement with Japan. Before leaving Washington, the Foreign Minister also met briefly with President Johnson to exchange greetings and accept the President's thanks for Korea's support in Vietnam and his congratulations on the progress made thus far toward reaching an agreement with Japan.

Documentation covering the Foreign Minister's visit is in the National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 15–1 KOR S; POL 2 KOR S;POL KOR S-US; POL JAPAN–KOR S; POL 7 KOR S; DEF 15–3 KOR S-US; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA: FRC 70 A 3717, 333 Korea; and Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Park Visit, May 1965. The joint communique resulting from the visit is in Department of State Bulletin, April 5, 1965, page 491.

35. Special National Intelligence Estimate 35. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, March 19, 1965.

SNIE 10–4–65

PROBABLE COMMUNIST REACTIONS TO DEPLOYMENT
OF A ROK COMBAT DIVISION FOR BASE SECURITY DUTY IN SOUTH VIETNAM

The Estimate

1. We do not believe that the introduction of one ROK combat division into South Vietnam for static defense purposes would provoke Communist China, North Korea, or North Vietnam overtly to invade South Korea or South Vietnam. Neither do we believe that it would in itself change Communist attitudes toward negotiations, or lead to a slackening of the insurrection in South Vietnam.

2. The main question is what interpretation the Communists would put on the introduction of the full ROK combat division. They would almost certainly estimate that it would not in itself significantly alter the military situation. They might consider, however, that it portended a substantial further buildup of foreign forces—e.g., Chinese Nationalist, Thai, Philippine, and US—for ground combat. Whatever their estimate on this point, they would try to discourage such a buildup. To this end they would increase their propaganda, and again accuse the US of recklessly expanding the war. They would probably employ the theme of “US use of Asians to fight Asians” and attempt to stir up troubles between the ROK forces and the Vietnamese.

3. The Communists would probably supplement their propaganda with some sorts of action. The North Koreans would almost certainly attempt to arouse protests in South Korea against the export of South Korean forces. They might make threatening military movement within North Korea or along the DMZ, designed to reinforce any doubts the South Korean or other governments might have about the wisdom of thus diverting their troops. We think it unlikely that North Korean ground force “volunteers” would be sent to North Vietnam, though it is possible that North Korean technicians or anti-aircraft personnel (possibly SAM operators) might be brought in. In South Vietnam, Viet Cong terrorist efforts and military harassment might be directed against the ROK forces in the hope that casualties would cause discontent in South Korea and also serve as a warning to other potential foreign contingents.

4. Communist China might attempt to scare off further US-initiated strengthening moves in South Vietnam by deploying Chinese forces southward toward the North Vietnam border. We do not believe, however, that China would do much else. It would be unlikely to counter by sending a Chinese division to the DRV because it would be unneeded there and probably uninvited. If it had decided for independent reasons, to send more or less overt anti-aircraft or fighter plane units, it might seize upon the introduction of the ROK division in the South as further justification for doing so.

5. The introduction of a ROK division would add one more complication to an already difficult situation for Moscow. It would provide a new occasion for the DRV to put pressure on the USSR for more and quicker military aid. The USSR might agree to North Vietnamese requests for greater or speedier assistance, although we doubt that this would take forms which substantially increased the risks of direct Soviet involvement. It would also diminish somewhat any USSR hopes that negotiations could still be arranged.

1 Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 99, SNIE 10–4–65. Top Secret; Controlled Dissem; Limited Distribution. According to a note on the cover sheet, the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense and of the National Security Agency participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred with this estimate on March 19 except the representatives of the Atomic Energy Commission and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

36. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara 36. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, March 22, 1965.

Dear Bob:

I am writing about our protracted negotiations with Korea and the Republic of China concerning status of forces arrangements for those countries. In each case, the negotiation is now centered upon the difficult and sensitive issue of criminal jurisdiction over our forces. Given the importance attached to the negotiations in these two countries, and the prolonged delay in reaching agreement, I believe that the way in which we now handle the criminal jurisdiction issue will have a significant bearing on our future political relationship with both governments.2

Our present position accepts in each case that the host government will have discretion to exercise some criminal jurisdiction over our personnel. We have designed our proposals, however, to take account of certain inadequacies in the local systems of judicial administration. First, we have insisted that our exposure to local jurisdiction be sharply reduced from the outset. We have demanded that these governments waive their primary jurisdiction in advance and agree that this waiver can be recalled (and their jurisdiction exercised) only in cases of major importance arising from certain types of offenses. Secondly, we are insisting on a variety of protections for those cases in which their jurisdiction might ultimately come to be exercised. These include an extensive list of fair trial guarantees, the presence of our trained observers at all proceedings, and U.S. custody of the accused throughout all proceedings.

Neither the Koreans nor the Chinese regard our proposals as reasonable, or as really consistent with their sovereignty. Both are clearly concerned that their acquiescence in these arrangements would not be defensible against internal or external criticism. The Koreans have rejected the waiver arrangement, although they have shown flexibility on the procedural safeguards and custody. The Chinese have accepted the waiver proposal (which gives them greater latitude than in the Korean case for recall of the waiver), but they have done so with obviously great reluctance and diffidence, and only subject to our making concessions in the important area of U.S. custody. The Chinese have told us that in their view they are being offered a composite of the worst of our status of forces and base rights arrangements world-wide.

Considering the long delay in reaching mutually satisfactory agreements with the Koreans and Chinese, and their reactions to our proposals, I have felt compelled to re-examine our position on the criminal jurisdiction issue. I certainly do not question that any formula we agree upon must offer adequate protection for our personnel. However, I think we should be careful not to overlook any more negotiable alternatives which would also provide such protection. I am particularly anxious to find an alternative because I do not believe our present position (even if it could be negotiated by some further application of pressure) would be politically viable. On the contrary, I believe it would leave a considerable residue of political bitterness affecting our broader national interests in these two countries. I have no doubt that the effects would be notable in the implementation of the status of forces agreements themselves. For example, we could expect to find both governments determined to exercise the full limit of the restricted jurisdiction available to them, rather than disposed to leave any of these cases in our hands.

I am convinced that in the circumstances we should propose to these two countries the same waiver formula we use in the Federal Republic of Germany. The effect would be to make illustrative, rather than definitive, the list of offenses in which the host government could exercise jurisdiction. However, the host government would still be bound by rigorous criteria in electing to exercise its jurisdiction. For example, it would still be necessary that the host country's exercise of jurisdiction be required by major interests arising out of the special circumstances of a specific case. We would feel justified to intercede through diplomatic channels if the propriety of the host state's action under this stringent criterion were questionable. In respect of jurisdiction actually exercised by these two governments, the accused would be afforded the protection of those fair trial guarantees we consider necessary and a U.S. observer would be present during the trial proceedings. The U.S. would retain custody of the accused throughout all judicial proceedings and would not surrender the accused in any case where the accused had not been accorded a fair trial. On this basis, I feel that the so-called “German formula” would adequately provide for the protection of our personnel.

We believe that the German formula would be negotiable with the Chinese and Koreans, and without establishing a residue of resentment and noncooperation, because it is in force with a major European ally and is appropriate to their forward-area location. Its justifiability on these grounds will be of great importance if our current discussions of criminal jurisdiction with the Philippines should produce an agreement there. In the Philippines, for a variety of reasons, we have proposed a formula which is much more favorable to the host state, and we will be pleased if we can get it. We must of course anticipate that there will be disparity between the Philippine settlement on the one hand, and the Chinese and Korean arrangements on the other. I believe this can be managed if the latter arrangements involve the German formula, because it can be justified by precedent and on the merits. If the disparity were to be greater, as our present position would make it, I can only anticipate that our difficulties with the Chinese and Koreans will be exacerbated sharply.

At this writing, we are uncertain how fast the Philippine negotiations will proceed, but there is some indication today that they may move rapidly. If so, this would compound the problem with the Chinese and Koreans. But that problem would exist in any case, even if the Philippine negotiations were delayed, as there is the greatest possible evidence that the Chinese and Koreans have been watching closely the progress in each other's negotiations, and that both are well aware of the Philippine aspect.

I would therefore appreciate it if you could concur in our working out new instructions to Seoul and Taipei, embodying the German waiver formula.

With warm regards,

Sincerely,

Dean

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 1266, Korea 013. Secret.

2 Additional documentation on the criminal jurisdiction issue is in the National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15–3 KOR S-US.

37. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 37. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, March 30, 1965, 7 p.m.

931. Ref: Deptel 902.2 Subject: ROK Combat Forces for Vietnam.

1. Proposal to dispatch ROK combat division to Vietnam in present circumstances would present problem and involve consideration quite different from those surrounding dispatch of non-combat units. It involves factors which have probably not been fully presented to or even considered by Foreign Minister Lee Tong-won.

2. Sending ROK division to Vietnam would require approval of National Assembly and wide and free-ranging public discussion at a time when ROKG is engaged in major struggle in effort to normalize relations with Japan. This struggle likely to continue for at least two months and possibly longer. It may involve very survival of the government in face of determined opposition effort to create turmoil. We can say with certainty based on recent experience that this proposal would arouse strong objections and require great deal of attention from a govt already harassed.

3. Opposition politicians vigorously opposed dispatch of 2,000 non-combat troops to Vietnam. Their opposition to this new proposal will be even stronger. Opposition press can be counted on to oppose and to introduce strong element of doubt about wisdom of greater Korean participation in Vietnam. This has already begun in comments on news report from Washington of FonMin's reported offer to Secretary Rusk of further troops. Students, who were not on campus at time of National Assembly debate over ROK IMAF last January, will interject themselves and at least a vociferous minority among them is likely to oppose. Hue and cry will bewilder general public and generate uneasiness and fear of consequences of greater Korean participation in distant undeclared war when known enemy is nearby and their own daily problems appear so difficult. Adding controversy over this issue to other current controversies would weaken government at time when maximum strength is needed for ratification ROK-Japan agreement. Reservations about troop dispatch expressed previously by elements in DRP will be stronger and thus make it more difficult for govt to obtain National Assembly approval for the settlement by simple exercise of its majority.

4. Top leadership of govt feels greater readiness to expand Korea's contribution than any other sector of Korean society. President Pak, some Cabinet officers, and majority of military leadership are bold in vision and want ROK to play greater role in East Asia. They would in normal circumstances probably be quite prepared to act provided their conditions were satisfied. Nevertheless, we believe even this leadership would hesitate to take on task of sending combat division to Vietnam at this time. Their plate is full and before any more is added at least ROK-Japan issue must be out of way.

5. We therefore conclude time is not now propitious.

6. It would moreover in our judgment be undesirable to take up question with ROKG before or during Pak visit to Washington if, as now seems likely, ROK-Japan settlement not yet ratified and visit viewed primarily as aid to ROKG in getting ratification. In addition to certainty that proposal would lead to press, problem of negotiating suitable package for Pak on that occasion would be greatly complicated by US request for combat troops, especially since if request were made initial response would probably be affirmative but be followed immediately by second thoughts and stipulation of long list of conditions on points covered below. We recognize that it might seem strange if request were presented to ROKG soon after Pak returned without having been discussed during Washington visit. Nevertheless, on balance we think it better to defer raising matter with ROKG until after ratification, recognizing that Washington's judgment on this will be made in light of relative importance attached in short term to ROK-Japan settlement on one hand and reenforcement in Vietnam on other. If by chance ratification already in hand, Pak visit would be logical time to raise matter with ROKG.

7. In more normal political situation that is likely to obtain after ratification of ROK-Japan settlement, our present judgment is that ROKG, as distinguished from public, would wish to respond affirmatively to US request for combat division for Vietnam. We expect govt's position will be strengthened by successful conclusion Japanese settlement, although immediate aftermath will probably see Cabinet shakeup. Koreans remain fundamentally anti-Communist, with some pride in their willingness to stand at side of a country threatened by common enemy. It is not difficult for Koreans to recognize enemy even when he is distant and they do remember being helped in their own adversity. Many volunteers among veterans of ROK Army are ready to come forward, partly from a spirit of adventure and partly in hope of useful employment and financial gain. Even after ratification opposition would still oppose, as they did last January, and there would be nationwide discussion and debate, but with assurances and help from US (extent of these would be vitally important), proper preparation of public opinion, and good management, govt would stand sufficient chance of getting National Assembly approval to justify the effort.

8. In official and public consideration this action, there would be concern over possibility of greater danger along DMZ, where status quo would appear subject to change with Korean engagement in open conflict against Communist elements elsewhere. We agree with Dept's estimate that chances of all-out conflict on border between North and South Korea are not great. We do not exclude possibility of North Korean demonstration along DMZ (e.g. more fire fights, artillery fire on Paeng Yan-do or even large scale bombardment) to generate fear, inspire movement of refugees, etc. Whether danger is actually greater or not, many Koreans would raise question whether their country's actions in Vietnam might not endanger their own country's peace.

9. There would be some concern over legality sending combat troops to Vietnam in absence treaty obligation. This was raised by opposition and some newspapers during debate over sending non-combat troops and can be expected to be repeated with call for some form of formal treaty relationship which would sanction such intervention.

10. Many Koreans would question their ability share burden of collective security when their own problems are great and their progress is slow. They would question need for greater Korean role, when other free nations in Asia have not yet made contribution equivalent to their own. This questioning would be directed particularly at Japan's failure to help, at the wisdom of sterilizing the Chinese nationalists, at slowness of Philippines to act, and at the relatively modest contributions of Australia and New Zealand. Some responsible Korean military figures might question publicly (as they already have privately, e.g. commander of advance party for ROK IMAF and General Kim Chong-O) feasibility of employing Korean combat units in guerrilla war in foreign environment, under difficult tactical and logistical conditions.

11. Material aspects will loom large in Korean calculations, both official and private. Persuasion and appeals to rally to common cause will be useful, but special inducements on large scale will be necessary. Pressure will not work and should not be attempted. Volunteer aspect would need to be stressed to minimize complaints that comscripts being sent abroad to fight in undeclared war.

12. ROKG would seek firm assurances US forces in Korea would not be reduced and revision of US–ROK Mutual Security Treaty to secure US commitment along lines NATO formula as insurance against any increase in threat from North. Any proposal that one US division be shifted from Korea as part of build-up in Vietnam would be vigorously opposed and would increase effectiveness of opposition arguments that Korean interests were being sacrificed.

13. ROKG would expect all expenses of operation to be borne by US. This would include transportation, logistical requirements, special overseas allowances, and any other cost factors involved. For force of say 21,000 men this would be substantial amount. ROKG will almost certainly ask that division sent to Vietnam be replaced as soon as possible by activating a new division at US expense.

14. To bolster their defenses against what they would consider as substantially increased risk to their own security, ROKG would vigorously seek more military support to fill budgetary and military deficiencies, including suspension MAP transfer, increased military budget support, and expanded MAP levels. ROKG would expect to get substantial benefit from sale of goods to Vietnam under US aid financed program, and from maintenance and repair services which Korea can supply. This subject has been getting considerable attention in ROKG ever since their troops went to Vietnam. ROKG would also expect its active role in Vietnam to be reflected in US economic aid levels in Korea. Their argument would be such—if Korea is to help abroad it needs to be strengthened internally. It is not yet ready to bear extra burdens.

15. To sum up, we see formidable proposal [opposition?] and long drawn-out debate over proposal. Present time is particularly difficult, but under any foreseeable circumstances govt will have trouble and public opinion is certain to be divided. Extensive inducements will be required and cost will be great. But if approached after ROK-Japan ratification and with assurances of generous support from US, our present best judgment is that govt response is likely to be affirmative. National Assembly approval can be hoped for but cannot be assured.

16. We believe that question also has implications for the long-run psychology of US–ROK relationship which we are examining and which may affect judgments expressed above pro or contra. For example public debate of this question may give Koreans greater feeling of equality and partnership with the US, helping to compensate for age-old inferiority complex and fear of Japan, and contribute to a new sense of national confidence. On other hand, many Koreans may begin to question whether US–ROK relationship evolving into one in which ROK becomes tool which US uses for own political and strategic purposes instead of independent object of US assistance and support. These possible effects involve larger question of how both we and Koreans envisage not only their relationship with the US but their own changing role in Asia and the speed of that transition.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Nodis.

2 Not found.

38. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Vance) 38. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Vance)1

Washington, April 13, 1965.

Cy—

Bill Bundy and Dean Rusk feel that we have reached a point where we must settle quickly the criminal jurisdiction issue that has been with us off and on over the past ten years in Korea and Taiwan. Bill is particularly anxious to get a favorable Defense reaction to State's proposed solution before Henry Lodge leaves this weekend to talk the Koreans into increasing their effort in Vietnam.2

The Services and the Chiefs have taken a hard position against State's proposal but, on close analysis, it turns out that the difference between them and State is only of degree and approach. I am satisfied that State's proposal protects adequately Defense's interest (including the GIs'). General Howze and Admiral Gentner, speaking individually, have also indicated that State's proposal is satisfactory.

John T. McNaughton

Attachment

SUBJECT

Chinese and Korean Status of Forces Negotiations—Criminal Jurisdiction

This memorandum recommends your concurrence in Secretary Rusk's criminal jurisdiction proposal (Tab A)3 for the Chinese and Korean Status of Forces negotiations. The Service Secretaries and the Joint Chiefs of Staff non-concur (Tabs B–E).4

The issue is the extent to which the host states would have the option to exercise criminal jurisdiction over US personnel. Everyone is agreed that the US would have jurisdiction over official duty offenses and those involving only US personnel or property. In the remaining cases, the Services and the Joint Chiefs of Staff want to continue to press for limiting the host state's option to exercise jurisdiction to definitive categories of cases (e.g. rape, death of a human being and robbery). They are concerned by reports of corruption, bribery and political influence which, in their judgment, may have an impact that would not be readily detectable by US observers in the administration of justice by the courts of these countries. Through the definitive categories formula, they hope to reduce the exposure of US personnel to the local courts. Secretary Rusk believes that the definitive categories formula is not negotiable since it is without precedent and that, in any case, it is not necessary. He recommends we offer instead the jurisdiction formula in effect with the Federal Republic of Germany. Under this formula, the host state is not limited to specific categories of cases. However, before the Chinese or Korean authorities could exercise jurisdiction in a given case, they would have to determine that the particular circumstances of that case make their exercise of jurisdiction imperative. This stringent criterion would in Secretary Rusk's judgment limit the number of cases in which the host states would exercise jurisdiction. (The memorandum at Tab F from the Acting General Counsel discusses both sides of the issue in greater detail.)

The difference in positions is basically one of degree and approach. No one contends that we must not accept some local exercise of jurisdiction over US personnel. It is a matter of judgment as to which formula is negotiable and which, if accepted, would work better over the longer term. The Acting General Counsel considers that either formula is acceptable from a legal point of view.

Given all the circumstances, I believe that the totality of the safeguards incorporated in Secretary Rusk's proposal is adequate to protect our personnel. The Rusk proposal would require Korea and China to accept a far less favorable arrangement than we have offered to the Philippines. I share his judgment that the German formula is a reasonable solution to a difficult problem and that to continue to press for the definitive categories formula would jeopardize our present excellent relationships without any appreciable increase in protection for our personnel.

If you approve Secretary Rusk's proposal, I will notify the Services and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and have appropriate instructions sent to Seoul and Taipei.5

John T. McNaughton 6

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330,OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 1266, Korea 013. Secret. A copy of the attachment was sent to the Secretary of Defense.

2  Lodge visited Korea on April 27 during a trip to 10 Asian countries April 19–May 1 made at President Johnson's request. A copy of Lodge's report to the President is in the National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66,POL 27–3 VIET S. Lodge's mission in Korea was to explain the current situation in Vietnam and to raise the possibility of Korea furnishing a 4,000-man regimental combat team to Vietnam. (Telegram 2754 to Tokyo, repeated to Seoul as telegram 1039, April 25; ibid., POL 27–14 KOR/UN; additional relevant documentation is ibid., POL 27–3 VIET S)

3  Document 36.

4 None of the tabs is printed.

5  Vance approved the proposal on April 15.

6 Printed from a copy that indicates McNaughton signed the original.

39. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 39. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, April 15, 1965.

1008. For Bundy. Ref: Deptel 982.2 ROK Troops for Vietnam.

Following telegram was on point of despatch when reftel received. It is nevertheless transmitted in order to stress importance in Korea of really substantial contributions by other countries, and in the hope that at least some of the considerations set forth therein may be helpful to Ambassador Lodge in his efforts to secure same.

1. Following are further thoughts referred to in last para Embtel 931.3

2. The basic danger to be averted if possible lies deeper than the immediate questions of whether ROKG will respond affirmatively to a request and the extent of political difficulties in National Assembly. It is the risk of creating a situation in which Korea appears to its own people and to others in the world not as an independent and willing contributor to a struggle in which it has a vital interest, but as a puppet or vassal of the US, brought into danger in distant Southeast Asia and at home to serve the interests of the US. If Korea is the only country besides the US which sends significant combat units to SVN, such an impression can be created. It certainly will be fostered and exploited to the utmost by the opposition here and if established will corrode US/ROK relationship.

3. Despite forthcoming attitude of President Pak and other leaders, Koreans generally are not yet psychologically prepared play large role on international stage. Conscious of economic and political weakness Koreans are preoccupied with proximate interests, e.g. normalization with Japan, unification, and with domestic problems. Country is divided, government is still weak and economy requires large scale external aid. Living under shadow of two most powerful Communist countries, its relations with nearest free world neighbor (Japan) are just, with difficulty, being restored to normal. With other free world and neutral nations, ROK has problem maintaining and extending recognition as only legitimate government in Korea. Thus by ordinary standards ROKG in no position to play important international role or to give economic or military assistance.

4. Relations with SEA countries (RVN itself, Thailand, Philippines and Malaysia) are friendly enough, and Thai and Filipino troops fought in Korean War. Except for thin layer of leadership in govt, however, Koreans do not think of themselves as heavily involved in SEA problems by virtue of either political or economic interests there.

5. ROKG's traditional anti-communism, the immense stake of all Asia, including Korea in free world success in SVN, Korea's special relationship with US and existence of large and powerful ROK military force in being, all constitute persuasive arguments for invoking ROK assistance. But strength of these arguments is diluted so long as US NATO partners remain aloof, and Asian allies much closer to scene, much further from enemy and with more obviously direct interest in SE Asia, e.g. Thailand and Philippines, do not send combat troops in any substantial number. Moreover, mission Korean forces in Korean eyes is to defend ROK, and if not needed for that purpose, many Koreans would wish to see force reduced. Force is not now adequately MAP supported and pay and allowances are heavy drain on limited budgetary resources which will be increasingly needed for local costs of economic development program. On other hand existence of unemployment on large scale in ROK will pre-dispose many in favor of sending volunteers to fight in Vietnam. This feeling especially strong among veterans. A division of volunteers would create far less domestic political difficulty, but would of course take much longer to activate and make ready.

6. These considerations emphasize importance of substantial contribution of forces by other countries to counteract impression ROK forces being used as mercenaries to fight US war in SE Asia. We recognize that Japan is not expected to contribute forces at this time, but reasons are not appreciated in ROK. A substantial economic contribution from Japan for Vietnam would at least help to lessen objections in Korea that other Asian countries not making proportionate sacrifices.

7. Finally, strong and stable Korea is important anchor for our security interests in Far East. Our concern is whether those interests will be best served by contributions of manpower in SVN, if that contribution adds to instability and weakness here. Chief domestic political task for present ROKG is to build public confidence which it now lacks. Before sending even volunteers to fight in RVN, it ought to be sure of broad measure of public support over and above majority party approval in National Assembly. Externally chief task is to ensure normalization results in successful ROK-Japan relationship. Active role of Korean military in RVN might well have adverse impact upon developing relations with Japan. We would value Amb Reischauer's judgment on this question.

8. Foregoing is submitted for consideration by Washington, along with the many other relevant factors of which we cannot have adequate understanding, in making decision whether to ask ROK to provide combat troops for SVN, and as possibly useful background for Ambassador Lodge on his trip.”

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. No time of transmission appears on the telegram.

2 In telegram 982 to Seoul, April 14, the Department of State acknowledged the political difficulties arising from the troop issue in Korea and stated the “urgent need for introduction of additional Korean, Australian and New Zealand troops in SVN.” The Department wanted the ROK to furnish a 3,000-man regimental combat team, with the probable future requirement of one division. (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

3  Document 37.

40. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 40. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, April 26, 1965, 2:51 p.m.

1042. Embtel 1072.2 We appreciate desirability giving Pak frank picture our possible future plans, but there are grave drawbacks to telling him now that we may eventually ask for as much as a division.

Basic factor is, as stated in our 1039,3 that we are most anxious avoid any publicity for deployments before they are firmly agreed with GVN and preferably before they actually arrive. We realize that in case of ROK units alerting and shipping arrangements alone would probably lead to necessity for announcement well prior to arrival, and it is for this reason, in part, that we did not visualize ROK RCT, even if fully agreed, closing SVN until mid-June at earliest.

Secondly, if we do go through with proposed additional 2–3 enclaves, we are most anxious to have this appear—as indeed is the fact—as a limited measure to secure particular areas and conduct limited operations from them. Any foreshadowing of much greater deployments to come would jump the gun in view of the very tentative character of our thinking at this point, and would inevitably create the impression that we were simply moving inexorably to a large ground involvement. Obviously, if Pak were to seek Assembly approval for a ROK division, even if he made it clear that it would not be dispatched immediately in toto, it would inevitably lead to conclusion by press and other governments that if ROK was considering a force of this size we ourselves must have in mind something very much greater.

For these reasons it seems to us vital that Pak not seek any Assembly approval for a division at least before the end of June and probably not until we have had a much better chance to evaluate effectiveness of more limited deployments now contemplated. It also seems to us, unless you can be really sure of security factor, that it would be most risky to tell him firmly that we even have in mind the possibility of a division-size ROK combat contribution. If it is humanly possible, we must take this thing one bite at a time in order to avoid most serious consequences in GVN and in world attitudes.

We suppose that part of your problem is that ROK Assembly may recess during summer. We wonder, however, if it could not be recalled if required.

Hence, we would vastly prefer you stick to original instructions while not foreclosing possibility additional contribution might later be requested. Please handle accordingly unless you have reply comments.

Moreover, any publicity even for RCT proposal at this time would be most inopportune. We do not have GVN reaction to any additional deployments and would need to work out details even when and if both GVN and Pak are agreeable in principle. Moreover, exact timing of any public indication—much less formal seeking Assembly approval—will have to be weighed very carefully in total picture of public impact added deployments. Hence, you should make perfectly clear to Pak that we would need to consult very closely with him on future handling and that all publicity must be avoided for now.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Bundy, cleared by Hilliker, and approved by Bundy. Repeated to Saigon.

2 The Embassy in Seoul received confirmation that Washington recognized that a request for ROK forces for Vietnam “might rise to scale of one division (18,000 men) in later stage if required,” although the Koreans were not to be informed of that possibility at present. (Telegram 1040 to Seoul, April 26; ibid.) The Embassy responded in telegram 1072, April 26, that, because the National Assembly would have to approve the dispatch of additional troops, Pak should be informed from the start so that he could decide whether to “seek authority in advance to dispatch up to division-size contingent rather than tackle problem piecemeal.” (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 1039 to Seoul, also sent to Tokyo as telegram 2745, April 25, outlined the approach Lodge should take in his meeting with Pak when raising the question of Korea providing additional troops to Vietnam. Lodge was instructed “to mention to Pak personally that there may arise a possibility that a ROK combat contribution on the order of a regimental combat team (about 4,000 men) would become desirable within the next two months.” (Ibid., POL 27–14 KOREA/UN)

41. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 41. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, April 27, 1965.

1082. Following is draft memo of private conversation between Amb Lodge and President Pak, which has not been cleared by Amb Lodge. This followed more general discussion being separately reported.2

1. Amb Lodge said that President Johnson wants President Pak to know, for his personal ears only, that an appraisal of the situation in South Viet Nam indicated that it might be necessary to introduce additional troops. The possibility of asking Korea to contribute a regimental combat team of perhaps 4,000 men was being discussed with PriMin Quat. No conclusions had yet been reached. Hence the Amb was not making any specific request, but he did want President Pak to know that such a request might be forthcoming.

2. The President said that any request for further assistance from Korea would be given very serious consideration. He could assure Amb Lodge that Korea would do what it could to help.

3. The President said that the Korean Amb in Saigon (Sin Xang-ch'ol) was concerned that there were not sufficient combat troops in South Viet Nam adequately to protect the 2,000 non-combat troops which had been sent there.3 This was a matter which had been under consideration by his govt. There had been opposition in some quarters to the dispatch of the 2,000 non-combat troops to South Viet Nam. Some of this came from people who were ignorant, some from people who were dubious about the policies being pursued in Viet Nam, and some was just political opposition. All of these matters would have to be considered, and also questions on timing. The President would consider them and would continue the discussion of this question with Amb Brown.

4. Amb Lodge said we very much appreciated President Pak's forthright response to his remarks, and that Amb Brown would be in touch with the President when the matter had been further considered in Saigon and Washington. He stressed the importance that no word of this suggestion should get out to the public because of the obvious embarrassment that would be caused to all concerned in Saigon, Seoul, Washington, and in any other countries that might contribute, by premature disclosure. The President said he fully appreciated the necessity for secrecy.

5. The President then said that he wished to mention the matter of the settlement with Japan. He asked Amb Lodge to assure President Johnson that the Korean Govt was determined to complete the settlement with Japan. There would be opposition. There would probably be further demonstrations. There would be difficulty in the Assembly. But the President was convinced that the majority of the Korean people supported that settlement and that the govt would be able to secure its ratification. He said that he had hoped that the agreement would be signed before he left for Washington. Practical considerations of drafting, etc., however, made this very difficult. He thought now that it probably would be signed by the end of May, perhaps when he came back. The agreement might be submitted to the Assembly at the end of June or early July when, he said, with a smile, it was very hot and people would be less inclined to protracted debate and struggle.

6. The President closed by asking Amb Lodge to assure President Johnson that he was in full support of President Johnson's policies and that he intended to tell President Johnson personally when he saw him in Washington.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. No time of transmission appears on the telegram. Also sent to the White House and repeated to Saigon for Lodge.

2 A summary of Lodge's general discussion of Vietnam with Pak and other high-level Korean officials was transmitted in telegram 1085 from Seoul, April 28. (Ibid., POL 7 US/LODGE) Additional documentation on the Lodge visit to Seoul is ibid. and POL 27–3 VIET S.

3 The Embassy in Saigon was puzzled by Pak's claim and noted that Korean forces included an infantry battalion and a company of marines, were stationed in a relatively secure area close to U.S. and Vietnamese air bases, and had reinforced their installations with sandbags and trenches. (Telegram 3607 from Saigon, May 1; ibid.)

42. Memorandum of Conversation 42. Memorandum of Conversation1

Seoul, May 6, 1965.

PARTICIPANTS

The Minister of National Defense, Kim Song-un

Army Chief of Staff, Lt. General Chang Ch'ang-kuk

Assistant Vice Minister of National Defense, Major General Chang U-chu

An Interpreter

Ambassador Winthrop G. Brown

Edward W. Doherty, Minister-Counselor

1. Ambassador Brown called on the Minister of National Defense at the latter's request to clarify Washington attitudes toward various requests for assistance previously made by the Minister. Minister Kim opened the conversation by asking what Ambassador Brown had heard from Washington.

2. Ambassador Brown said that he now had a reply from Washington covering the four main points raised by Minister Kim.2 Washington's position was along the lines Ambassador Brown had expected and had warned Minister Kim to expect.

3. On measures to expand trade with South Vietnam, Ambassador Brown said the U.S. Government would be as helpful as possible consistent with the requirements of established policy. This meant that favorable consideration would be given to procurement of goods and services from Korea under MAP and AID funded programs where Korean suppliers were competitive as to price, quality and delivery terms, etc. Thus the door is open to Korean suppliers. It was our belief that there are many good opportunities and markets and that Korean suppliers are in a good competitive position. The Ambassador pointed out that Saigon is the best place to work out specific transactions, not only for goods, but for repair and service contracts as well. The Ambassador stressed that “buy American” limitations would continue to obtain for many commodities, and that in the case of other commodities which were open to “limited free world” procurement, Korea could not be given a preferential position.

4. With regard to the level of U.S. forces in Korea, as the Ambassador had previously explained, the U.S. cannot undertake to make a precise, open-ended commitment. We are prepared to say in the communique, to be issued in Washington on the occasion of President Pak's visit to the United States, that we have assured President Pak that the U.S. will continue to maintain powerful forces, which in conjunction with ROK forces, would be sufficient to ensure the security of the Republic of Korea. However, we cannot say that we will keep any specific number of troops for any specific period of time. Nor can we make the NATO-type undertaking that an attack on the Republic of Korea would be regarded as an attack on the United States. We are prepared, however, in the communique to reaffirm the U.S. intention to come to the defense of Korea in the event of an attack in accordance with the treaty of 1953.

5. The Ambassador told Minister Kim that he had not been able to change the Washington position on the MAP transfer.

6. As to the military assistance program, again Washington could not commit specific amounts for specific times. The communique could say that MAP would be continued and that the U.S. would do its best to provide MAP assistance in amounts necessary to ensure effective Korean forces. The communique would also say that a substantial portion of won counterpart funds would be available for the defense budget if that would be helpful.

7. The Ambassador then referred to the request for assistance made by the Minister of National Defense earlier (see Memcon dated April 29, 1965) for a military pay raise.3 He said that we regarded this as a complicated and difficult question, especially since it involved the possibility of pay adjustments for other government employees. We recognized the need for pay adjustments but we wanted to make sure a solution was found which would be complete and at the same time not inflationary. Washington too was sympathetic but had suggested that we sit down here in Seoul with the ROKG, especially with the Economic Planning Ministry, to work out all of the details of the problem and try to find a solution. The Ambassador said to Minister Kim that he may have felt that a firm position on this question was lacking on the U.S. side. However, he had discussed the matter at length with General Howze and Mr. Bernstein and we were prepared to assist in finding a solution if the ROKG (not just the MND) would work out a government program.

8. Minister Kim was openly dejected after the Ambassador's recital. He remarked ruefully that if he could not get some relief on MAP transfer, he would have to stay in the United States; that he could not come back to Korea. Minister Kim went on to explain that the MAP transfer had become a grave political issue and that, more than anything else, the people were expecting that President Pak would come back from Washington with some adjustment in the transfer program.

9. The Ambassador asked what had led the Korean people to such a state of mind and Minister Kim understood the inference. He said he was aware that he is sometimes known as the world champion preventer of MAP transfer. This was because the MAP transfer led to an increased military budget. When he had to ask for more money for the military budget, journalists and editors became attentive and wanted to know why. It was difficult to get more money for the defense budget and therefore he must fight against anything that increases that budget. The Minister of National Defense must provide for the armed forces. The armed forces expect this of him. (The Minister implied at this point that the MAP transfer would make it more difficult to obtain funds for a military pay raise and he was therefore under pressure from the senior officers to resist the MAP transfer program.)

10. The Minister said that the pay raise problem was very serious but that the Korean Government has other serious problems. ROKG officials outside the Defense Ministry look with disfavor on a military pay raise because, in their view, it doesn't accomplish anything positive but does raise the level of government expenditure. With all the other complicated problems, there is great competition for any additional funds that become available and the Ministry of National Defense stands little chance of winning in the competition. The Ambassador asked why, if the problem is so serious, additional funds could not be raised from Korean revenues and set aside in the budget for a pay raise as is done in the United States. The Minister replied that this might be reasonable and logical in the United States, but it would not work that way in Korea.

11. The Ambassador commented that any pay raise, especially one that included adjustment of civil service pay, would have to be financed substantially out of ROKG revenues. Therefore, there would have to be concerted approach to the problem both within the ROKG and between the U.S. Government and the ROKG. The U.S. Government was not willing to make available additional funds for this purpose until such a concerted attack had produced a feasible solution, consistent with stabilization objectives. It was our belief that a substantial pay raise could be accommodated from prospective revenues that would accrue to the ROKG and still leave funds for other important objectives. The Minister replied that he had frequently raised this problem with Mr. Chang Ki-yong, Economic Planning Minister, but Chang was not willing to stand up and talk for military expenditures. When Chang thinks he is going to have additional funds, he is reluctant to have the funds set aside for military expenditures that would be losing money which could be expended for other objectives. The Ambassador asked whether Mr. Chang knew of the Ministry's request for 30 million dollars from the U.S. for a pay increase. Noting that he had not spoken directly to Mr. Chang about it, the Minister replied that the EPB generally agrees with the proposal on the condition that “we get the money from you.” The Minister then said that if the U.S. would give only 20 million dollars, he perhaps could get Chang to make available the remaining 10 million dollars.

12. The Ambassador tried to conclude this phase of the discussion by noting that he would ask the Economic Planning Minister to look at the problem and would say that the U.S. was prepared to work cooperatively on the problem. The military budget was a very important part of the total budget, very basic, and we, General Howze, Mr. Bernstein, and the Ambassador, would not like to see a large increase in revenues go entirely for non-military uses with nothing for an increase in military pay. The Minister said he appreciated such support from the U.S. side but that he needed not only moral support, but direct tangible assistance.

13. The Minister asked whether the Ambassador's refusal of his request applied only to what was asked for in cash, or to supplies of wheat as well. He said he needed more than U.S. help in raising ROKG revenues and if he could not get help, he would have to take up residence in the United States. The Ambassador again explained that the U.S. could not take action on a proposal that was not completely worked out and approved by the ROKG. He pointed out that this could not be considered simply as a military problem. Finally, he stressed that the problem must be worked out here and not in Washington. He explained that Washington was not prepared to negotiate with the Minister on any concrete problems or issues. Concrete results would emerge from the President's meeting with President Pak. However, these results would embody substantive decision reflected in the communique and agreed between the two governments here in Seoul before the President leaves for Washington.

14. The Minister then spoke of his concern for the defense of Asia, not just of Korea. He hoped that Ambassador Brown would continue to reflect his views to Washington. The Ambassador was so powerful in Washington that no tree could resist his push. The ROK forces were on the very point of starvation. There was a saying in Korea that no tree could sustain the blows of the ax. The Minister had struck only two blows and he intended to cut the Ambassador eight more times in order to get some relief on the MAP transfer and some assistance on the military pay increase. Ambassador Brown replied that he was used to being hacked at.

15. The Ambassador asked the Minister if he still planned to stay over in Washington for several days after President Pak departed. The Minister said that in view of Washington's attitude, it might not be worth while for him to stay; President Pak would decide. Once again the Ambassador assured the Minister that he would be welcome but could not expect to conduct any business talks with defense officials while he is in the United States.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S. Secret. Attached to airgram A–551 from Seoul, May 13. The meeting was held at the Ministry of National Defense.

2  Brown and Kim met on April 29 and discussed military issues in preparation for Pak's visit to Washington. (Memorandum of conversation attached to airgram A–551; ibid.)

3  Kim sought a 75 percent pay increase, which represented $30 million. (Ibid.)

43. Memorandum of Conversation 43. Memorandum of Conversation1

Seoul, May 12, 1965.

PARTICIPANTS

The Prime Minister

The Minister of National Defense

The Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Mr. John Lim, Chief Secretary to the Prime Minister

General Hamilton H. Howze

Ambassador Winthrop G. Brown

The Prime Minister said he had asked us to come because the government had received a request from the government of South Viet Nam for combat troops. He wanted to make it quite clear that the ROKG wanted to send combat troops and to make its contribution to the defense of Southeast Asia. They were about to begin consultation with leading members of the Assembly on this subject.

There were, however, certain problems with the Assembly which had been illustrated at the time when approval of the dispatch of 2,000 non-combat troops had been requested. The opposition at that time had asked what assurances the government had received from the United States to guard against the difficulties which would be created for Korea by sending these troops, for example additional risk of aggression from the north.

Specifically they had raised the following points: 1) Had the government been able to get a commitment from the United States to revise the 1953 defense treaty so that an attack on Korea would be regarded as an attack on the United States?

To this the government had replied that this was not necessary because the presence of substantial US forces in Korea was in itself a guarantee of US action, since those forces would themselves be the subject of any conceivable attack.

2) Had the government received an assurance from the United States that it would not withdraw any of its forces now stationed in Korea?

3) Had the government been able to secure a repeal or extension of the MAP transfer program?

To this the government had replied they had not, but the US Government had agreed to make certain adjustments in the program which would be helpful.

4) Had the government taken steps to get an increase in the level of MAP to compensate for the sharp decrease which had taken place in recent years as result of which the Korean forces were inadequately equipped even to defend their own country, much less to go off to help in SVN.

To this the government replied they were constantly in touch with US authorities about military assistance. In any event they did not feel that the dispatch of troops to SVN was a matter for bargaining with the US, but was a moral obligation on Korea's part.

The Prime Minister said there were many questions raised by the opposition on the earlier occasion of troop dispatch and that they would all come up again with renewed force when the government presented the request to the Assembly for authorization to send combat troops. It would be very helpful if certain assurances could be given to the President while he was in Washington and reflected in the communique so that he would be in a strong position to answer any such questions.

The situation was further complicated by the fact that the government was already pressing the Assembly for ratification of the settlement with Japan and encountering serious difficulties.

The Prime Minister repeated that the government was determined to send combat troops and was not in any way bargaining with us about this. He was simply asking for help to enable the President to be able to do it.

The matters on which the President would like reassurance in Washington, in addition to those raised by the opposition, were the question of a pay raise for the armed forces, which was desperately needed, and increased trade with SVN. If the President could come back also with assurances on these two points, it would be very helpful.

It was true that President Johnson had singled out President Pak for special personal courtesies such as sending his private airplane to Seoul and scheduling a fine parade for the President in New York City. These were greatly appreciated. But if the President simply went to the United States and was cordially and honorably received and came back without anything specific to show for his visit, this would not help.

The Prime Minister said that he did not think the allotment of $150 million of DLF funds over the next few years would make much impression on the Korean public, particularly since it would be realized only in small amounts in view of our insistence on projects. He recalled that when he had been Ambassador in Washington $70 million had been allotted for one year, but because of lack of projects only about $40 million had been realized. He was afraid that this would happen again and that the government would be criticized by the opposition because of it.

I said that the Prime Minister had expressed himself with his customary lucidity and frankness, and I hoped he would allow me to be equally frank. I would try to be equally clear.

But first of all I would like to know exactly what the SVNG had asked for and whether I could see a copy of the letter from the SVNG. This was produced and was simply a brief two paragraphs saying in effect “additional combat troops would be very helpful here and we would appreciate your sending combat troops at your earliest convenience.” There were no specifics as to the nature or quantity of the units being requested nor any indication of the job they would be expected to do.

I said that as the Prime Minister undoubtedly knew, when Ambassador Lodge was here he had told President Pak that we had been discussing with the SVNG the possible need for additional troops and he had told President Pak that a request for a regimental combat team might be forthcoming. He had not then made any such request.

I said that this letter had been sent by the SVNG without our knowledge, and that when it had been sent I had been asked by Washington to speak to the President immediately about it. I had done so on the evening of May 7 before the government had received the letter. I had told President Pak that while we believed that dispatch of a Korean regimental combat team to SVN would be desirable, we appreciated that this might cause him serious political difficulties, particularly with respect to the ratification of the agreement with Japan, and that I had been instructed to tell him that we would not ask him to take any action which in his view should cause him serious difficulties in that connection, and that a delay in action on this request until after the ratification would not in our view cause serious difficulty.

I very much appreciated, and I knew our government would very much appreciate the desire of the Korean government to contribute combat troops. Our position on timing was as I had stated to President Pak.

I said that I was well aware of the matter raised by the opposition and likely to be raised by them again. I felt that the answers given by the government on the previous occasion had been exactly right. I particularly welcomed the Prime Minster's statement both to the Assembly and to me today that the ROKG did not wish to bargain on this matter. We agreed that this was not a matter for bargaining and we did not propose to bargain.

As I had explained to the Minister of National Defense on May 6,2 and as I had explained to the Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Mun Tok-chu, it was not possible under our constitutional system for the President to change the treaty commitment which we had with Korea, even if he wished to do so. Moreover he could not make any commitment to keep any specific number of troops in any specific locality for any specific period of time. Nor could he give assurance of the maintenance of any specific level of military assistance.

He could, however, and would gladly do so, give very positive assurance to Korea of the continued military support of the United States. The form in which we proposed he should do so was contained in the draft communique which we had given to Mr. Mun as our suggested revision of the Korean draft.3 We were also prepared to recommend to Washington some wording changes suggested by Mr. Chang Sang Mun to Mr. Doherty yesterday at his meeting with Mr. Mun which were designed to increase the sense of urgency of our commitment. We felt that the language of our draft was a very strong and powerful assurance which should clearly comfort the Korean people.

I had not been able to persuade Washington to go any further on MAP transfer than the memorandum which I had given the Prime Minister some weeks ago. If the President continues to feel very strongly on this matter I could only suggest that he bring it up personally in Washington. So far as Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara and Mr. Bell were concerned we could go no further.

I repeated to the Prime Minister what I had said to the Minister of National Defense. (See Memorandum of Conversation enclosed with Embassy's A–550)4 about the pay raise question.)

I said that we already working on expanding opportunities for Korean trade in SVN; that we are hopeful of significant results and that we are prepared to consider recommending to Washington that some reference to this matter be included in the communique.

I said that all of us in Seoul would do our best to try to get the highest possible level of military assistance of the Korean forces and that I was encouraged that aid to Viet Nam had now been separated from the regular MAP legislation, thus I hoped lightening the burden on the regular MAP program.

I said that we thought $150 million of new development money under the most favorable terms available anywhere in the world was a real contribution; that the speed with which it was used depended entirely on the Korean government and that we were prepared to provide more as soon as it was used up. If some language change could be made to make it clearer that this money was all immediately available, we would be glad to consider it. I feel that if the matter were presented to the Korean public in this light it would be appreciated by them.

I said that I welcomed the discussion which we had just had because I felt that it brought into focus things which had been said on both sides many times. I felt that we now had had sufficient discussion of the issues; that everyone on the American side had a very clear idea of what the Korean government wanted and why. I thought the time had now come to get down to actual language. On this the ball was entirely in the Korean government's court. We had considered the Korean first draft and had presented our ideas on what we thought the language should be. If the Koreans had any specific suggestions to make I hoped Mr. Mun would make them in his meeting this afternoon with Mr. Doherty. I felt that no useful purpose would be served in further general discussions.

The Prime Minister said he understood that we could not for constitutional reasons give the NATO commitment, but if MAP transfer were to be pressed further he assumed there would be no difficulty in the Minister of National Defense doing so in Washington. (I said it would have to be done by the President.) The Prime Minister said that the government would shortly present to us a program dealing with the pay raise problem; that he appreciated my explanation of the DLF matter and would suggest some language to improve the impression for the Korean point of view, and that he agreed we could get down to work on actual drafting.

Mr. Mun said that my explanation of our constitutional problems had clarified the reasons for some of our positions and he would certainly take these into account and would have specific language to suggest to Mr. Doherty.

Mr. Lee Hu-rak came in just about the time we were discussing the DLF fund, and said that the phrase “over the next few years” was troublesome. He also noted that our communique omitted reference to trade and again raised the question of a commitment to maintain our present level of troops. I said that the last was not possible, but that we were prepared to recommend deletion of the phrase he found troublesome and mention of trade in the communique.

Comment: It was obvious that all present were very disappointed. Gloom started to descend very obviously as soon as I mentioned that we were not pressing for action on combat troops to Viet Nam before the ratification of the agreement with Japan, and thickened as I proceeded, this despite the fact, which I pointed out several times, that I said nothing which had not been said to each of them many times before.5

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S. Secret. Attached to airgram A–550 from Seoul, May 13. The meeting was held in the Prime Minister's Office.

2 See Document 42.

3 Documents tracing the negotiations on the contents of the communique released at the conclusion of the Pak visit are in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S.

4 Reference should be to airgram A–551 from Seoul; see Document 42.

5 When summarizing this conversation, Brown also commented that “it has been clear for some time both from intelligence sources and from my conversations with MND that ROKG at Cabinet level was hoping to use request for combat troops to RVN to wring some concessions from us on the points mentioned above in connection with President Pak's visit to Washington.” Brown believed, however, that the conversation brought Korean “expectations to more realistic levels.” (Telegram 1175 from Seoul, May 13; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19 KOR S-VIET S)

44. Memorandum From James C. Thomson of the National Security Council Staff and the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 44. Memorandum From James C. Thomson of the National Security Council Staff and the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 14, 1965, 5:25 p.m.

SUBJECT

Development Loan Commitment to Korea

The attached paper from State requests your approval for the inclusion of a specific $150-million Development Loan commitment, over the next few years, in your joint communique with President Park next Tuesday.2

This item will be one part of a generalized assistance package designed to reassure the Koreans of our continued support despite the imminent conclusion of a Japan-Korea settlement. The sum in question is no more than we would normally plan to provide over the next three years. Furthermore, the communique will of course stipulate that the provision of such funds will be “subject to applicable legislation and appropriations.”

Although it is unusual to cite a specific figure in connection with such a visit, both Embassy Seoul and the various Washington agencies are strongly convinced that Park has urgent need of such a quantified commitment in order to cope successfully with the acute fears of his opponents and of large sections of the Korean people that we are on the verge of abandoning their country to Japanese control.

In these circumstances, it would seem appropriate to make this exception to our general custom of avoiding such figures in a State Visit communique.

JCT Jr.
McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Park Visit Briefing Book. Secret.

2 Attached but not printed. Tuesday was May 18. The President approved the proposal and added a handwritten notation: “Also asking Horning, McPherson, Busby et al. if they can't make some imaginative, substantive contribution for the communique.” Horace Busby, Jr., and Donald F. Horning were Special Assistants to the President and Harry C. McPherson, Jr., was Special Council to the President.

45. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 45. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, May 14, 1965.

1191. Ref: Embtel 1190 rptd Tokyo 423, Taipei 77, Manila 182 CINCPAC 181.2 For Bundy from Ambassador.

1. The long and painful chapter of SOFA negotiations is drawing to a close. Only one real obstacle remains. The means of surmounting it with satisfaction and respect on both sides are set forth in reftel.

2. The obstacle in question is our hitherto adamant insistence on a provision denying Korean employees of US forces the ultimate right to strike and the equally adamant refusal of ROKG, unanimously and vocally supported by public, legislative and editorial opinion to agree to this prohibition.

3. Long and strenuous negotiations have convinced us that we have no hope of getting the Koreans to agree to such a clause. Its enforceability is highly questionable. It would provide an instance of what all Koreans of whatever party will rightly or wrongly consider injustice and discrimination and which those who wish us ill both in Korea and elsewhere can and will exploit to our disadvantage.

4. The Korean Government would find it most difficult successfully to defend this clause before its Assembly and public opinion. It does not appear in any of our other SOFAs, not with China, nor with Japan, nor with the Philippines.

5. This is a matter of public discussion in Korea now. If agreed to, there is serious likelihood of a strike against this clause when it is announced. The government, which is genuinely anxious to help us avoid strikes, could not oppose this one.

6. The proposal contained in reftel gives real, and we think sufficient, protection for our interests. It even provides for a qualified no strike clause under conditions of need, but does so on a basis which the ROKG will be able to support us. We will need this support in such a case.

7. I am convinced that the Koreans cannot be pushed further on this point. I believe that the clause we propose is in the best interests of the US, both in terms of the SOFA itself and in terms of our overall interests in Korea and elsewhere. I believe that with this clause in hand we can now get satisfactory agreement and close the deal. Without it there is little or no chance of agreement.

8. I therefore endorse the reasoning of the negotiating team contained reftel and recommend Washington's speedy acceptance of this proposal.

9. For CINCPAC: General Howze concurs.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15–3 KOR S–US. Confidential; Priority. No time of transmission appears on the telegram. Also sent to the Department of Defense and repeated to Tokyo, Taipei, Manila, CINCPAC for POLAD, and SJA USARPAC.

2 Telegram 1190 from Seoul, May 14, transmitted the proposed text of the labor provision to the SOFA agreement being negotiated with Korea. It provided for a 70-day period of compulsory arbitration before workers actually went on strike, denied certain categories of workers the right to strike, and limited the right to strike in times of emergency. (Ibid.)

46. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 46. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 17, 1965.

SUBJECT

Topics Particularly Appropriate for your Private Meeting with President Park

The following topics appear particularly appropriate for your personal talk with President Park, with only interpreters present. We are taking steps to be sure that Park is aware you may wish to lead off this way, and that his interpreter will be someone in whose discretion he has complete confidence.

1. Additional ROK force contribution to South Viet-Nam. As you know, the Honolulu meeting included discussion re a possible Korean regimental combat team (4000 men or so) some time in the next two months, with the possibility that at a later phase the ROK force might be expanded to a division. Ambassador Lodge and Ambassador Brown have discussed with Park only the possibility of the RCT only. Park has responded that this would take serious thought, and we have been most anxious not to let this possibility become public in Korea, because of its possible impact on his major political problem of getting ratification of the agreement with Japan. We suggest you refer to the RCT possibility but indicate that you are well aware of his political problem. This would be the right occasion to draw him out as to just how he does see his political situation and its impact on further ROK combat force contributions in South Viet-Nam. You will certainly wish to lead off by thanking him warmly for the contribution they have already made.

In this connection the South Vietnamese Government has conveyed a formal request to Park for additional Korean forces, and we have consulted with Park to head off publicity. This request itself does not change anything, as the South Vietnamese (who acted without telling us) will certainly not press unless we urge them to. The real question is whether Park can now bite off the issue of additional troops—requiring formal Assembly approval—at the same time that he has his major fight on ratifying the Japan settlement.

2. Additional Project. We are looking urgently for a special proposal arising directly from these talks, such as the joint medical project at the time of the Sato visit. The best bets appear to be introduction of the Peace Corps into Korea, and/or an expansion of English-language training in Korea in the interests of world-wide communication. Your staff and we will have final recommendations on this at your briefing session at 4:30.

3. Status of Forces Agreement with Korea. We do not recommend that you raise this topic. However, Park might do so in your private session. We recommend that you refer this matter to my conversation the following morning, saying only that we want to do the right and fair thing.

The first two topics are in addition to those covered in the basic memorandum to you,2 some or all of which could also be covered in the private session as you see fit. Park will undoubtedly benefit from a substantial private talk with you before you join the larger group in the Cabinet Room, and we would see no problem in your extending the private session as much as you and he feel wise.

Dean Rusk

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Park Visit, May 1965. Secret.

2 A May 13 memorandum from Ball to President Johnson outlined the major points President Johnson and Pak would likely discuss. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66,POL 7 KOR S) The major points made in Ball's memorandum were also delineated in a memorandum from Thomson to Johnson; see Document 47.

47. Memorandum From James C. Thomson of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 47. Memorandum From James C. Thomson of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 17, 1965, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

Your Meeting at 5 p.m. today with President Park

President Chung Hee Park has come to Washington for one paramount reason: he seeks the strongest possible indication from us, both through our courtesies to him and through tangible evidence of continuing U.S. assistance, that we have no intention of abandoning Korea to Japanese control in the wake of a Japan-Korea settlement. Whatever reassurance we can give him will ease the severe problems he faces in gaining the support of his people for the ratification and acceptance of such a settlement.

Personal Factors: Park is a shy, intelligent man born of a farm family, he has spent most of his life in his nation's armed forces. He is said to be self-conscious of his height and therefore initially rather formal and stiff; he can respond to informality, however, once he feels at ease. His one form of recreation is horseback riding.

As you know, you met Park when he came to this country in November 1961 shortly after seizing power by a military coup: you met him again when he came to President Kennedy's funeral.

In the attached memorandum2 (which you have already seen) State has suggested certain topics that might arise in your talks. Here is a brief review of the major points: 1. Japan-Korea Settlement: Both parties have made great progress, and a basic treaty has been initialed; it should be signed within a few weeks, and ratification will probably come in July. We are deeply gratified with this progress, and Park's determination has been the chief ingredient. A settlement should bring a new and mutually productive relationship between two complementary economies and two natural allies.

2. Assistance to Vietnam: The Koreans now have 2,200 troops in Vietnam (including a military hospital unit, 10 karate instructors, an engineer battalion, a LST, and an infantry battalion to provide security for these forces). We are deeply grateful for this assistance—given despite strong opposition from Park's political opponents. The GVN has now asked for further Korean troops. It is our judgement that a decision on such additional forces should be delayed until Park overcomes the acute problems he currently faces in pushing through a Japan-Korea settlement. (For your information: the Koreans had hoped to use the question of further troops in order to pry major additional concessions out of the U.S. Government during the Park visit; for this reason we should avoid specific discussions at this moment.)

3. U.S. Aid to Korea: Park will want all the reassurance we can give him on our continued economic support. We propose to include in the communique a general aid pledge: to finance Korea's essential imports, to make available $150 million in development loan funds over the next few years, to continue technical assistance and training, and to keep up our Food for Peace aid. (Walt Rostow returned from Korea deeply impressed with their economic progress.)

4. U.S. and Korean Force Levels in Korea: The Koreans have wanted a very specific commitment from us to maintain our forces in Korea at their present level. They also seek our commitment to maintain sufficient assistance to keep their 600,000 troops at the present level. All we can say in response is that our commitment to their defense is absolute under the 1954 Mutual Defense Treaty, and that we would certainly consult with them on any changes in force levels which might be dictated by our regional and global requirements.

5. Map Transfer Problem: The Koreans have been disturbed by our “MAP transfer” program since 1960—an effort to transfer the procurement there from the MAP to the Korean budget on materials that are obtainable on a commercial basis in Korea. Although we have delayed and softened certain aspects of this program, we cannot meet the Korean request in toto but are willing to indicate in the communique that certain adjustments have been made in order to ease the impact on the Korean economy.

Other Items:

Park will urge that we move towards a speedy conclusion of a Status of Forces Agreement. We are very close to such an agreement under a formula modeled on our agreement with Germany; and we can assure him that we share his desire to see this matter speedily resolved (but not during the course of his visit). Park may also raise the issue of Korean unification. Here our position is his, namely that unification will be possible only through the U.N. formula of free elections under U.N. supervision.

James C. Thomson, Jr. 3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Park Visit Briefing Book. Secret.

2 See footnote 2, Document 46.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

48. Memorandum of Conversation 48. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 17, 1965, 5:15–5:51 p.m.

SUBJECT

U.S.-Korean Relations

PARTICIPANTS

President Johnson

President Chung Hee Park of Korea

Mr. Sang Ho Cho, President Park's interpreter

Dr. Paul Crane, President Johnson's interpreter

President Johnson said that the U.S. planned to extend all possible aid to Korea. It planned to keep its troops there, and no reduction of troop strength was contemplated. However, if there were an adjustment, President Park would be the first to know about it, and full consultation would be held beforehand.

President Johnson congratulated Park on the happy progress of the Korea-Japan negotiations and said that he considered President Park to be the chief ingredient in the success of these negotiations. He felt that it was due to Park's leadership that things had been going so well. He realized that it had been a very tough and touchy problem. He felt that conclusion of the Korea-Japan treaty would also assist our mutual effort in Viet-Nam. President Park said he felt that the Korea-Japan negotiations could be concluded within a month, by early or middle June. He said that there were certain irresponsible people who were trying to block the negotiations, but he felt his public relations and other efforts would ensure conclusion of the agreement.

President Johnson congratulated President Park on his assistance in the struggle in Viet-Nam, and said, with reference to that aid that we would keep in Korea a military strength equivalent to that at present so that, in accordance with our commitments under the 1954 treaty,2 Korean security would not suffer.

President Johnson then emphasized how much more difficult it was now to get aid through Congress than it had been 20 years ago when the aid program first began. He said that the 2,000 Korean troops that had been sent to Viet-Nam in his opinion had helped save the aid bill in Congress. He asked President Park whether he felt additional Korean troops could be sent to Viet-Nam from Korea. President Park stated that the Korean Government would have to study that matter. The people in Korea were worried whether they might not invite further activity from North Korea if they weakened the line by sending too many troops to Viet-Nam. However, he said that he personally would like to send more troops to Viet-Nam. President Johnson then asked President Park if he could send one division. If President Park could raise the commitment to one division, this would help a great deal in the struggle there. President Park repeated that it was his personal feeling that Korea could make larger commitments of troops to Viet-Nam, but this would have to be studied by his Government, and he could not make a commitment on it at this time.

President Johnson said that at the present time he was searching for a diplomatic solution in Viet-Nam. He also hoped that eventually there could be a solution to the problem of the unification of Korea; but this would have to be done under the UN formula of UN supervision of free elections.

President Johnson said he wanted to tell the Korean Government that aid would be assured to that country and that the U.S. would finance essential imports and development loans, technical assistance, and food for peace. The impression the American Government had of Korea had never been better. After his visit to Korea, Dr. Rostow had reported great progress in the economic field.

President Park said he hoped very much that there would be no indication from Washington that there would be any withdrawal of UN troops from Korea. This sort of talk made it very difficult for him to help in Viet-Nam, because his own people became very disturbed any time there was any talk of withdrawal of UN troops from Korea. President Johnson referred to the strong support in the Congress for his Viet-Nam program and said he would see to it that Korea's security is ensured, that troops and money enough will be provided to ensure this in accordance with the 1954 treaty. He said that, if any troops were to be removed from Korea, it would only be done with prior consultation.

President Johnson said he believed that, if they can get an agreement or some basis for agreement in South Viet-Nam, this would also relieve the pressure from North Korea. He hoped that the Australians, the Filipinos, and New Zealanders would all help in Viet-Nam and he also hoped to get a Korean division into Viet-Nam so that they could get a total of 70,000 to 80,000 troops in Viet-Nam from various nations to be able to win there.

On the status of forces agreement President Johnson stated that Ambassador Brown was working on that problem and that we would follow the same formula as was used in Germany. This had worked very well in Germany and should work well in Korea. He was glad the negotiations were going ahead well; but he did not think they could be concluded during this State Visit. President Park said that he thought these negotiations had gone on too long and were becoming a major irritant to many of his people, particularly the Opposition. He hoped President Johnson would break into the negotiations with an order to somehow bring them to a speedy conclusion.

President Park said 1967 was the last year of his first economic development program and that a second five-year development program was planned. Koreans would need continued assistance from the U.S. to help them with this. President Johnson spoke of the $100 billion foreign aid which the U.S. had given since World War II to countries overseas and the 160,000 U.S. casualties which we have suffered since World War II. He said there were many people in Congress who had opposed spending this $100 billion. The way that some countries acted made it very difficult to get aid out of Congress. He said that when Sukarno burns USIA libraries and offices, people in Congress are of a mind to cut off all foreign aid. He considered Korea's conduct very helpful. He said that Park's policy in Korea went all the way in backing up the Viet-Nam effort, and again he stated that this was a great help to him and that it improved the military situation in Viet-Nam.

Asked whether the Koreans had asked any other nations in Asia to help out in Viet-Nam, President Park said no they had not. President Johnson said the U.S. feels the same way about its commitments in Viet-Nam and Korea, and feels that Korea has been the greatest assistance in helping to bring pressure to bear so that other countries like Australia and New Zealand would come in. Britain, he realized, was very much occupied in Malaysia. The President concluded by repeating the hope that Korea would increase its commitment to one division.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. II, July 1964 to August 1965. Secret. Drafted by Crane, and approved by the White House May 28. The meeting took place in the Oval Office. The time and place of the meeting are from the President's Daily Diary. (Ibid.) Earlier in the day the President and Mrs. Johnson hosted the arrival ceremony for Pak, his wife, and members of his party on the South Grounds of the White House at 11:40 a.m. (Ibid.) The remarks made by Presidents Johnson and Pak at that time are in Department of State Bulletin, June 14, 1965, pp. 950–952.

2 The Mutual Defense Treaty between the United States and the ROK was signed at Washington on October 1, 1953, and went into effect on November 17, 1954. (5 UST 2368)

49. Memorandum of Conversation 49. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 18, 1965.

I–6696/65

SUBJECT

Park-McNamara Conversation at Breakfast in Blair House, May 18

Secretary McNamara was President Park's guest for breakfast this morning at Blair House. The President appeared at 0830, and the conversation continued until 0945. Also present for the US, in addition to Secretary McNamara and myself, were: General Wheeler (CJCS), Lloyd G. Hand (Chief of Protocol), Lt. General Beach (CINCUNC Korea Designate), Ambassador Brown and Paul Crane (Interpreter). Present on the Korean side, in addition to the President, were: Chung Hee Park (President of the Republic of Korea), Key Young Chang (Deputy Prime Minister), Sung Eun Kim (Minister of National Defense), Chong Kap Kim (Chairman, National Assembly Armed Services Committee), General Chang-kuk Chang (Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff), Hyun Chul Kim (Ambassador) and Hu Rak Lee (Secretary General to the President).

The following two points were worth noting: 1. With reference to military pay, Secretary McNamara stated that, just as we will not tolerate inappropriately low pay for our military forces, we would not expect the Koreans to tolerate such low pay for their military forces. He said that he did not conceive of paying the forces too little in order to finance military equipment or to permit MAP transfers. He suggested that the Koreans and Americans conduct a joint study on Korean military pay. Ambassador Brown concurred in the suggestion.2

2. With respect to MAP transfers, Secretary McNamara stated that it is our view that the transfers can be absorbed by the Korean economy but agreed that the transfer program should be reviewed each year in the light of the condition of the Korean economy.

John McN

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330,OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 3717, 333 Korea. Confidential.

2 The Minister of Defense submitted a formal request for the formation of the committee on June 17, just after General Beach assumed his duties as Commander of U.S. Forces in Korea on June 15. On June 19 Beach agreed to form the committee and recommended that membership be limited to U.S. and ROK military representatives empowered solely to examine Korean military pay levels. (Airgram A–641 from Seoul, June 30; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19 US–KOR S) The committee submitted its findings and recommendations on July 22. The committee determined that a 100 percent pay increase for noncareer personnel and an 83.5 percent increase for career NCOs and officers were justified. (Airgram A–84 from Seoul, August 27; ibid.)

50. Memorandum of Conversation 50. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 18, 1965, 10 a.m.

SUBJECT

Joint Communique to Be Issued by Presidents Johnson and Park

PARTICIPANTS

Korean Side

President Chung Hee Park

Deputy Prime Minister Key Young Chang

Acting Foreign Minister Duk Choo Moon

Defense Minister Sung Eun Kim

Minister of Information Jong Chul Hong

Presidential Secretary General Hu Rak Lee

Ambassador Hyun Chul Kim

Assembly Defense Committee Chairman Chong Kap Kim

Minister Suk Heun Yun, Korean Embassy

Foreign Ministry American Bureau Director Sang Moon Chang

American Side

The Secretary

AID Administrator Bell

Assistant Secretary William P. Bundy

Ambassador Winthrop G. Brown

Ambassador Lloyd N. Hand

Assistant Administrator for Far East Rutherford Poats

Deputy Assistant Secretary Marshall Green

Deputy Assistant Secretary Robert W. Barnett

Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense Peter Solbert

Robert A. Fearey, Director for East Asian Affairs

Christopher A. Norred, Jr., Officer in Charge, Korean Affairs

Secretary Rusk said that he wished to extend to President Park a cordial welcome to the Department of State. He regretted he had not been able to remain at the White House the previous evening to say good-bye, but he had worked in his office until 5:00 a.m.2 He and his staff and associates were available for any matters the President might wish to raise. He suggested, however, that they might address themselves to the Joint Communique.

President Park thanked Secretary Rusk. He said he had had a very good talk with President Johnson the previous day, and had found that President Johnson had a good understanding of the Korean situation. There remained, however, several problems that should be discussed.

President Park said that President Johnson on the preceding day had agreed that there were no serious problems remaining on the status of forces agreement negotiations. On reduction of UN Forces in Korea, President Johnson had said that he hoped there would not be any reduction, but if there were it would be discussed fully with the Koreans beforehand. Secretary Rusk commented that we were in agreement on what should be said on this point—that the U.S. would continue to maintain powerful forces in Korea. He also reminded President Park that President Johnson in his welcoming speech on President Park's arrival had said that the U.S. would stand side by side with the Koreans as long as a danger exists.

President Park reported that at breakfast with Secretary McNamara and others, he had discussed the “MAP transfer” problem, which has an effect on the Korean economy and morale. He said he hoped that this problem would be carefully considered in the Communique. He then referred to the phrase “over the next few years” which qualified the $150 million Development Loan funds in paragraph 9B.3 He said he understood the appropriation and executive processes that would be involved in use of those funds, but that its inclusion in a public Communique would invite Opposition criticism of his Government.

Status of Forces Agreement Negotiations

Secretary Rusk said he always enjoyed talking with President Park because they were clear in their expressions to one another, and did not waste time. He suggested they address themselves to the status of forces negotiations.

Secretary Rusk said he had a statement to make on those negotiations, and he asked that his remarks be interpreted sentence by sentence. Secretary Rusk said that we should all be pleased to note that several major issues had been resolved during recent weeks. A number of important issues remained to be resolved, however, so it did not seem possible to agree upon the text of an agreement during President Park's stay. It seemed that two principal differences remained—on the criminal jurisdiction and labor articles. With respect to the criminal jurisdiction article, the Secretary said we had gone as far as we could go on the waiver proposal and trial safeguards, and he believed that the Korean Government should try to meet our position on these two points.

We were not expressing any lack of confidence, the Secretary went on to say, in the legal systems of the two countries. Our attitude had nothing to do with special arrangements, such as those of the 19th Century period which gave so much trouble. We were not raising issues with regard to tourists, businessmen, or others who were in Korea on a voluntary basis. But where we required men under compulsory military service to serve in Korea—taking farmers from Kansas and workers from Pittsburgh—we believed they have the right to protection in situations where they inadvertently have difficulty. The formula we had proposed is the one in effect in Germany where the U.S. has over 200,000 troops, and which has worked well on both sides. It would be difficult to explain why this formula would not be acceptable in Korea. We hoped the Koreans could meet us on this point.

On the labor article, the Secretary said we were prepared to accept the Korean proposal on the right of Korean employees to strike if a labor dispute was not resolved by the end of a 70-day period. A Joint Committee would designate certain essential categories where the right to strike would not be exercised. If the Korean Government was willing to agree to our proposals on the waiver and trial safeguards, then we could announce that agreement in principle had been reached and agreement on the remaining issues could be reached in the very near future.

President Park agreed.

“MAP Transfer” Program

Secretary Rusk then referred to the differences of view regarding reference to the “MAP transfer” program in the Joint Communique. He suggested a further addition to paragraph 5 of the Communique, as follows: “It was agreed that the program should be reviewed each year in light of the condition of the Korean economy.” President Park agreed.

Development Loans “over the next few years”

Secretary Rusk said that we all understood what was intended with regard to the Development Loan funds of $150 million, that the language should not be interpreted as a one-year commitment. It was difficult because on the Korean side there were popular sensitivities, while on our side there was the caution of the U.S. Congress. Last year Korea used $26 million in development loans, while this year it has used $46 million. It was important that the development loan language in the Communique not be interpreted as a one-year figure, as this would cause us difficulties. We try as a matter of general policy to avoid specific figures in communiques with distinguished foreign visitors. We had made an exception in this case because of our strong interest in Korea and in the success of its Government. We would like to meet the Korean needs on this point. He suggested that the words “over the next few years” be deleted from the second sentence of paragraph 9B of the draft Communique, and inserted in the fifth sentence. This should help the Korean side, although it would cause us some difficulty.

Secretary General Lee commented that this would still leave these difficult words in the Communique. He suggested they be rephrased to make reference to U.S. constitutional requirements and U.S. procedures.

Secretary Rusk pointed out that in the fifth sentence, the words would apply also to the additional monies to be made available which would clearly be available over a period of years.

Secretary Rusk added that to use a specific figure, to say that the funds would be used as rapidly as possible, and to say that other monies would then be made available would give us serious difficulties with Congress, if it appeared that the funds were to be used in one year. We were prepared to say the funds would be used as rapidly as possible. He hoped the Koreans would be able to accept the words “over the next few years” in the latter part of the paragraph.

Secretary General Lee said that, if the commitment were put this way, it would be vague and meaningless to the Korean public. It would weaken the whole impact.

The Secretary said there must be some misunderstanding of what we propose. Under our proposal the $150 million would be used as rapidly as possible. Then after that is used we anticipate the provision of additional loan funds. Obviously the combination of the two comprises a commitment extending over the next few years. We might find language without the use of any figure. We might just refer to continuing development loan backing for the Korean Government with no reference to amounts or time. But when we say we will provide $150 million as soon as possible, and then more, that seems the best formulation for the Korean Government. If we say that, we need the phrase “over the next few years” or an unlimited blank check would be implied which we could not explain to our own people.

Secretary Rusk made the point that it seemed to him that the basic point to be made was that a Korea-Japan agreement would not mean that the U.S. would run away. We were trying to say so eloquently, and it seemed to him that $150 million was an eloquent figure.

Secretary General Lee said that he believed it would be better not to use the figure if that required the qualifying words “over the next few years”. He said it was well understood that the Korean Government would not use the funds in one year, or extend the use over an indefinite number of years.

Ambassador Brown commented that the Communique would say not that $150 million would be used over the next few years, but that $150 million plus additional monies would be used in such a period. It should be easy to explain that.

Secretary Rusk said he was concerned lest there be too wide a gap between the explanations of the Communique by the Korean and U.S. Governments. The Korean Government should be able to explain to its Assembly that the U.S. had created a fund of $150 million, which would be used as rapidly as possible, and then more monies would be available. This should make it clear that the U.S. was not losing interest in Korea.

At this point the Secretary said he had some matters to discuss with President Park alone. He suggested they step across the hall into his office, and let the other members of the party try to resolve language differences in the meanwhile.

In the absence of President Park and Secretary Rusk, the other participants reached agreement on the following changes: 1) The following sentence was to be added to paragraph 7: “He confirmed that U.S. military and economic assistance to Korea would continue to be extended, as set forth in paragraph 9 below, after normalization of Korean-Japanese relations.” Accordingly, the following closing words of the first sentence of paragraph 9 would be deleted: “after the normalization of relations between Korea and Japan.”

2) The words “over the next few years” would be deleted in the second sentence of paragraph 9B, and the fifth sentence of that paragraph would be rephrased to begin as follows: “Such development loan funds would be made available, in accordance with annual legislation and joint economic judgments, to finance… .”

Upon their return, Secretary Rusk said that the Korean Government was getting the money, and would it not give the U.S. Government the words? President Park said he did not understand all the words in the Communique, but he was prepared to trust the U.S. Government. Where would we be if we did not trust one another?

Secretary General Lee asked whether it would not be possible to drop the words “in accordance with annual legislation and joint economic judgments”. Secretary Rusk said the U.S. could not drop them.

Secretary Rusk suggested that each side name a coordinator to agree upon the approved text, and named Mr. Green for the U.S. President Park named Acting Foreign Minister Moon for Korea.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. 11, July 1964 to August 1965. Confidential. Drafted by Norred and approved in S on May 25. The meeting took place in the Secretary's Office.

2 The previous evening Rusk and his wife attended the State Dinner at the White House held in honor of Pak. (Ibid., President's Daily Diary) Rusk apparently returned to his office to monitor events in the Dominican Republic.

3 The joint communique released at the conclusion of Pak's visit is in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 779–781.

51. Memorandum of Conversation 51. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 18, 1965, 5:03–5:41 p.m.

SUBJECT

Visit of President Park, Communique Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

U.S. Side The President

William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State, FE

Ambassador Lloyd N. Hand

Ambassador Winthrop G. Brown

Robert W. Barnett, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Economic Affairs

James C. Thomson, NSC

Robert A. Fearey, Director, East Asian Affairs

Dr. Paul Crane, Interpreter

Korean Side President Park

Key Young Chang, Deputy Prime Minister

Duk Choo Moon, Acting Foreign Minister

Sung Eun Kim, Minister of National Defense

Jong Chul Hong, Minister of Information

Hu Rak Lee, Secretary General to the President

Ambassador Hyun Chul Kim

Sang Ho Cho, Interpreter

The President welcomed President Park and congratulated him warmly on his Press Club speech of that noon; he understood that it had been very well received, and this was high praise since the Press Club audience was a tough one.

The President said that Ambassador Brown had forwarded him a letter dated May 7 which contained a check from the Korean people to assist the victims of the tornadoes which had devastated the Midwest in April. The letter indicated that the check was intended both to help the victims of the tornadoes and to strengthen friendship between Korea and the United States. This gift was symbolic of the way the people of the two countries feel about each other. This brotherly and neighborly gesture was worth more to us than millions of dollars; it was deeply touching. The President asked President Park to tell the National Council which had sent the letter and check that the money would be used to assist veterans of the Korean War who had suffered loss of their homes or of members of their families in the tornadoes.

The President said that every chair had been filled at the dinner the previous evening. That morning a number of the guests had told Mrs. Johnson and him how indebted they were for having been included to honor President Park and, through him, the people of Korea. The President said that he and Mrs. Johnson had been much pleased to see how many people had been prepared to travel all the way across the country to attend the dinner.

The President said that the previous day President Park and he, at his initiative, had covered a number of topics which he had thought were of greatest interest to President Park and to the Korean people. The topics had included a status of forces agreement, Korean unification, economic assistance, support of the Korean forces, and assurances that the United States would not withdraw armed forces from Korea, at least without first obtaining the understanding of the Korean Government.

The President said that he and President Park appeared to have pretty well covered the waterfront when they finished. He had asked President Park a number of times whether he had something to raise, and had asked him not to hesitate to do so. He would welcome the President's now raising anything he might wish.

The President said that he and Secretary Rusk had been trying to keep the rebels and the loyalists in the Dominican Republic from attacking each other throughout the night.

President Park said that it might seem a small matter but he wished to note that he had discussed the MAP Transfer Program with the Secretary of Defense at breakfast. Secretary McNamara had said that he understood the difficulty, that he would study the matter further, and that he would keep it under review. President Park said that he would like the President, too, to keep it in mind.

The President said that he was familiar with the program. He would be happy to make the gesture of eliminating this requirement but this would lead to trouble with Congress. He said that he understood the difficulty, however, and that we would be as understanding as we could.

The President said that he still did not have any indication whether he would have three billion dollars or nothing for military and economic assistance in the coming year. As President Park had noted, he had had to postpone certain visits by friends from other parts of the world because he disliked meeting and discussing problems against a background of such uncertainty over his own appropriations.

President Park said that the Republic of Korea had 600,000 men in its armed forces. These men were well-trained and well-disciplined. He wanted President Johnson to realize that these forces really formed part of U.S. forces ready to fight against Communism. In a fight they would be with the United States; but at the same time they were dependent on U.S. assistance.

The President said that President Park's assurance was very heartening. The President emphasized what he had said the day before: that the action the Koreans have taken in sending forces to Viet-Nam is not only a help to us in Viet-Nam, but also on Capitol Hill.

President Park said he had an additional item to raise, that of Korea's diplomatic relations with African nations. He had discussed this matter with Ambassador Brown. Successful diplomacy in Africa was important to Korea, and on this matter they needed our help; but they could also perhaps be of help to us. This was a subject on which the President had undoubtedly been briefed by his advisors, but President Park wanted to emphasize the cooperative role our two nations might play together in Africa.

President Johnson expressed his appreciation of President Park's offer of mutual assistance and said that we would explore this matter further.

President Park commented that his meeting with the Secretary of State that morning had been very successful; he was sure that the President was informed of the results.

President Johnson asked if there were any other matters that should be discussed. He repeated that U.S. Government officials and the guests at the dinner the night before had deeply appreciated the chance to meet with Park. He commented on the Administration's high regard for Ambassador Kim and his wife as strong friends and allies; he said that they fitted into our society with ease and worked with our people most effectively. He wanted to compliment the Ambassador.

President Park expressed his thanks for the role played by Ambassador Brown; he noted that a number of problems had been solved since Ambassador Brown's arrival.

President Johnson responded that Ambassador Brown was one of our most trusted and able officials. He then asked if any of President Park's associates desired to raise any further items—otherwise they could move on to the communique and then to the reception.

Defense Minister Kim raised the problem of the low state of pay of Korean armed forces; the pay scale was so low, he said, that they faced serious difficulties in morale. The United States should be concerned with this matter in considering these forces as its own troops.

The President said that he was not familiar with this problem but would explore it further with our Secretary of Defense. He said that Congress was pressing for pay increases for our own armed forces, which would be difficult within budgetary limits.

President Park then expressed his thanks for the communique and also for the President's new proposal for an Institute for Technology and Applied Science; he was glad to accept this proposal.

President Johnson noted that the two Presidents belonged to the “same lodge” of school teachers.

Deputy Prime Minister Chang asked if it would be possible to strike out the word “annual” on page 5 of the communique; we might substitute the word “applicable”. President Johnson agreed to strike the word “annual” without making a substitution. He added, however, that we would have to be candid with our own press and Congress, as they realize that our assistance is subject to annual legislative review.

Secretary General Lee commented that their side understood our legislative system in this regard. He added that since we had helped the Koreans in this way, they would try to work even harder to make good use of our assistance.

President Johnson said that if he could always produce documents like this where he went, he would get a lot of votes.

He asked if Ambassador Brown or Ambassador Kim had anything to add; both responded in the negative.

President Johnson asked President Park to tell Mrs. Park that he and Mrs. Johnson were looking forward to seeing them at 7 o'clock at the reception; they would be slightly late, because he had some further business on his schedule. He concluded the meeting by expressing his hope that President Park had enjoyed himself, and that he had found U.S. officials helpful and courteous.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. II, July 1964 to August 1965. Secret. Drafted by Thomson and Fearey and approved by the White House on June 5. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room at the White House. The time and place of the meeting are from the President's Daily Diary. (Ibid.) After the meeting Johnson and Pak met with members of the media. (Ibid.)

52. Memorandum of Conversation 52. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 18, 1965, 6–6:30 p.m.

I–23517/65

SUBJECT

Visit of Korean Minister of National Defense Kim, 18 May 65

PARTICIPANTS

Defense Department Side Secretary of Defense—Robert S. McNamara

Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA)—John T. McNaughton

Assistant to the Director, Far East Region/ISA—Captain Jon L. Boyes, USN

Interpreter—K. Zabalakas

Korean Side Minister of National Defense—Sungeun Kim

Assistant to MOD—M Gen Woo Joo Chang

Senior Military Attache, Embassy Washington—B Gen S.K. Yoon,ROK Army

Military Assistance Program—Minister Kim said that the ROKG understood the FY 66 MAP had been increased. The Secretary replied that it looked as if there might be some increase to the program; at least at this point it looked more favorable. He said that the Congress had proposed a substantial cut, but that was reversed. We now believe that FY 66 will be a satisfactory program. However, he said in 1966 each country must take effective means to use MAP dollars in the best manner possible. For Korea, the FY 66 MAP should help, but it should also be the time for the ROKG to consider the proper size of the Korean armed forces. The Secretary said that in relation to North Korea and Communist China, the ROK must bear in mind how much strength plus that of the U.S. is needed to protect South Korea, but it should not be too large. Korea must look at what should be the proper size of its forces in 1966, keeping in mind available MAP funds and the pay problem. Kim said that President Park was worried about the threat of Red China and North Korea. The Secretary said we should be worried about this threat. We would continue to assure that the U.S. strength plus that of South Korea was enough—that in considering the threat we must always think of the combined power of the South Koreans and the U.S. He said that he, personally, thought the South Korean forces were too large. The ROKG should give careful thought to what size is necessary in respect to its resources. The Secretary said we should always keep in mind that the Chinese Communists, and their servants the North Koreans, will move toward any weakness, whether it is in the south or the north. We must be strong everywhere, and firm, but “we do not need two fists when one fist will do.”

South Viet-Nam. Kim said South Korea has received a request from the Government of Viet-Nam for additional South Korean forces to be sent to support Viet-Nam; they will do their utmost to help that country in its troubles.

Kim said the VN war was known as the “McNamara War,” but since the Korean troops are going to SVN, the war is becoming known in Korea as “Kim's War.” The Secretary said that the U.S. determination in SVN shows the U.S. is against Communist aggression anywhere and this helps South Korea against Communist aggression in the north. Kim said that in order to send more Korean troops, constitutional processes were required. He, personally, wants to send these additional forces and is not seeking any bargains. He needs the Secretary's support and cooperation to sell the Korean National Assembly on sending more troops. The problem is a sensitive one, for if the size of the Korean forces to SVN is increased, the South Korean people worry about an increase in the ChiCom and North Korean threat. Also, any force reductions in U.S. or Korean force levels create domestic problems. Kim said he believed it necessary, if one RCT is sent to SVN, that an RCT cadre be formed in Korea and, likewise, if a Korean Division went to SVN, the ROKG should mobilize and put into training one division in Korea to maintain the image of force.

The Secretary said that Kim should talk to General Beach about this. He said he doubted the need to replace an RCT or division sent to SVN, but he was not a military expert. He added that he would be surprised if the replacement of units was needed. Kim said such action was necessary to swing the Congress of Korea behind the idea of additional forces and this replacement of units was a way to do it.

The Secretary said that we have a strong commitment to Korea with the Mutual Defense Treaty. The U.S. will act and provide sufficient forces to fight. Further, we will recommend, advise, and assist on the proper level of forces needed by ROK. He said President Park made an important point this morning (18 May breakfast Park-McNamara)2 when he said that it is necessary for Korea to make economic progress to be strong. The Secretary added that the ROKG should not put into its military more force than is required; Korea must use its resources wisely. He said that he was inclined to feel there was not a requirement to have as large forces as Korea now has.

Military Transfer Program and Pay Raise. Kim said he felt that there should be an easing of the Military Transfer Program and that a pay raise was essential. The Secretary said that we should remove any inequities in pay that existed between the military, civil service, and the civilians, and certainly take necessary steps to correct and improve conditions that were not satisfactory. We should undertake a joint study together in Korea on the pay problem and the actual requirements to be met. The Secretary replied that the Transfer Program should continue. He was willing to consider the Military Transfer Program in light of prevailing economic conditions, tax revenues, expenditures, and what is in the best interests of our two countries. He said Korea's economy is important,MAP is not the place to solve the economic problems, and the Military Transfer Program helps the economy. We would like, therefore, to pursue the Transfer Program. It is important not to hold up a military pay raise and economic developments because of the Transfer Program. We will continue to keep the Transfer Program under study and look over the Program each year for adjustments if they become necessary.

MAP Excess Material. Kim asked for the Secretary's views on the transfer to Korea of MAP excess material sale proceeds. (Koreans proposed proceeds of sales should go to Korea for barracks, and quarters since their budget and MAP funds are so austere.) The Secretary said that he had not seen the proposal. He would be glad to look into the proposal when it was received.

Compensation for Korean Casualties in SVN . Kim said a problem existed in not having sufficient funds to provide adequate pensions and death benefits for Korean casualties in SVN. The Secretary said that Kim should draft a paper of what he thought was necessary and talk this over with Ambassador Brown and General Beach.

Korean Logistical Support to SVN . Kim said President Park wanted him to bring personally to the Secretary's attention the need for Korean participation in logistical support in SVN. The Secretary said that if Korea could meet the requirements and meet the bids as to quality, quantity, time and price, he saw no reason why ROK could not get some of the business. He said that under our AID programs it seemed quite appropriate for Korea to participate.

Kim said the problem was one of equity between Korea and Japan in providing the logistical support in SVN. He said Japan made money out of the Korean War by supplying materials while the Koreans did the fighting and now the same thing was going on again in SVN. He said the Koreans need a “special advantage.” The Secretary said if everything was equal, he would tend to favor Korea because of the need to boost the Korean economy.

Kim said Korea wants to have a U.S. procurement office in Seoul to help them compete with the Japanese who have such an office (Kim might be talking about U.S. Army Logistics Center Japan (USALCJ) which services the Far East). The Secretary said he did not think we were favoring Japan in such a manner, but he did not want to favor Japan over Korea procedurally. He would have the procedural problem looked into. (ISA was asked to do this.)

Secretary Invited to Visit Korea. Kim invited the Secretary to visit Korea on October 1, 1965, which is Armed Forces Day in Korea. The Secretary said he would very much like to come if possible; he and Mr. McNaughton had been trying for over a year to visit that area but just had not been able to do so. He would keep it in mind.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330,OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 3717, 333 Korea. Secret. Drafted by Boyes, and approved by McNaughton on May 21. The meeting was held in McNamara's office at the Pentagon.

2 See Document 49.

53. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 53. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, June 3, 1965.

1271. 1. In courtesy call on President Pak he raised question of ROK combat troops for RVN, asking clarification whether number desired was regimental combat team as mentioned by Amb Lodge or division mentioned by President Johnson. I replied that question was one of timing. A division was wanted, but combat team was all that could be accommodated at first. Pak said he would ask Assembly for authority to send up to division, to avoid necessity approaching Assembly twice.2

2. In response to direct question Pak stated it was his considered judgment that asking Assembly now to approve dispatch combat troops to RVN would not add materially to problem of obtaining Assembly approval of settlement with Japan. In fact there might be some advantage in presenting Assembly with several important questions at once. Opposition would have problem where to concentrate its fire. (FonMin made same point to me earlier today.) Pak expects about same result in vote on combat force as was achieved in vote on 2,000 non-combat troops.

3. Pak has requested GRVN through charge here for formal request for division. As soon as this is received he plans publish it and ask Assembly approval. He regrets that matter has prematurely leaked to press, and has instructed Min Defense to deny flatly that any agreement for dispatch or division was reached in Washington or that any firm plans for such dispatch yet exists.

4. Memcon follows.3

5. Comment: While I hesitate to question Pak's judgment on internal political matter and certainly did not feel justified in doing so to his face, I am afraid that I cannot share his easy optimism. To send 20,000 combat troops to RVN is a major undertaking for any country. It certainly is for Korea. Many Koreans will have sincere doubts as to wisdom of such a course. The opposition will claim that at same time Pak is turning Korea over to Japanese economic domination under unsatisfactory settlement, he is also weakening Korean defenses and increasing Korean danger from Communist neighbors, thus confirming his irresponsibility and incapacity to govern.

How much force this will add to “extreme struggle” against Japan settlement already promised by opposition cannot be accurately appraised. That it will add something seems inescapable.

I would therefore be much happier in terms of our primary objective of buttoning up Japanese settlement to see the troop question deferred until the settlement is ratified. At the least I would like action to be deferred until we can see more clearly how the opposition and public react to the troop dispatch proposal as publicized in press which is now center of public discussion here, and also to aftermath of Washington visit and program of Tokyo and SOFA negotiations.

Consequently I recommend that we seek to delay any further GRVN request at least long enough to permit a more accurate reading of the situation here.4

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19 KOR S–VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. No time of transmission appears on the telegram.

2 The Embassy learned from the Presidential Secretary that Pak understood the need for additional troops in Vietnam, wanted to “make additional forces available as gesture of appreciation for warm treatment and support accorded him on recent presidential visit,” and would request the National Assembly authorize sending a division to Vietnam. (Telegram 1268 from Seoul, June 2; ibid.)

3 Not found.

4 In light of Brown's comments, the Department of State requested that, since the Korean-Japan treaty “has top priority,” Saigon should “get GVN to hold off on making formal request for ROK division.” The Department of State also questioned whether Pak might be reneging on his commitment to achieve a treaty with Japan by pressing the troop issue. (Telegram 2788 to Saigon, June 3, repeated to Seoul; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19 KOR S–VIET S) Brown replied that in his view Pak did not intend to replace one issue with the other and was not hindering negotiations with Japan. (Telegram 1283 from Seoul, June 7; ibid.) The Embassy in Saigon reported that the Vietnamese Foreign Minister agreed to hold the request for additional Korean troops until the matter was discussed with him further. (Telegram 4064 from Saigon, repeated to Seoul as telegram 85, June 5; ibid.)

54. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 54. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, June 4, 1965, 1000Z.

1278. Ref A. Embtel 1269; B. Deptel 1224.2 Subject: Proposed reduction US force in Korea.

1. I have reviewed with General Howze both the military and political implications of the proposed reduction of US army strength in Korea to 48,700 including transients. Three aspects of the problem are crucial to any decision, namely: A. The effect of the reduction on the combat strength and effectiveness of the US forces in Korea.

B. The need to restructure the Army in Korea if the contemplated reduction is carried out.

C. Whether the establishment of this level of forces and any restructuring that is carried out because of it will be construed by the ROKG and the public as a weakening of Korea's defenses and a decrease in the US commitment to the ROK.

2. We are quite aware that the reduced force level would result in total strength (numbers) only about 3000 men below the average of the years 1960–1963, and that for one brief moment of time in the past, which was a low point in the normal fluctuation of strength, the numbers here got down to the figure now proposed. General Howze is nonetheless convinced that, especially with the present structure, the 48,700 level would result in a combat effectiveness of the two US Army divisions in the ROK of little more than 50 percent of the effectiveness contemplated by their tables of organization and taking into account Katusa augmentation. The full tables of organization and distribution of US units assigned to EUSA today call for 69,453 (present for duty—no transients included). A reduced effectiveness had in fact prevailed in the lean years 1960–1963, but the hope had been that strength could one day be improved to levels considered barely adequate to the present structure (i.e., about 55,000, including transients). As a result of strenuous and carefully documented representations made by General Howze after becoming COMUS Korea in 1963, force levels were in fact brought up to this level in 1964.

3. The reduction of military capability involved in a permanent 48,700 ceiling naturally gives me concern.

4. A decision to restructure might have been in order earlier, but the fact that force levels could, and occasionally did, rise to figures regarded as reasonably consistent with the existing structure, made it possible to postpone such a decision. If, however, a new and permanent lower ceiling is to be established, the question can no longer logically be avoided.

5. General Howze has documented to the Dept of Army the need for a restructuring if the force level is to be permanently at the new figure of 48,700 including transients. Basically his plan calls for the reduction of the 7th infantry to a brigade, and a beefing up of the 1st cavalry division. Some units of the 7th infantry would be abolished and the spaces transferred to remaining combat units. In the process some compounds in the 7th division area would be deactivated, and the military port of Inchon would be closed except for the POL terminal. The 1st cavalry would be strengthened as a result of these changes and the 7th division, though restructured as a brigade, would according to military opinion be stronger than it would be if its available manpower were scattered through a large number of units. Such changes are the logical corollary of a decision to limit the total numbers of personnel to a figure at which a number of presently organized combat units are badly below strength. To “retain both divisions at full structure and reduce manning levels” to proposed level as suggested in reftel B would not be militarily sound and would provide in fact less military power than the 48,700 figure could actually provide.

6. So much for the military aspects of the situation. The political problem presented is more immediate. I do not need to repeat here the importance attached by all Koreans to the US military commitment to Korea and the maintenance of US forces here. To meet this concern many high level US officials, including Secretary Rusk and, most recently, President Johnson, have assured the Koreans of continued powerful US forces in Korea and of prior consultation should we decide to reduce our forces here.3

7. As the ROKG and public were unaware of the buildup in 1964, the attrition to about 48,000 in March 1965, and the recent buildup, it is quite possible that they can remain in ignorance of the further reduction to 48,700 which is now proposed. This is however, not certain since the entire strength will now fluctuate around a lesser level.

8. To restructure in such manner as to use the 48,700 most effectively will certainly attract attention, and lead Koreans to the conclusion that the US is reducing its forces. Some of this can be countered. For example, closure of Inchon can be represented as part of a larger program to shift the 8th army's supply routes and logistic base to the Pusan/Taegu area. However, the ROKG would for purely operational reasons have to be told of the reduction of the 7th division to a brigade and will inevitably inquire as reasons for this restructuring.

9. I do not need to belabor the obvious point that this is no time to give the Koreans the impression that we are pulling out any troops. Nor do we want to give our free world allies or the Communists any such impression.4

10. Thus a permanent reduction to 48,700 level makes little military sense without restructuring, but to restructure will do major political damage in weakening the present govt when it needs all possible strength for the ratification of the settlement with Japan and to be able to make a further contribution of troops to GVN.

11. The best solution from both the political and military viewpoint is to rebuild to approximately 55,000 including transients and maintain the present structure. With this we can maintain a reasonable military posture and avoid political problems.

12. A less satisfactory solution would be to reduce to about the average of the last 5 years, or 52,000, and struggle along with the present structure, hoping that by reduction of the proportion of transients we can keep our structure sufficiently filled to be reasonably effective militarily, and being able if questioned by the ROKG about any deficiencies to say that there is no reduction from the average number we have had in the past.

13. A still less desirable solution, for reasons stated above, is to reduce to 48,700 and keep the present structure.

14. A final possibility (preferable from a purely military point of view to that in para 13) is simply to tell the Koreans about the reduction, point out that after it our force levels would be only a few thousand men below the mean level of 1960–1963, that restructuring will improve the effectiveness of the new number, and that with the present situation in South Vietnam this is the best we can do.

15. We should not contemplate this possibility at this time. No matter how presented by us, the headlines in Korea would be “US withdrawing its troops,” and the impact on the ROK-Japan settlement and the prospect of further Korean troops for RVN would be highly adverse for obvious reasons.

16. I therefore recommend that for the next 6 months we adopt the first solution (para 11) or, as a last resort, the 2nd (para 12). The matter could then be reviewed in the light of circumstances then existing.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19–2 US–KOR S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to Tokyo.

2 In telegram 1269 from Seoul, June 4, Brown stated he would discuss proposed U.S. troop reductions with the Country Team and requested that no actions be taken until he reported further. (Ibid.) In telegram 1224 to Seoul, June 2, the Department of State quoted from a Department of Defense letter indicating that troop strength in Korea would be reduced to 48,700. (Ibid.)

3 In telegram 1372 from Seoul, June 24, the Embassy reported that the Korean Government seemed to suspect that U.S. troop strength was being reduced. According to an intelligence report, at least two local police stations were instructed to watch closely the military installations in their locality to determine and report any reductions of U.S. troops. In addition, each police station in an area having a U.S. military base was ordered to recruit an informant working on the base to acquire information about troop strength. That information would then be used to evaluate ROK policy toward furnishing additional troops to Vietnam. (Ibid.)

4 In telegram 166 to Seoul, August 12, the Department of State notified the Embassy of decisions made by the Secretary of the Army to reduce “US forces in Korea for gold-flow reasons.” The charges conformed to suggestions advanced by the CT in Korea, namely, that troop levels would be maintained at 53,000 including transients and that Inchon would be used only for POL. In addition, some Pershing missile units and medium-range helicopters would no longer be sent to Korea. (Ibid.)

55. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 55. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, June 14, 1965.

1309. For Bundy and Johnson from Ambassador. Subj: ROK troops to Vietnam.

1. President Park has just told me that ROKG has received message from GRVN expressing appreciation for decision ROKG to send division combat troops to RVN and asking that such troops be sent as soon as possible.

2. President points out it obviously impossible for ROKG to act on such a message, which places him in most embarrassing position as he has consistently and publicly denied any decision to send combat troops.

3. President still wishes to send troops and to do so as soon as possible. He asks that anything necessary be done to get formal request from GRVN for combat decision without any prejudgment ROKG position.

4. President still wants such request prior ending present Assembly session June 18 since if he gets request before session closes he may be able to get extension session to consider request. Next session is scheduled for July and President plans devote it to ratification settlement with Japan. He does not want to complicate this later session with troop issue if he can possibly avoid it.2

5. Meanwhile General Howze advises that General Westmoreland wishes marine regimental combat team as soon as possible and plans to use it different location from rest of ROK division. For practical military reasons General Howze feels that if ROK troops are to be used in separate locations request might better be for division plus regimental combat team since division would operate more effectively as complete unit.

6. I have not had time to consider this carefully or to discuss it fully with General Howze, but my preliminary reaction is that in view of confused and checkered history of this matter illustrated by GRVN message referred to above, it would be most unwise complicate political situation by asking for any more than division at this time. I may comment more fully on this point after having chance consider it more carefully with General Beach who assumes command tomorrow.

7. I, of course, made it clear to President Park that no one on US side had told GRVN that ROKG had decided to send combat division. All that we had told GRVN was that we were confident ROKG would give request for combat division very sympathetic consideration.

8. President Park urgently requested that GRVN message be kept completely secret in view obvious embarrassment to his government should its contents become known.

9. Text GRVN request follows separate telegram.3

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Saigon and passed to the White House. No time of transmission appears on the telegram.

2 In telegram 1317 from Seoul, June 15, Brown reported on his conversation with Pak in which the latter recounted his discussions with several DRP Assembly members about sending combat troops to Vietnam. The members urged the matter be submitted to the Assembly as soon as possible so that it would not be “considered at the same session with the Japanese settlement.” Accordingly, Pak was anxious to receive the request and was prepared to ask for a special session of the Assembly to consider it. (Ibid., POL 27–3 KOR S)

3 Telegram 1310 from Seoul, June 14, transmitted the GVN request. (Ibid., POL 27–3 VIET S)

56. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 56. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, June 23, 1965, 1300Z.

1369. Ref: Deptel 1312, Saigon 2993,CINCPAC unn, COMUSMACV unn.2 Subj: Support and Allowances for ROK Troops in RVN.

1. On June 18 Korea Times reported Minister of National Defense (MND) Kim Song-un had on previous day told National Assembly Defense Committee “U.S. had agreed to provide the additional troops (i.e. 400 men to reinforce ROK troops already in South Vietnam) with munitions and the same overseas service allowances as granted to the Korean forces already stationed there.” Ambassador called on Kim same day and reminded him of written agreement between his Ministry and ourselves that fact U.S. was paying overseas allowances for the two thousand Korean troops in Vietnam would be held secret.

2. Minister said he had not realized we were concerned about keeping this secret and was sorry if he had caused any embarrassment. Ambassador said matter would come up again and asked him to avoid any mention of our contribution in future if conceivably possible, and, if not, to play it down as much as possible.3 Memcon pouched.4

3. Ambassador also expressed hope that there would be no public discussion of any arrangements with respect to despatch of division to South Vietnam until Min of Natl Defense, FonMin, PriMin, General Beach and Embassy had all agreed on same story and same way of putting it to public. Minister said he fully agreed and would try to avoid or play down reference to our support for units now in Vietnam. He said he was sorry he had caused trouble and would certainly be in touch with us in advance about anything that was said about larger unit.

4. ROK JCS has now prepared and submitted agenda for discussion between MND and COMUSK containing long list ROKG requests in regard not only allowances but combat pay and logistic support in RVN of ROK division requested by GVN. COMUSK meeting with MND afternoon June 23 and will report in separate message5 and in detail on ROK stated requirements.

5. Comment: With despatch of ROK forces in division or even RCT strength it will be difficult if not impossible to conceal extent to which U.S. will presumably be paying expenses in RVN, already many Koreans seem to take for granted that U.S. footing bill and that sending troops to RVN is “good business” for ROK. So far we have detected no particular public or press criticism this feature ROKG support in RVN.

6. We realize degree to which we can maintain privacy of arrangements for ROK combat forces will depend on nature of arrangements still to be worked out. Would appreciate having Dept's comments on this aspect after our recommendations have been received and studied.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19 KOR S-VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to Saigon, CINCPAC for POLAD, and COMUSMACV.

2 Telegram 1312 to Seoul, June 21, authorized the Embassy to inform the ROKG of the allowances to be paid to a Korean division in Vietnam. The source of funding was still to be determined. (Ibid.) The Embassy informed Washington that the Country Team in Seoul preferred payment in the present form, namely, “direct cash payment to MND outside normal aid channels.” The Country Team did not want payments to interfere with U.S. policy for Korean stabilization and development and wanted to avoid discussions about funding that “could range all the way from charges that ROK forces are being used as mercenaries to complaints that ROKG not being adequately compensated for services rendered.” (Telegram 7 from Seoul, July 2; ibid., POL 27–3 VIET S)

3 The Embassy in Saigon concurred with this strategy, pointing out that release of information about U.S. payments to Korean troops would have a “detrimental effect both within VN and internationally.” In the Embassy's view, release of that information would make Vietnam more vulnerable to charges that its government was merely a “U.S. puppet” and undercut U.S. claims that the Vietnam effort had the support of international forces. (Telegram 23 from Saigon, July 2; ibid., DEF 19 KOR S-VIET S)

4 Not found.

5 Not found.

57. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 57. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, July 10, 1965, 0510Z.

40. Ref: A. Deptel 15, B. Deptel 27.2 For Assistant Secretary Bundy from Ambassador. Subj:ROK Deployment RVN-MAP Transfer and Pay Raise.

1. If Korea provides a combat division for RVN this will add a new dimension to our relationship.

2. Korea, a small country bordering on the Communist world, will be in actual combat in one of the most active areas of RVN against Communist forces. It will have provided very substantially greater combat manpower than any other free world country great or small except the United States. This is a decision of great import for any country to make.

3. It comes at a rather crucial period for Korea, a sort of watershed in its current history. For if the settlement with Japan is ratified, as we hope it will be, a period of new relationships and new problems will begin which will provide great opportunities, but also problems the solution of which will tax all ROKG's capabilities and all our skill and understanding.

4. Tensions with the Communist world are heightening everywhere. This is no time to drop our guard. Rather we should accelerate our effort to build free world strength wherever opportunity offers.

5. At the moment trained combat manpower is a crucial need in RVN. It is fair to say to Korea that this battle is hers as well as ours, that she can afford the men, that it is her duty to return in some measure the help rendered her so unstintingly by the free world in the past, and that we will ensure that this will not involve her in extra cost.

6. But it is also a cold fact that Korea does not have to do this, that it does involve Korea in some additional risk, that a well-trained combat division can be a real contribution to the struggle, and that it can save us a great deal in blood and treasure.

7. This question is now about to be considered by the Assembly in an atmosphere which for a variety of reasons has become superheated and casts doubt upon the outcome. It is not just the opposition which is causing the trouble, but also many members of the DRP. The question is mixed up with the feeling against Japan and the ever present haunting doubts about US support. The opposition, already in full cry on the ratification of the K–J settlement, is beginning to attack on the second front of the troop issue. Some members of the DRP are accusing the govt of failure to get proper recompense from the US for what the ROKG is prepared to do in RVN. On top of this, public opinion has been inflamed by distorted reports that the US expects flesh and blood from Korea while concentrating its purchases of war materials in Japan to the advantage of that economy rather than the ROK.

8. The question of a pay raise has become a current political issue in specific reference to the question of sending troops to RVN. This pay raise is unquestionably not only justified, but is essential if morale and efficiency in the armed forces and civil service is to be maintained. That it is long overdue is clear from the fact that the cost of living has increased about 75 percent since pay was last adjusted. The 1966 budget, shortly to be presented to the Assembly, will have to deal with this question in some form. In every phase of service, military, govt, education, low pay is a drag upon progress and efficiency which the country can ill afford. Yet the cost is also great for it to afford.

9. A 75 percent pay raise plus the present MAP transfer program would, for example, increase the military budget by about 35 percent.

10. I have devoted a lot of thought as to what we could do to meet this combination of political and economic problems in a way most consistent with our current economic strategy. We need a measure which will meet the political objections which the govt faces in seeking to send combat troops to RVN, which will contribute at least partially to the solution of the economic problems which the govt faces, which will recognize the real contribution which Korea will in fact be making, and which will be consistent with our aid policy and stabilization program.

11. There is a solution which meets all of these criteria and meets most of them dramatically, namely a suspension of the ROK funding requirement of the MAP transfer program for so long as ROK maintains substantial forces in RVN by means of US offshore procurement from Korea of those items now scheduled for transfer, upon the understanding that ROKG budgetary savings from this action be a contribution to a substantial military and civilian pay raise.

12. We cannot give preference to Korea in procurement for RVN as they want us to do, for reasons of law and principle. But we can meet political difficulties and show our appreciation without sacrifice of either by this adjustment of MAP transfer.

13. Such action would have a considerable effect. It would be represented by the ROKG as a great political victory. It would go far to ensure united DRP support for despatch of a division to RVN. It would correct the adverse effects of the untimely release of the Poats and McNamara statements, which, however proper in their context, have caused untold political difficulties for us and for the ROKG here.3 It would be consistent with Secretary McNamara's promise to President Pak to review the MAP transfer program in the light of Korea's real economic needs. It would not finance all of a pay raise, but would help make a pay raise possible.OSP of items programmed for transfer would continue the stimulation of local industry which we have so strongly emphasized as important and would set the stage for budgetary transfer when the ROKG is equal to the task. Korean dollar earnings would be increased. The stabilization and SA policies would not be weakened.

14. Realize that this course will add something to our dollar outflow. But the amount pales into insignificance in comparison with the cost of sending a US division to RVN instead of a ROK division.

15. Of course to suspend MAP transfer and still make good on our recent commitment (refs A and B) to increase ROK active army divisions combat effectiveness and to bring 3 ready reserve divisions to full equipment levels, Korea MAP funding must necessarily be further increased. But in my view this is a lesser evil than a reluctant despatch of the division or failure to send it at all, or indeed the loss of a substantial pay raise.

16. We may lose some face in yielding on a point on which we have for so long held firm. But the possibility of a change of view was established at the highest level during the Pak visit to Washington and we do have more facts and new circumstances. So this doesn't worry me.

17. I think a suspension of the MAP program is now both politically expedient and economically and militarily justified.

18. I therefore recommend that we agree to it and do so promptly, so that it can have its effect upon current Assembly consideration of the troop issue.4

19. All members of the Country Team concur.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Telegrams 15 and 27 to Seoul, July 5 and 8, outlined the terms Washington was prepared to meet, if ROKG agreed to provide additional troops to Vietnam. (Ibid.) With reference to the ROKG requests, Brown stressed the importance of four military matters to the U.S.-ROK relationship: maintenance of U.S. troop strength in Korea, suspension or modification of the MAP transfer program, an increase in MAP, and financial assistance for a Korean military pay raise. Noting ROKG dissatisfaction with the U.S. response to these concerns thus far, Brown stated that without some concessions on those points the U.S. would be strongly criticized by the Korean press and public and the National Assembly could refuse to approve the dispatch of troops to Vietnam. (Telegram 12 from Seoul, July 3; ibid.)

3 The Korean Minister of National Defense obtained news reports quoting McNamara as having said that Korea would bear the full 75 percent military pay increase and stating that Poats believed that Korea could easily shoulder $7 or $8 million in defense increases. News that the United States intended to purchase munitions from Japan for use in Vietnam also reached Korea. (Telegram 1390 from Seoul, June 29; ibid., DEF 19 US–KOR S)

4 In a Joint State-Defense-AID message, the Embassy received authorization to inform ROKG that the MAP transfer program would be suspended as long as Korean troops served in Vietnam and funding of the offshore procurement program for transfer items had been approved. The savings Korea realized from those actions was to go to covering the costs of military and civilian pay increases. (Telegram 47 to Seoul, July 12; ibid., POL 27–3 VIET S) Brown notified the Department of State that he would keep the information secret until he had determined the most appropriate manner and time to utilize it. (Telegram 45 from Seoul, July 13; ibid.) But Brown feared that without an increase in MAP funds for Korea the United States would be unable to meet other promises to provide military equipment and investment funds. (Telegram 53 from Seoul, July 14; ibid.)

58. Editorial Note 58. Editorial Note

On August 13, 1965, the Korean National Assembly began deliberating the proposal to dispatch a combat division to Vietnam. Assembly members of the opposition People's Party decided to walk out or abstain from voting, even though many supported the proposal. According to the Embassy many regarded “any sign of cooperation with ROKG as political kiss of death at this critical juncture.” (Telegram 123 from Seoul, August 4; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66,POL 27 VIET S) On August 13 the Assembly authorized sending combat troops to Vietnam by a virtually unanimous vote: 101 for the proposal, 1 against, with 2 abstentions. Opposition members were not present for the vote. (Telegram 154 from Seoul, August 13; ibid.) President Johnson responded by sending President Pak a message of thanks for “this further demonstration of the devotion of the people of Korea to the spirit of liberty and independence.” (Telegram 171 to Seoul, August 13; ibid., POL 27–3 VIET S) The text of the President's letter is in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, page 781.

59. Memorandum From the Assistant Director of the United States Operations Mission to Korea (Brown) to the Director of the United States Operations Mission to Korea of the Agency for International Development (Bernstein) 59. Memorandum From the Assistant Director of the United States Operations Mission to Korea (Brown) to the Director of the United States Operations Mission to Korea of the Agency for International Development (Bernstein)1

Seoul, September 23, 1965.

SUBJECT

Procurement in Korea for Vietnam

Over the last several months there has been considerable discussion within Korea and between the ROKG and the U.S. on procurement in Korea for Vietnam. Discussions have touched on both civilian procurement, using U.S. aid funds for Vietnam, and military procurement both for U.S. forces and under the Vietnam MAP.2

In our general discussions with the ROKG we have informed them that there is no possibility of granting Korea special preference for such procurement for both political and legislative reasons. We have also stressed that Korea should emphasize the development of permanent export markets rather than place too much emphasis on what is hopefully a temporary situation. At the same time, it is important for the U.S. to recognize the political and psychological attitudes within Korea on this question. Korea is providing a full combat division plus a non-combat engineering unit to Vietnam. While the ROKG and the U.S. have repeatedly maintained that such action was based on Korea's understanding of its own interests in the war in South Vietnam and its responsibilities to the Free World, there is inevitably the feeling within Korea, and particularly in the Assembly, that Korea should receive some tangible trade benefits from its willing response to the request for troops. This feeling is fortified by the feeling that persists in Korea that Japan profited greatly economically from the Korean War. Korea now sees an opportunity to capitalize itself on the economic consequences of the Vietnam engagement. But equally important, Korea resents any implication that while Korea is contributing troops to the war, Japan may once again be making large profits through U.S. off-shore procurement.

In order to meet these problems, the U.S. has promised the ROKG that Korea will be given full and equal opportunity to compete for U.S. off-shore procurement whether military or civilian. Some steps have been taken in this regard, but others still remain to be implemented, and certain other recommendations in this area are still awaiting U.S. action.

Civilian: USOM recommended in April that Korea be made eligible for purchases under Supporting Assistance for Vietnam of tires and tubes which are currently restricted to U.S. procurement. This recommendation was made on the basis of Korean capability to produce tires and tubes of high quality, having supplied such products over the past several years to U.S. forces stationed here in Korea. Furthermore, Korea utilizes U.S. surplus rubber in its production of tires and tubes and thus the procurement in Korea would not represent entirely a gold drain. Finally, this industry is one which AID has helped to develop and is one of the most competent and competitive industries in Korea. Action on this recommendation lies with AID/W.

The second recommendation on civilian procurement, made in June, related to the 10% rule on steel products. The rule in question states that not more than 10% of an item purchased on a limited world-wide basis can be obtained from a non-eligible source of procurement. In the case of galvanized steel products from Korea, roughly 10% of the value of the final product is paid for with cash to Japan for certain interim processing with additional payment to Japan paid for with scrap iron imported from the U.S. Thus while Japan contributes more than 10% of the total value of the finished product, only 10% is paid for in dollars and the remainder in U.S. purchased scrap. Our recommendation was that the U.S. interpret the 10% rule broadly enough to permit Korean exports of this product under the AID Vietnam program. This was not a waiver request, but a request for a broad interpretation which appears legitimate within the purposes for which the rule was established. This recommendation is important because Korean exports of galvanized steel to Vietnam have run as high as $13 million a year and steel has thus been one of Korea's chief exports to Vietnam. In addition, Korea manufacturers undertook long negotiations and paid an indemnity to Vietnam to reopen the market in Vietnam after a bad shipment caused the RVN to exclude Korean steel imports. To deny this market to Korea now would mean rendering past Korean efforts both in developing the market and in settling a difficult dispute useless. Action on this question is with USOM/Saigon, which has been given discretionary authority by AID/W to resolve the matter.

We discussed with Washington the possibility of other types of civilian procurement in Korea, particularly the processing of PL 480 products for Vietnam and the purchase of textiles. Washington has informed us that such procurement is not feasible.

Military: Korea has been informed that MAP and DOD funds can only be spent off-shore for emergency or other special reasons such as storage problems, substantial price differences, etc. In such cases, procurement must be completely competitive, and no preference can be granted. To meet Korean complaints about procurement in Japan, DOD has requested Japan, Vietnam and Korea to review procurement procedures and to determine whether Korea was in fact in a less advantageous position, because Korea was now receiving information on all orders for Vietnam and would in the future be receiving information on all U.S. procurement in the Far East for U.S. forces. However, to date while information on Vietnam procurement has been provided to the U.S. Army's Korean Procurement Agency, information on other military procurement of the Far East has not been so provided. While Korea may not be able to compete with Japan on certain sophisticated items, there is an important political and psychological importance in giving Korea completely equal opportunity to compete on all U.S. off-shore procurement in the Far East. Action on this matter lies evidently with U.S. Army's Japan Procurement Agency.

A second item of military procurement was in the use of Korean facilities of rehabilitation and repair of vehicles, aircraft, and other equipment, for which Korea was believed to have some very adequate facilities. Last spring, CINCPAC undertook to survey some of these facilities—on a priority basis—for use in connection with Vietnam. To date, however, nothing has been heard from CINCPAC on this matter.

Conclusion: Korea's hopes for large-scale exports to Vietnam, which have frequently been mentioned as high as $30 million a year, will largely be frustrated, particularly since off-shore procurement of most textiles, which represented over half of the value of items in the Korean planning, has been precluded by Washington under either U.S. forces or AID procurement. This makes it all the more important that in those items in which Korea does have a legitimate right to compete, efforts should be made to provide Korea the necessary information and opportunities. Action on the tires and tubes and on the steel questions for example, would be most welcome. A determination of Korea's capability in repair and rehabilitation would also be important.

In addition, off-shore procurement by the U.S. for other than Vietnam should not discriminate against Korea and should in fact provide Korea with as much opportunity as possible. Particularly important in this area is the procurement for the U.S. forces stationed in Korea, including the purchases for the PX. This subject is dealt with in a separate paper which is attached.3

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 12–5 KOR S. Secret. Attached to a September 28 letter from Roger Ernst, Acting Director of the United States Operations Mission to Korea, to Barnett.

2 Documentation regarding increased Korean participation in procurement programs for Vietnam under AID and MAP is ibid.,POL 27–3 VIET S; DEF 12–5 KOR–VIET S; DEF 19 US–KOR S; DEF 19 KOR S-VIET S; AID VIET S; and AID (KOR S) VIET S.

3 Attached but not printed.

60. Editorial Note 60. Editorial Note

Korean Foreign Minister Yi Tong-won visited Washington November 29–December 1, 1965. On November 29 the Foreign Minister met with Assistant Secretary of State Bundy for discussions covering the treaty with Japan, the Korean item and Chinese representation in the United Nations, Korean procurement for and the situation in Vietnam, and Korean fishing interests. Many of those topics were also discussed between Foreign Minister Yi and Secretary Rusk later that day. The Foreign Minister also met with Vice President Humphrey and Secretary McNamara during the visit. The major topic discussed at those meetings was Vietnam.

Memoranda of conversations and other relevant documentation pertaining to the Foreign Minister's visit are in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S; POL 15–1 KOR S; POL 27 KOR/UN; POL 33–4 KOR S-US; POL 27 VIET S; and Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 3717, 333 Korea.

61. Memorandum of Conversation 61. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, December 7, 1965.

SUBJECT

Additional ROK Troops for South Viet-Nam

PARTICIPANTS

Korean Ambassador Kim

Mr. William P. Bundy—Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

Ambassador Kim asked to see me alone this afternoon. After a preliminary inquiry about subjects that Secretary McNamara had intended to raise if he had been able to carry out his hope of going to Korea after the NATO meeting, the Ambassador came to his point, which was that he had a letter from President Park's chief secretary, Yi Hu Rak, asking in effect whether the US intended to solicit additional Korean forces now for South Viet-Nam.2

I responded that we did believe that additional forces were required in 1966 and that we were studying the extent of the need urgently. I made clear that no decisions or final evaluations had yet been made, so that I could not now say whether the question of additional Korean forces would be raised. I then went on to stress that, “when and if” we did come to believe that it would be useful to have additional Korean forces, we would take great care to see that the matter was raised personally with President Park before we did anything else.

Ambassador Kim noted that his attaches in the Pentagon were picking up word that additional Korean forces were being envisaged in various plans for 1966. I said that we had contingency plans for a great many situations, but that their existence did not at all mean that the US Government had come to a firm decision. He also noted that there had been a certain amount of newspaper speculation and that he was getting inquiries whether Korea was planning to send “two divisions”. I told him that such speculation was virtually inevitable, although it did not do any good and we would do our best to prevent it. He expressed agreement that press speculation on the subject was not useful.

(Subsequent to my meeting with Ambassador Kim, I received from Deputy Assistant Secretary Friedman in DOD his memorandum of a similar call by Ambassador Kim this morning.3 Mr. Friedman gave the same basic response that I did, except that he did not specifically say that we would take the matter up with President Park in the first instance if we did come to the view that additional Korean troops were needed. Mr. Friedman also elicited Ambassador Kim's personal view that any request for additional troops would probably be favorably received, but that it would have to be carefully handled to assure that it did not become a “political football” and that the Korean Government would have to be in a position to show its people more clearly the importance of the move to Korea. Ambassador Kim further volunteered that his Government might be thinking of one or two additional divisions, to make up a corps.)

Comment: It was Mr. Friedman's conclusion from Ambassador Kim's responses that the Korean Government would be interested in very early discussions on this subject. Pending consultation with Ambassador Brown, prior to his departure for Korea on Saturday, I am less sure of this conclusion. Ambassador Kim has a way of speaking for himself alone, and the message from Yi Hu Rak could be interpreted to mean that we should be very careful how we handle this and particularly careful to deal with President Park himself before the matter seemed to be a wide general assumption in the press or otherwise. However, the absence of any negative element in the Yi Hu Rak message does at least suggest that the Korean Government realizes that the matter is virtually sure to come up, and in this sense the message may argue for the possibility of an early request at least on a discreet basis.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. III. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Bundy and approved in S/S on December 8.

2 Foreign Minister Yi's discussions about Vietnam during his visit to Washington produced reports in the Korean media about the possibility of an increase in ROK troops in Vietnam. According to the Embassy in Seoul, that possibility had not yet produced much public or political response, but at least one major newspaper, Choson Ilbo, had struck a somewhat critical note on the issue of additional troops being dispatched from Korea. (Airgram A–212 from Seoul, December 9; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27 VIET S) The U.S. Government had denied that the matter of additional troops had been discussed with the Foreign Minister and took the official position that the issue was not currently being discussed between U.S. and Korean officials. (Telegram 605 from Seoul, December 17; ibid.)

3 Memorandum of conversation not found.

62. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 62. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, December 16, 1965, 0930Z.

598. For Bundy, FE. Subject: Further Korean Troops to Vietnam.

1. This afternoon I called on President Park and gave him a full exposition of our appraisal of the situation in South Vietnam, of our plans for augmentation of U.S. forces there, our efforts to get further contributions from Asian countries and their probable results, and asked his reaction to the possibility of the contribution of further Korean division by July and a brigade by October. I said that the U.S. would be prepared to see that the physical security of Korea would not be impaired by such a contribution and that no added economic burden be placed on Korea because of it.

2. The President said this was a matter which he would have to consider very carefully. It might perhaps be well, having once contributed combat forces, to add to that contribution and try to help get it over as soon as possible, but he had to consider the National Assembly,2 Korean public opinion and many other matters before reaching any decision. He said he would like the fact of my approach kept a secret. He would mention it only to his Prime Minister and Minister National Defense and hoped that complete silence on this point would be obtained in Washington and Saigon as well as in Seoul.

3. He agreed that the sole channel of communication between the two governments on this matter should be in Seoul.

4. It was left that he would get in touch with me when he was ready to talk fuller.

5. Comment: I got the impression that the President felt this was going to be a very sticky problem for him and that, on first reaction, although anxious to be helpful, he was by no means clear in his own mind as to what the right course for Korea should be.

6. Full Memcon follows.3

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Saigon Eyes Only for the Ambassador, Department of Defense for McNaughton, and CINCPAC.

2  Brown reported separately in telegram 605 from Seoul, December 17, that Pak also expressed regret that earlier in the year he had asked the Assembly to approve a specific number of troops for Vietnam rather than request blanket authorization to dispatch what he determined to be appropriate numbers of troops. (Ibid.)

3 Not found, but telegram 605 from Seoul, December 17, contains a detailed summary of the Pak-Brown discussion of issues pertaining to Vietnam.

63. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 63. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, December 22, 1965, 1135Z.

627. Subject: Additional Korean Troops for South Vietnam.

1. PriMin Chong Il-kwon raised this subject with me at lunch today, indicating he had discussed matter with President Pak and with Minister National Defense. He stated that President Pak, MND and he all agree that ROK should send additional troops we had requested but that US help would be required in handling problems with political opposition and press that would arise when request became public knowledge. I questioned him closely with respect to authoritativeness of his statement, asking on three separate occasions whether this statement represented official response to my conversation with President Pak. On each occasion PriMin responded in the affirmative.

2. Conversation was devoted primarily to discussion of tactics for handling political problems. PriMin said it would be essential, before troop request became public, that either Secretary Rusk or Secretary McNamara come to Korea for consultation with President Pak. He suggested about January 25 for such visit. He said visit needed to assure Korean public of continuing deep concern and support of US leadership for ROKG. Immediately following consultation Secretary could publicly reaffirm US support for Korea's security, point to concrete measures being taken by US to strengthen ROK forces (e.g., new equipment for divisions), assure public that modernization ROK forces would continue and that MAP program would not decrease in next two years or so, describe plans for augmentation US forces in SVN, and express hope that Korea could make further troop contribution. (PM envisaged that in meantime favorable news could continue emanate from Washington and Saigon on US and GVN procurement from Korea for SVN and augmentation Korean exports.)

3. Immediately following this announcement President would confirm request and convene National Assembly to present authorizing legislation, which it would have secretly prepared in advance. PriMin said he anticipated legislation could be passed before President Pak departs February 7 on his Southeast Asian tour. He expressed view such hurried passage necessary to get legislation passed before public unrest develops during traditional period of food scarcity in late winter and before opposition and its press supporters could organize resistance and mobilize student action. He thought President Pak would have no difficulty in keeping DRP in line, although he admitted some DRP members might make trouble.

4. PriMin said that he foresees two major political problems facing ROKG in coming months. One was the possibility of difficulties, particularly on economic aspects, with administration of Japan-ROK agreements. These might give opposition and press opportunities to attack Pak government. Second was possibility that something might go wrong in Vietnam, where serious reverses could damage prestige of ROKG. He therefore thought it essential that to extent possible effort be made to educate press and opposition assemblymen as to Vietnam situation and US determination before troop request made public. PriMin said in this context he thought it would be extremely useful if the USG could arrange and finance early visits to US and Vietnam by group of about 15 key DRP and opposition assemblymen and to Vietnam by selected group of reporters and editorial writers. Those selected could report to Korean people on actual conditions in US and Vietnam, could be indoctrinated on need for additional forces in present ROK area of responsibility by ROK commanders in SVN, and could generally prepare way for acceptance troop request.

5. In response to foregoing I told him that it might be possible to have Secretary McNamara visit Korea during last week of January2 and that we would see what we could do about arranging for visits to US and Vietnam by assemblymen and press people. With respect quid pro quo I gave him essentially same assurances I had given to President Pak but did not go into detail. I told him that US would be as forthcoming as possible and that we would expect detailed discussions of military aspects this subject would take place between MND and General Beach as soon as MND was ready to talk. I concluded this conversation by expressing deep appreciation on behalf of USG and people for the response which he had given me.

6. Comment: I am not completely satisfied with this interview, particularly in view of fact that MND has not mentioned this subject to General Beach, although after his talk with Prime Minister, MND had lengthy discussion with Beach on related subjects. This makes me feel it necessary to confirm personally with President Pak that ROKG position is as stated by PriMin. This I will try to do morning December 24.

7. I also find it difficult to believe that things will go as smoothly as PriMin seemed to indicate. For one thing it appears unlikely that ROKG would be able to push enabling legislation through National Assembly before President Pak's departure for Southeast Asia. Indeed PriMin seemed to confirm this doubt when he later referred to possibility that assemblymen and newsmen might take suggested trips while President Pak was away. It is also clear that considerable hard bargaining with respect quid pro quo will ensue once MND gets into this act. On the whole, however, PriMin's reply confirms our feeling that highest levels ROKG wish to respond favorably to our request and that major problems will involve satisfying MND's demands on quid pro quo and minimizing public and political opposition to request when it is presented to National Assembly. These may be considerable.

8. For tactical reasons, I propose now to wait for approach from MND to General Beach, which I will try to get President to accelerate if I am able to discuss subject with him on Dec. 24, or if not, by raising matter again with Prime Minister, at latest Dec 27. Meanwhile, we are considering how we could assist with brain-washing operation on opposition and press which PriMin suggested and would appreciate any suggestions Department may offer. Would also appreciate soonest indication of whether it would be possible for Secretary McNamara to schedule Seoul visit last week January.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

2  McNamara did not visit South Korea at this time. As part of a previously arranged trip to several Asian countries, Vice President Humphrey was scheduled to visit Seoul January 1–2, 1966. The Embassy advised that since the “request for additional ROK troops is now most important subject involving US/ROK relations” Humphrey should be prepared to discuss the subject when he met with Pak. The Department of State concurred. (Telegrams 628 from Seoul, December 22, and 623 to Seoul, December 23; both ibid.)

64. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 64. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, December 24, 1965.

645. Ref: Embtel 643.2

1. By previous arrangement I remained after the President's interview with Senator Symington and General Beach reported reftel. I said to the President that the PriMin had raised with me on Dec 22 the matter of an additional Korean division and brigade for SVN, which I had broached to the President on Dec 16. The PM had said that the President wished to send these forces if necessary arrangements for preserving Korea's security and satisfying Korean public opinion could be made. He had also said that the President felt if this was to be done it were best that it be done quickly, perhaps even before he left for his trip to Southeast Asia. Since this was so important a question, I wished to confirm that this was indeed the President's view and if so to ask him how to proceed further.

2. The President said the PM had told him of our talk and had correctly reflected his views. If additional troops were to be sent it was best that they should be sent when they were needed and not after long, drawn-out delays. To make this possible, many things would have to be done by his govt and a number of things by the US.

3. I said that I recognized this and repeated that our request had been made on the basis that the physical security of Korea would not thereby be impaired and that no additional economic burden would thereby be imposed. The President nodded. I realized that this would involve a number of practical arrangements which would have to be worked out. The PM was leaving for Manila on the 28th and would not be back until the first. How would the President contemplate that we should get on with necessary arrangements?

4. The President said that the PM had doubtless issued the necessary instructions to the MND and perhaps we should get in touch with him. I said that at any time the Minister of National Defense notified us that he was ready to talk, we would be prepared to do so. I therefore suggested the MND inform General Beach as soon as he was ready to begin discussion. General Beach was prepared to respond immediately and the sooner we received this word from the MND the better. The President agreed that we should proceed in this fashion.

5. I told the President that this action on his part would be deeply appreciated in [garble—US?] and closed discussion with a heartfelt “Thank you,” to which he responded with a shy and friendly “Merry Christmas.”

6. Comment: The entire second part of this interview lasted less than ten minutes. The President was calm, sober and laconic. Indeed, it struck me as remarkable that a matter of such moment should be dealt with so calmly.

7. It is unmistakably clear, however, from what the President said and from the PM's earlier comments that they have genuine concern, both about the physical security of Korea and about what the Korean people will think about that security. It is important to them (and I think to us, also) that they secure the necessary Assembly approval, not by just a bare majority or a straight party vote after bitter debate and genuine doubts, but with the reasonable support and consensus of a satisfied public opinion. Indeed, as a conscientious President he could take no other position and it is doubly important for him personally with an election coming up.

8. The next move is up to the ROK, and I tried to arrange it that way because I think it is better psychologically for MND to be coming to us, particularly since I have twice established with the President the fundamental basis upon which we approach this negotiation. We know that MND has established a secret noforn task force to consider this matter. If General Beach does not hear from MND in a few days I will raise the matter again, but will apply the needle, not to MND, but to the Blue House or to the PM.

9. I am aware of General Westmoreland's and CINCPAC's strong desire for the arrival of any new ROK contingents before the dates of July and October contained in my original proposal to the President. I suggest, however, that we do not raise this question yet, but in the light of the President's and PM's stated feelings that this matter should be dealt with promptly, bring up the need for earlier deployment at the negotiating level when discussions have developed an agreed basis upon which the troops can be sent.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. No time of transmission appears on the telegram. Repeated to the Department of Defense, CINCPAC, and Saigon and passed to the White House.

2 Telegram 643 from Seoul, December 24, summarized the discussion of ROK troops in Vietnam between U.S. Senator Stuart Symington and Pak. Pak expressed his satisfaction with the treatment and support given his troops and mentioned in general terms the possibility of additional ROK units being sent to Vietnam. Since the discussion of that issue was nonspecific, Brown indicated his belief that no “compromise of secrecy with respect to our larger request was involved in the President's remarks.” Nevertheless, Symington was cautioned that the topic “should be handled as a matter of the highest classification.” (Ibid.)

65. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 65. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, December 28, 1965, 0730Z.

656. Troops for Vietnam.

1. The Prime Minister told me evening December 27 that he had just come from meeting with President, DPM, Minister of National Defense, Foreign Minister and Yi Hu-rak, in which requirements from U.S. necessary to make possible reinforcement Korean troops in Vietnam were formulated. Memorandum will be prepared and handed to me in next day or two by Foreign Minister, who will conduct subsequent negotiations. Prime Minister will check on progress of discussions after Vice President's visit.

2. I said that I recognized certain things would have to be done by U.S. and the sooner we received the memorandum the better. I repeated that the basis upon which we were proceeding was no impairment of Korean security and no economic burden for Korea.2 The PriMin said that he and the President wanted very much to be helpful, but they had problems with Korean Assembly and public.

3. I asked if President was still thinking of time table which PriMin had outlined (Embtel 627).3 He replied that President had not decided on time table and could not do so until he saw what arrangements could be made with U.S.

4. PriMin said President was thinking of asking Assembly for authorization in general terms to increase or decrease troops in South Vietnam without specifying numbers.

5. PriMin added that Foreign Minister had assured the President that he would be “a very tough bargainer” in these negotiations.

Comment.

6. Additional troops issue has thus now become matter of formal inter-government negotiation, including economic and political, as well as purely military matters. ROKs are reserving commitment until they see what they can get. MND strategy will doubtless be to get as broad commitments from U.S. as possible before getting down to military details, and Yi Tong-won will doubtless try to maintain reputation of “giant killer” which he has built up in negotiations with Japanese.

7. I anticipate rather confused situation, for a while at least, in view personalities involved and Yi Tong-won's ignorance of matters economic and military. We will just have to play this by ear and will know more when we see the memorandum. It will be real advantage to us if ROKG makes opening gambit.

8. In any event it appears that things are moving seriously on the Korean side.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD, Department of Defense, and Saigon.

2 Proposals exchanged by the Department of State, the Country Team in Seoul, and COMUSKOREA examining the needs and costs involved in accomplishing those goals are ibid.

3  Document 63.

66. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 66. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, December 28, 1965, 0935Z.

657. Additional Troops for Vietnam. Deptel 588.2

1. As is evident already from my talks with the President and the Prime Minister, the main problem facing them in acceding to request for more troops will be the creation of a favorable climate of opinion in Korean Assembly, press and public.

2. U.S. attitude and even more important, U.S. actions, will inevitably exert a strong formative influence, one way or the other, on this climate.

3. Our overriding purpose is to get additional troops and, almost equally important, to get them with as solid a basis of Korean national support as possible. It would not be good for us or for our cause, for example, if these troops were sent by a narrow margin of Assembly approval after bitter debate and in the face of serious press and public criticism or even serious doubt.

4. There are many ways in which we can make our formative influence helpful. Some of these are large scale and dramatic, e.g., increased MAP support, public statements by very high level U.S. officials. But the cumulative effect of a series of smaller actions, or avoidance of action, especially in areas which are currently the focus of Korean public interest, can have an equal and, in some instances, a more solid and perhaps even greater beneficial influence.

5. If for example, over the next few weeks and months there should be a series of favorable procurement actions for SVN, or increased export to U.S. or new DLF loan approvals, or a better textile quota, or avoidance of bad news on use of counterpart, even in relatively small amounts in each case, the psychological effect here would be very constructive.

6. Most helpful at the moment would be a demonstration of U.S. good faith by early arrival of substantial quantities of the military equipment for the three ready reserve divisions (particularly fighting items) which was promised the ROKG when it agreed to send the Tiger division to SVN. Delay in these deliveries has already been the subject of anxious ROKG questions.

7. Much is already being done, e.g., DOD procurement mission, and this has already been helpful. It nevertheless seems to me that we should for the next few months look at every action affecting Korea proposed by any part of our government in terms of its contribution to, or detraction from, the service of this main objective, and how, if possible, such action or inaction can be made to serve, or be kept from hurting, the achievement of that objective. A current small case in point can be found in Embtel 626.3 Another is the “unfunding” of U.S. won accounts (a purely technical matter) which has resulted in a sudden and complete cessation for December of dollar receipts from won conversion for U.S. military and has elicited strongest representations from the DPM today.

8. We are establishing necessary machinery here to try to forward this purpose and hope Washington can do likewise.

9. I would like to add that if the Koreans make this further troop contribution, it will be utterly impossible for them to understand why there can be no preferred treatment for them in matters economic, especially as they relate to SVN. They will be making a contribution in the irreplaceable commodity of human life, and doing so on a scale utterly disproportionate to the contributions of their competitors, particularly Japan. In such case the assurance of equal treatment with these competitors seems small recompense.

10. It seems to me that we are being faced with a political and human problem directly related to a bloody war in which we are deeply committed, to the solution of which our normal rules of commercial policy and peacetime procurement must also make their contribution.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Limdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense, CINCPAC for POLAD, and Saigon.

2 In telegram 588, December 17, the Department of State presented, among other things, the proposed commitments the United States was willing to make to Korea, should additional ROK forces be deployed to Vietnam. (Ibid.)

3 In telegram 626 from Seoul, December 22, the Embassy discussed upcoming talks regarding the renewal of a contract between the Department of Defense and the Korea Oil Corporation to supply MAP-financed POL to meet Korean military requirements. (Ibid., DEF 19–8 US–KOR S)

67. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 67. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, December 30, 1965, 0945Z.

675. ROK Troops for Vietnam. Ref: Deptel 662.2

1. During call on Foreign Minister related to other matters, he volunteered that he had discussed with President our request for additional ROK troops for SVN. The President's reaction was favorable. But there were many problems about which the President had consulted with the Deputy Minister and Foreign Minister, who were considering what advice to give him.

2. He then made three points: (A) It has been less than two months since the first full ROK combat division arrived in SVN and less than six months since the matter had last been discussed in a divided Assembly. This was a very short time in which to present another such proposal to the Korean people.

(B) The issue of troops for SVN had been somewhat overshadowed in Assembly debate by emotion surrounding settlement with Japan. When it came before Assembly again it would stand out alone as an issue. The opposition, which is currently totally disorganized, is trying to make a comeback and regain the face which it lost in the struggle over the ratification of the Japan treaty. It was likely to seize upon the question of further troops as a major issue, since opposition members felt strongly that only way they can keep themselves together is to have an issue on which to fight the majority.

(C) Many Koreans felt that Korea had already made its full and proper contribution to South Vietnamese war. Every Korean felt that Korea's contribution is vastly greater than that of any other free Asian country. Contributions of men from other Asian countries, even in small amounts, would be helpful and perhaps necessary.

3. The FonMin said he wanted it clear that President Pak's policy was to support the US and that he and the FonMin felt that the war in SVN was theirs as much as ours. But the President had to deal with a practical domestic political problem. Questions of timing, presentation, etc., would be of paramount importance. Although the President's mood was favorable, the Cabinet members who knew about it, plus Kim Chong-pil, who was also being consulted, were not united in their opinion. In response to a specific question as to Kim Chong-pil's attitude, he declined to indicate who thought what.

4. I pointed out the importance of early decision, since the struggle was urgent and many physical preparations had to be made in SVN and elsewhere which depended on the number and character of the troops which would be available. Equipment had to be ordered, etc., all of which involved long lead time.

5. FonMin said he and DPM were considering this problem very seriously and he wanted to discuss it with me, but specifically asked that he be given a little time. “I assure you that I will get in touch with you. I have not disappointed you yet” he said.

6. I plan as our next move to suggest to Vice President Humphrey that he underline with President Pak the personal interest of President Johnson and sense of urgency about this matter. I understand Vice President is prepared to do this. I will follow up with a specific request to President, in Vice President's presence, for negotiation action by ROKG.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense, CINCPAC, and Saigon. This telegram and the referenced telegram (see footnote 2 below) were retyped and given to President Johnson as attachments to a December 30 memorandum from Bromley Smith. Smith's memorandum indicates that Johnson read the telegrams. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. III)

2 In telegram 662 to Seoul, December 29, the Department of State informed the Embassy of decisions made at a Cabinet meeting, including approval by the President of developmental loans to Korea in the amount of $29 million. The Department of State also reported that the President attached “the utmost importance” to obtaining additional South Korean troops for Vietnam. Brown was instructed “to exert maximum pressure to obtain these forces for a reasonable price.” (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27 VIET S)

68. Memorandum From Vice President Humphrey to President Johnson 68. Memorandum From Vice President Humphrey to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 5, 1966.

SUBJECT

Korea

In my discussions with President Park of the Republic of Korea, I was told that there had been undue delay in the provision of military assistance during the past year. Furthermore, there was a grave shortage of spare parts. I was further informed that much of the equipment, radar, field pieces, anti-aircraft guns and rifles were of World War II vintage and in a serious state of disrepair. This same message was given to me by the military authorities during my inspection of ROK troops.

I am not in a position to judge the accurateness of this complaint, but I do pass it along for your information and respectfully suggest that an inquiry be made at the Defense Department. If there is delay, then indeed someone should expedite the shipment of the necessary equipment and parts.

There was grave concern in the government circles of Korea that we would be sharply reducing military assistance at the very time that Korea was taking a more active role in Vietnam. The President and the Prime Minister of Korea made a strong plea for offshore procurement from Korea to supply forces in Vietnam. They emphasized first of all that all offshore purchasing for the Korean forces in Vietnam should be made from Korea. They also requested that a sizable portion of offshore procurement for other forces in Vietnam be obtained through Korean sources. Both the President and the Prime Minister and other Cabinet officials expressed concern that the United States might do most of its offshore purchasing from Japan. I assured the Korean officials that these observations would be brought to your attention. The report of Mr. Valenti as to my conversations with President Park and the Prime Minister relates in more detail the substance of the Korean position on procurement and its relationship to additional Korean forces in Vietnam.2

President Park is anxious to be of greater help in Vietnam3 but faces some serious political and economic problems at home. He feels that he could overcome these problems even though 1967 is an election year, if the United States would give special consideration to Korean economic needs by purchasing supplies in Korea and making available the necessary military assistance to further modernize the Korean armed forces. I made it quite clear to President Park and his government that there was no U.S. blank check or open-end account. I urged that he make a specific proposal to our Ambassador so that we had something to talk about and some idea of what the Koreans wanted and needed.4 I stressed that it would not be possible for us to estimate Korean needs or offer any effective assistance until we had a proposal from the Korean government. I gather that such will be forthcoming.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council File, National Security Council Meetings File. No classification marking.

2 Dated January 2. (Ibid., Office of the President File, Valenti, Jack, Memoranda of Conversations—Japan, the Philippines, Taiwan, Korea, December 1965–January 1966) Memoranda of Humphrey's three conversations with the President, Prime Minister, Foreign Minister, and other Korean officials, all on January 2, were sent to the Department of State as enclosures to airgram A–255 from Seoul, January 5. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66,POL 27 VIET S)

3 In telegram 682 from Seoul, January 3, reporting on Humphrey's meetings with Pak and other senior Korean officials, Brown attributed Pak's willingness to assist the United States in Vietnam to three factors: “a wish to assume leadership role in East Asia, a genuine concern to oppose Communist aggression in Asia in ROK own interest, and a recognition of need to demonstrate further the closeness of the US–ROK relationship.” (Ibid.)

4 In telegram 682 from Seoul, January 3, Brown noted that the United States was “in for a period of bargaining” on the Vietnam troop issue. He indicated that although Pak's requests have been modest, the Deputy Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister were looking for something more and making the rewards “as large as possible.” (Ibid.)

69. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 69. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, January 5, 1966, 0830Z.

689. Department please pass DOD. Troops for South Vietnam.

1. Foreign Minister called in Ambassador January 4 to initiate troop talks.2 They agreed that General Beach and MND should meet to discuss what would be necessary on military side to prevent impairment Korean security if further division and brigade sent South Vietnam. They also agreed DPM and Bernstein should meet, but FonMin refused limit their discussion to what would be necessary prevent added economic burden and insisted that they also discuss “political and economic plus to which Vice President Humphrey referred in his talk with President Pak.”

2. General Beach later met MND, who presented broad program of demands for additional trade benefits totalling $500 million, pointed out that (a) no economic benefits had yet been received as result despatch Tiger division, and (b) no significant amounts of equipment promised for ready reserve division or for improvement firepower regular divisions had yet arrived, and made a number of other points covered in COMUSK message 53935.3

3. At General Beach's insistence MND finally agreed to formation joint US/ROK working group to consider practical military problems involved. Group hopes begin work soon.

4. MND stated Ministers concerned all had different ideas and he was going to see President later in afternoon.

5. At same time MND was at Blue House DPM met with Bernstein.4 DPM was more reasonable, confirmed that ministers had different ideas, repeated in the main the requests he had made to Vice President Humprey5 and stressed that he alone was to be the channel for talks on economic aspects of the proposed troop dispatch. These talks will continue.

6. Concurrently Yi Hu-rak told DCM that President was needled yesterday by Blue House press as to what Korea had got out of dispatch of Tiger division. He said President wants to send more troops but must be able justify his action to Korean people in simple terms and show that Korea is benefiting at least as much as other countries not militarily involved, i.e., Japan. Simplest explanation would be increased trade and aid. Yi had in mind about $100 million in directed procurement for SVN and $30/40 million in program loans.

7. There is clearly as yet no coordination or considered opinion within ROKG, but things are moving and with time and patience we believe we can sort things out.

8. We are more convinced than ever that, despite DPM's currently more sophisticated and long range approach, key to satisfactory solution lies in Yi Hu-rak's statement that Korea must demonstrably benefit at least as much as other countries not militarily involved, especially through directed procurement of materiel, services and manpower for SVN.

9. Further reporting will be limited to major developments and matters requiring Washington decision.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Top Secret; Limdis. Repeated to Saigon and CINCPAC for POLAD and passed to the Department of Defense.

2 In telegram 703 to Seoul, January 8, the Department of State asked that the Embassy begin negotiations as soon as practicable in order to meet “high priority USG objective to obtain one Korean brigade by April 1966 and one Korean division force in SVN by July 1966.” The telegram also detailed the package of military and economic commitments the United States was prepared to offer the Koreans in exchange for providing troops to Vietnam. (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

3 Not found.

4 Detailed information on the discussion between the Deputy Prime Minister and Bernstein was transmitted in telegram 705 from Seoul, January 7. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, AID(US) KOR S)

5 The Deputy Prime Minister told Humphrey that the United States could help Korea by increasing the amount of raw material sent to the ROK for processing, by assisting in the creation of export markets, by expanding procurement of Korean goods for Korean and all other forces in Vietnam, by excluding Japan from those markets for a few years, and by lending U.S. merchant ships to Korea to benefit its foreign exchange position. (Memorandum of conversation, January 2, enclosure 2 to airgram A–255 from Seoul; ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

70. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 70. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, January 6, 1966, 0935Z.

716. SOFA Negotiations.

1. FonMin this morning told Ambassador that at very high level meeting which President attended ROKG had decided to postpone SOFA signing. Sole reason for decision, according FonMin, is ROKG concern lest consideration of SOFA by Assembly about same time as request for additional troops for Vietnam be exploited by opposition and DRP dissidents so as to jeopardize chances of approval of latter.2

2. After ascertaining that President was party to this decision, Ambassador said it was matter for Korea's own judgment. He made it clear to FonMin that U.S. could not accept any indication on ROKG's part that U.S. responsible for delay. FonMin said he had never mentioned January 28 (now widely publicized as proposed date of signing) and if asked why SOFA not being signed then, would say it had never been his date and that certain details remained to be worked out. He might also refer to fact DRP floor leader had recommended March signing.3

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15–3 KOR S-US. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to the Department of Defense and CINCPAC.

2 In a January 11 meeting the Foreign Minister told Brown that the signing would be postponed because the “time was not ripe for introducing measure to National Assembly prior to President Pak's SEA trip scheduled to begin about Feb. 7.” Brown also learned prior to that meeting that the Koreans wanted to reopen the negotiations on the labor clause of the agreement and indicated he would try to resolve the problem without creating a major impasse. (Telegram 726 from Seoul, January 13; ibid.)

3 In telegram 1098 from Seoul, March 31, Brown reported that acceptance of the SOFA agreement was in doubt because of increasing Korean demands to renegotiate the criminal jurisdiction article as well as the labor article. Ratification by the National Assembly presented another obstacle because of opposition to some of the agreement's provisions and the precarious position of the Foreign Minister relative to that body due to his “alleged poor handling of negotiations with US on troop despatch” issue. (Ibid.)

71. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 71. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, January 10, 1966, 1010Z.

713. Joint Embassy/USOM Message. Department pass DOD. Troops for Vietnam. Ref: Embtel 705, Deptel 703.2

1. ROKG list, entitled Economic and Financial Supports Suggested for Review by USG handed to us January 8. Foreign Office official advised Embassy officer that paper was an official communication which President Pak wanted handled through diplomatic channels. Some won budget support type requests also included in shorter note handed to us January 7.3

2. ROKG list includes: (1) Additional budget costs from sending troops, including death and disability payments and provision new division to re- place Tiger division already in SVN (estimated by ROKG at 3 billion won).

(2) U.S. budget support for three quarters of military budget until 1971 (end next 5 year development plan).

(3) Compensation for land and building requisitioned by UNC (estimated at 4.6 billion won through 1963).

(4) $10 million special assistance from “U.S. Presidential Contingency Fund” for cultural, educational, welfare projects.

(5) Variety of OSP proposals under MAP and AID. Also priority to Korea over Japan and other Asian countries. Expansion and full use Korean facilities for producing military supplies and repair services. Abolish application aid [garble] American policy to OSP for Vietnam (e.g., iron and steel). Process PL 480 wheat and cotton for Vietnam in Korea. Use Korean technicians in Vietnam and train Vietnamese technicians in Korea.

(6) Variety of development loan requests: Allocation $100 million DL year for six years 1966 through 1971; accelerate approval of projects under $150 million commitment; finance steel plant, machine shop; approve thermal power loans Ulsan and Yongdong areas before end 1966; support port expansion Inchon, Yosu, Phohang, Masan, Pusan to enable start of work before end 1966; finance before end of 1966 six dredges for development industrial areas Ulsan, Piin and Chinhae, and 200 bulldozers and 500 dump trucks for farm land expansion and national construction projects; 500 freight cars.

(7) To finance commodities for economic stabilization, export promotion, and domestic capital mobilization, $50 million program loan in 1966 and $20 million per year from 1967.

(8) 150,000 tons of cargo ships by grants-in-aid and loans in kind.

(9) Encouragement Korean exports to U.S. Lift U.S. quota on Korean textiles.

(10) January 7 paper on military requirements includes counter-infiltration assistance (affecting AID and MAP), item (2) above, suspension MAP transfer through 1971, and MAP for construction barracks and welfare facilities (could involve some additional won counterpart release).

3. This list discussed January 8 between DPM, USOM Director and Economic Counselor. DPM indicated that list was compiled by Foreign Ministry which assembled specific proposals suggested by Prime Minister, DPM, Minister Defense, Foreign Minister, Chief Secretary Blue House and President. Impression, confirmed by private remarks DPM's program assistant, is that each Minister felt compelled support largest possible demands in competition with colleagues to appear to Korean people to be bringing greatest benefits to Korea. Resultant list extremely unreasonable.4

4. U.S. side indicated not in position give U.S. official reaction without full CT review and Washington instructions, or even to react informally on individual items until there had been time for review. However gave informal general reactions (1) list very unrealistic and unreasonable; (2) many items failed meet basic assistance criteria as to need, absorptive capacity, avoidance waste, statutory and policy limitations, etc.; (3) requests go beyond U.S. financial capabilities, in light global claims on limited MSA funds; (4) tended to run counter to fundamentals of development policies laid down officially and vigorously by President Pak, DPM and ROKG in legislative program, public declarations, and private statements, and followed with increasing success in recent period, i.e., policies involved in moving rapidly as feasible toward self-reliance and careful use investment funds.5

5. DPM defended list in general political terms without justification specific points or showing much fervor. Said he did not wish to push additional assistance to point at which produced effects contrary to established self-help policies, but that ROKG and Korean people wanted increase in aid that would permit acceleration of investment and growth rate. (DPM and President Pak appear to believe it is politically necessary and feasible for Korea to absorb effectively faster capital inflow than now in sight and thereby expand economy faster.

(Director emphasized that development programs and external resources in prospect for next several years are roughly at maximum that can be absorbed without negative effect.) DPM said there was much discontent over unemployment and poverty and people expected government to do more to reduce these problems faster. Said he considered assistance of two kinds desirable: (1) accelerating foreign exchange earnings, (2) accelerating capital goods inflow. At one point he also referred to need for more active U.S. role in meeting domestic capital requirements than was in prospect for next number of years, reiterating that he did not advocate more supporting assistance for this purpose, ROKG felt it needed to seize opportunity that Vietnam situation offered to increase these types of help for accelerated economic growth, having in mind stimulus Korean War provided to Japanese economy. DPM also argued U.S. should use this opportunity to give Korean economy last big push it needed to get over the hill. Then, he said, we can be stronger than North Korea. He cited Vice President Humphrey as saying Korea may get extra help if it sends troops to Vietnam. In responding to query re status of proposals in ROKG view,DPM said ROKG needed to consider the Korean realities and U.S. its own realities in reviewing proposals, leaving implication that list was a bargaining tactic.

6. DPM called Blue House during session to arrange meeting with President to report negative U.S. reaction. He called director afterwards to confirm that submission should be regarded as a list of suggestions for U.S. to consider. DPM suggested talks adjourn until January 17 (i.e., after his return from Saigon trip). We agreed.

7. Meanwhile, we are responding by paper stating that our concept is preservation integrity Korean security and avoidance new economic burden plus some modest “plus”, and setting forth initial offer included Deptel 703 just received plus “best efforts” promise on procurement for SVN and willingness explore any projects submitted by ROKG, including those specifically referred to in their paper, for DLF financing in context Johnson-Pak communique of May 20, 1965. We are including promise to replace brigade as well as division, as we consider this both necessary for security and omission this assurance would adversely color whole negotiations, this may perhaps get us down to serious bargaining. We are also pressing for early activation ROK/U.S. planning group on technical military problems involved promised by MND on January 5.

8. We will have comments on Deptel 703 later and would appreciate earliest comments on Embtel 705. Ambassador and Country Team repeat their personal conviction that we cannot and will not get these extra forces, except possibly with unacceptable arm twisting and bitterness, unless we can find some way to give Korea preference in a significant area of procurement for SVN, at least over Japan.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD, Saigon, and Tokyo and passed to the Department of Defense.

2 See footnotes 4 and 2, Document 69.

3 The documents submitted by the ROKG to the Embassy along with the latter's response are attached to airgram A–275 from Seoul, January 18. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S)

4 In a letter to Brown, January 18, Berger wrote that the list of Korean requirements had “caused some disappointment here. We have thought that the mendicant period of Korean history was drawing to a close and that we could expect the increasingly confident and sophisticated Park Government to present a stiff but essentially reasonable initial Korean negotiating position.” Berger concluded by expressing hope that “the Koreans will in the end accept a reasonable economic-military assistance package in return for the additional division and brigade.” (Ibid.)

5 In a telephone conversation with President Johnson on January 17, McNamara reported that the Koreans wanted “about $600–700 million worth of cumshaw” for the additional troops. Their proposal had been rejected by both the State and Defense Departments, but, McNamara noted, the United States was willing to provide “something on the order of $70 million worth of extra equipment and payments” to the Koreans. (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of Telephone Conversation between Johnson and McNamara, Tape F66.02, Side A, PNOs 1 and 2) For text of the conversation, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. IV, Document 26.

72. Telegram from the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 72. Telegram from the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, January 15, 1966, 0630Z.

735. Subj: Korean Troops for Vietnam.

1. In course of wide-ranging conversation with DCM January 14 Presidential Secretary Yi Hu-rak had number of interesting things to say about how Korean Govt views U.S. request for additional Korean forces to be sent to Vietnam.

2. Yi said U.S. request for additional division and brigade had come as something of a shock to President. President, Yi said, was quite proud of his prompt and effective response to U.S. earlier request, speed with which Tiger division and Blue Dragon regiment were despatched to Vietnam and disciplined and courageous performance of forces in Vietnam. According to Yi President never expected to be confronted with another request so soon. However he responded affirmatively out of friendship for President Johnson and a strong feeling of loyalty to U.S. engendered during his state visit to Washington last May. At same time he had grave misgivings about Korean public reaction to being asked so soon for such a heavy additional contribution. In Yi's own words President feels that despatch of additional forces requested will “overload Korea” but he is anxious to comply if politically feasible.

3. With such mixed attitude Yi said President feels he has to proceed cautiously and only after taking careful political soundings. President not only wants to be sure that Korean public will not feel they are being asked to do too much. He also thinks it important to be able to represent and defend Korean's involvement in Vietnam as clearly in the ROK's own interest.

4. President feels, according to Yi, that it is in interest of ROK to oppose communism anywhere in East Asia. In his own view this is sufficient justification for Korean intervention in Vietnam provided that intervention does not endanger security of ROK and does not impose an economic burden. However President does not feel such justification will be sufficient in presenting matter to National Assembly. Average Korean does not really see war in Vietnam as direct threat to security of ROK. On contrary he believes diversion of ROK forces to Vietnam weakens defenses of ROK while at same time inviting retaliation from north. To overcome this probable reaction to despatch of any further ROK forces to Vietnam President feels he will have to be able to demonstrate in National Assembly that there are corollary and significant benefits to ROK.

5. These corollary benefits should meet two conditions. They should be easy to explain to Korean public as flowing directly from Korean involvement in Vietnam and they should be large enough to convince Koreans that U.S. properly appreciates sacrifices that Korean people are making to assist in Vietnam. Yi then cited as an example question of death and disability benefits. Korean people would not be able to understand he said if U.S. was stingy in matter of death and disability benefits. U.S. would have to be prepared to be extremely generous in matter of death and disability benefits for those Koreans killed or wounded in action.

6. Yi concluded this portion of conversation by reminding DCM that sixty-six was an election year. Yi said that he was fairly confident that President would be reelected in sixty-seven if all went well, particularly, in view of weakened and divided state of the opposition party. President was however worried that opposition to despatching additional troops to Vietnam would snowball and become issue around which opposition leaders could rally to attack government and possibly have a decisive effect on election outcome.

7. Comment: We believe Yi who is close to President Pak was expressing with reasonable accuracy how President assesses problem presented by our latest request for ROK troops. Question remains when he will be able to take final decision. Judgement as to public and political reaction can probably be made over course of three weeks remaining before Pak leaves for Southeast Asian trip, since possibility of additional troop despatch gradually becoming known and will be hinted at in Pak's opening address to National Assembly next week. Whether and when terms and amount of support U.S. willing to offer “in appreciation” will seem sufficient to Pak will depend on progress of current negotiations which are still in opening phase. With positions two sides far apart, we are exerting every effort to get favorable decision before Pak leaves on trip and will let you know as soon as possible what we believe will be necessary to get it.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD, Tokyo, and Saigon.

73. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 73. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, January 21, 1966, 1010Z.

757. Troops for RVN. Ref: (A) Deptel 703;2 (B) Emb A–272;3 (C) Emb A–275;4 (D) Emb A–276;5 (E) COMUSK 5436;6 (F) Embtel 758.7

1. CT feels that we have now progressed as far as we can in separate discussions with MND and DPM. FonMin reports that both are dissatisfied and are advising President that US responses to date inadequate to justify favorable decision. President, DPM, MND and FonMin are leaving Feb 7 for two weeks and target dates of April and July for arrival of new forces in RVN are receding rapidly. Time has therefore now come to try to bring matter to a head and seek decision from President who basically favorable and is neither accurately nor objectively informed by either MND or DPM.

2. It is unnecessary to elaborate theme that this early request for doubling ROK forces in RVN, coupled with fact that acceding to it will, at best, involve some temporary degradation present ROK military strength at home (Deptel 703 para 2),8 presents President Pak with genuine political problem which we must help him meet.

3. We feel that a definitive offer should now be presented. If there is to be any chance of favorable decision even by President Pak before Feb 7, it should be as generous as possible. Our concept of that offer is set forth in draft letter to FonMin (Ref F), as supplemented by General Beach's letter to MND of Jan 18 (Ref D encl).

4. This offer will involve solid amounts of money. Amounts so paid here, however, are as directly spent for the prosecution of the war in RVN as those spent for maintenance of our own forces there. But for categories of accounting they would be charged to RVN and would be swallowed up in the cost of that great effort. In any event, if we are to get an extra division and brigade we must be prepared to pay for them. The amounts involved, while substantial, are small in comparison with the cost of doing the job ourselves.

5. I propose to hand this offer to the Foreign Minister, if and as soon as you approve it, hopefully early next week, stressing stakes involved and need for early ROK decision, before President leaves if possible. While chances of President's submitting matter to Assembly before he leaves on Feb 7 is diminishing as each day passes, it would be very desirable to get favorable decision by President before Feb 7 in order to permit necessary military planning to proceed within government during his absence.

6. ROKs may well come back with assertion that they need more. As a fall-back position CT recommends that we be prepared, if it will clinch the deal, to add a 25 percent increase in per diem for ROK forces in RVN.

7. Would appreciate Washington approval soonest, so we can expedite decision here.9

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff, CINCPAC for POLAD, Tokyo, and Saigon.

2 See footnote 2, Document 69.

3 In airgram A–272 from Seoul, January 17, the Embassy forwarded copies of a January 13 letter from the Korean Minister of National Defense to General Beach detailing Korean requests submitted in exchange for providing additional troops for Vietnam. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27 VIET S)

4 See footnote 3, Document 71.

5 Airgram A–276 from Seoul, January 19, transmitted copies of General Beach's reply to the Korean requests submitted on January 13. A copy of the airgram without attachments is in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27 VIET S.

6 Not found.

7 Telegram 758 from Seoul, January 21, contained the Embassy's draft letter to Pak explaining the terms the United States was prepared to offer in exchange for a Korean division and brigade for Vietnam. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S)

8 In paragraph 2 of telegram 703 to Seoul, January 8, the Department of State instructed Brown to explain to Korean officials that by meeting the U.S. objective of sending a brigade by April and a division by July to Vietnam “it may be necessary for the ROK to accept some temporary lessening of TE of the ROK active forces in Korea until shipments of equipment and supplies can reach Korea for the activation of reserve units, the reconstitution of support and service elements, and the reconstitution of ready reserve units.” The United States would, however, provide the needed equipment as soon as possible. (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

9 In telegram 758 to Seoul, January 22, the Department concurred with most of the Embassy's recommendations. The major points of divergence involved the amount of death and disability payments to be paid and a potential increase of 25 percent in the per diem rate paid to ROK troops serving in Vietnam. (Ibid.)

74. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 74. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, January 22, 1966, 0415Z.

762. Troops for SVN.

1. Foreign Minister called in Ambassador Jan 21 to discuss progress troop negotiations. He stated both MND and DPM dissatisfied at what they consider lack of progress and failure to get anything from US but “vague assurances and things already certain”. They do not feel they have enough on which to face Assembly.

2. FonMin asked if need for further ROK units was really urgent—things were quieter in SVN and large US reinforcement had arrived. It might be well to have a pause in the negotiations to allow the Korean negotiator to “save face.”

3. Amb reiterated urgency need, and said FonMin clearly not fully informed on magnitude and specificity US offers. If these offers were presented as the positive contribution which they are, instead of being disparaged, they could have highly persuasive effect on Assembly. FonMin could expect definitive offer early next week which would further clarify US position and should enable ROKG then to make its decision.

4. Comment: This is of course part of ROKG pressure on us for larger concessions. Report of MND and DPM personal dissatisfaction and negative attitude with President is probably factual.

5. DCM also stressed to Yi Hu-rak Jan 22, urgency Presidential decision before departure SEA trip. Yi said President feared US “something plus” would not be big enough to impress National Assembly. DCM expressed confidence that US offer would give President what he needed.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Tokyo, Saigon, CINCPAC, and the Department of Defense.

75. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 75. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, January 27, 1966.

I–20628/66

SUBJECT

Additional ROK Forces for SVN

Negotiations for the ROK division/brigade are now at the point where Ambassador Brown will submit almost immediately a negotiating letter to ROK stating a fairly firm US position on what the US will offer for these forces. Based upon this submission, there is a good chance that we will obtain an ROK decision in principle to dispatch the troops and to submit a request to the ROK National Assembly promptly after President Park's return in mid-February from a trip to Southeast Asia.

The negotiating letter is within the authority the various Washington agencies gave to the Ambassador. However, the US offers still are substantially short of some ROK requests. Among the DoD items, two require your action: (a) ROK request for increased overseas allowances. MND Kim has pressed hard for a 100% increase. This would increase the annual cost of ROK troop allowances in SVN by $24 million to total of $48 million (either MAP or Service-funded, depending upon disposition of pending legislative proposals). Ambassador Brown and General Beach agree to hold the line on this issue for the time being in the letter to be submitted to ROK, but state that they require fall-back authority to accept a 25% increase ($6 million annually).

I recommend that you authorize our acceding to the 25% increase but that we withhold giving Ambassador Brown this authority until a point in the negotiations at which he can indicate to us that our accession will “cinch the deal.”

(b) ROK request for additional military equipment. MND Kim has requested about $65 million of additional equipment. Many of the items are already included in the 1967–71 MAP plan for Korea. Ambassador Brown and General Beach recommend that we consider adding to the previously authorized “modernization” package ($10 million in each of FY66 and FY67) items costing $6.88 million as follows: (1) One DD ($3.24 million);

(2) Six 155 mm howitzers and prime movers ($0.09 million);

(3) Armored bridge launch vehicle ($.81 million);

(4) One assault transport ship ($1.02 million);

(5) S-2A anti-infiltration patrol aircraft ($1.72 million).

I recommend that you authorize an increase in the FY67 Korea MAP for the S-2A aircraft, the 105 howitzers and the bridge launch vehicle. These items appear to be best suited to priority requirements of the ROK forces. (Note: On his visit here two weeks ago the ROK CNO repeatedly showed interest in the S-2A aircraft (to be ROKAF-crewed) but made no mention of a DD or of an assault transport.) If you approve, the result will be to increase the $10 million FY67 “modernization” package by $2.7 million, the cost of the above three items.2

John T. McNaughton

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Korea 370.02. Secret. Attached to a January 27 transmittal note from Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense Alvin Friedman to McNamara. In that note Friedman indicated that McNaughton harbored significant reservation about paragraph (a) of his memorandum and intended to fight its implementation unless absolutely necessary. (Ibid.)

2 Both recommendations were approved by McNamara on January 28.

76. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 76. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, January 27, 1966, 7:51 p.m.

777. Joint State/Defense/AID Message. Ref: A—Deptel 703, rptd info Tokyo 1980, Saigon 1944, CINCPAC unn;2 B—Seoul's 758, rptd info Tokyo 267, Saigon 105,CINCPAC 252;3 C—Deptel 758, rptd info Tokyo 2131, Saigon 2120, CINCPAC unn;4 D—Seoul's 779, rptd info Saigon 112, CINCPAC 265;5 E—Seoul's 767, rptd info CINCPAC 260, COMUSMACV 7;6 F—Deptel 767, rptd info Tokyo 2155, Saigon 2145.7

Korean Troops for South Viet-Nam.

1. Following is approved draft letter based on refs a, b, c, and d which you are authorized forward to Foreign Minister ROKG at your discretion. This letter will be implemented when ROKG agrees to dispatch of one brigade and its support/service units in April 1966 and one division and its support/service units commencing in July 1966, except that the death gratuities and wounded-in-action benefits (outlined para 2 below) may be put into effect prior to this ROKG agreement if you so desire.

2. You are authorized in case of death gratuities, disability and wounded-in-action benefits for ROK military personnel in South Viet-Nam to make retroactive and future payments based on twice those rates, and no more, shown in the Fall 1965 U.S.-ROK Joint Study on Death Gratuities and Wounded-in-Action Benefits (ref E). The payments will be made in U.S. dollars using same procedures as for payment of overseas allowances for ROK military personnel in SVN, and utilizing MAP GVN or at some later date the appropriate U.S. DOD budget. (Retroactive payments estimated as of January 17, 1966 to be $164,000.) Prior to payment by COMUSKOREA, Minister of National Defense shall submit request which includes names of wounded-in-action beneficiaries or survivors and amount to be paid each. All records of payments and requests for payment will be kept as permanent records by COMUSKOREA.CINCPAC is requested to furnish ASAP dollar amount required now for retroactive payment and desired amount for February 1966 payments.

3. Text of approved letter follows:

“We have now had very useful discussions and exchanges of ideas on the question of the conditions under which additional ROK forces might be dispatched to RVN with yourself, the Deputy Prime Minister, and the Minister of National Defense. I think that we now understand more clearly your concerns in this matter and that the time has come to bring the threads of the matter together so that you will be able to make your decision.

The basic considerations were enunciated by President Park in his talks with Vice President Humphrey and myself.

These are that the integrity of Korea's defense should not be impaired and that no new economic burden should be imposed upon Korea. It was also agreed that there should be some net benefit to Korea for the deployment of these extra forces.

Our proposals for dealing with these basic considerations are contained in my memorandum to the Foreign Minister of January 12 and General Beach's letter to the Minister of National Defense of January 18.8 As a result of our further discussions we are now able to make these proposals somewhat more precise and to add somewhat to them. The proposals in these two memoranda are still valid. Rather than repeat them in detail I will sum up what the United States is prepared to do as follows: A.1. To equip as necessary and finance all additional won costs of the additional forces deployed to RVN.

A.2. To pay overseas allowances to these forces at the scale now being paid the Tiger Division, which, as you know, is as much as thirty times that currently being paid ROK forces in Korea even after the recent pay raise and approximately four times the pay of RVN troops. It covers all their expenses and has allowed for substantial remittances.

A.3. To provide death, wounded-in-action, and disability gratuities resulting from casualties in Viet-Nam at double the rates recently agreed by the Joint U.S.-ROK military committee as being fully appropriate.

A.4. To equip, train, and finance complete replacement of the additional forces deployed to RVN.

A.5. To provide communications facilities for exclusive ROK use, the character of which is to be agreed between U.S. and ROK officials in Seoul and Saigon. These facilities will meet requirements for communicating with your forces in RVN. In addition, to provide 4 C–54 aircraft to the ROKAF for support of your forces in RVN.

A.6. To provide over the next few years substantial items of equipment for the modernization of ROK forces in Korea on the basis set forth in General Beach's letter of January 18 to the Minister of National Defense.

A.7. To provide for the improvement of military barracks and military sanitation facilities from proceeds of MAP excess sales as set forth in General Beach's letter of January 18 to the Minister of National Defense.

A.8. To contribute to filling the requirements determined by the two governments to be necessary, following completion of a joint U.S.-ROK study, for the improvement of the ROK anti-infiltration capability.

A.9. To provide equipment to expand the ROK Arsenal for increased ammunition production in Korea. These undertakings, together with those already made in connection with dispatch of the Tiger Division to RVN and backup provided by the general U.S. commitment to Korea's defense, will fully meet the need for maintaining the security of Korea.

B. To avoid new economic burdens for Korea, the United States is prepared, in addition to paying all overseas expenses of the units to be deployed and the allowances referred to above, to release additional won to the Korean budget equal to all of the net costs of the deployment of these extra forces and of mobilizing and maintaining in Korea the activated reserve division and brigade and support elements. Thus, the deployment will involve no extra costs to the ROK budget and will involve large benefits in foreign exchange through troop remittances and payment of gratuities.

C. To provide a substantial net benefit to the Korean economy the U.S. is prepared additionally:

C.1. To suspend MAP Transfer Program for as long as there are substantial ROK forces, i.e. at least two divisions in RVN, with off-shore procurement in Korea in FY 67 of items suspended in FY 66 plus those on the FY 67 list. This will provide substantial budgetary relief and foreign exchange earnings for Korea. Regarding off-shore procurement, the United States Government will review this matter and make a further determination for FY 68 at an appropriate time.

C.2.A. To procure in Korea insofar as practicable requirements for supplies, services and equipment for ROK forces in RVN and to direct to Korea selected types of procurement for U.S. and RVN forces in RVN in cases in which: I. Korea has production capability,

II. Korea can meet specifications and delivery schedules,

III. It may be reasonably determined that Korean prices are fully competitive with other possible sources in the Far East, and

IV. The procurement conforms to DOD gold flow regulations. Supplies, services and equipment which meet this definition will be listed on a ‘natural source' list from which procurement will be made exclusively from Korean sources without soliciting bids from non-Korean producers.

C.2.B. To procure in Korea, in competition only with U.S. suppliers, as much as Korea can provide in time and at a reasonable price, a substantial amount of goods being purchased by AID for use in its project program for rural construction, pacification, relief, logistics, and so forth, in RVN. Payment for such goods will be by special letters of credit which tie these earnings to purchases in the U.S. Special regulations have already been adopted to permit commercial importation into RVN of galvanized iron sheets processed in Korea with AID funds.

C.2.C. To the extent permitted by RVN, to provide Korean contractors expanded opportunities to participate in construction projects undertaken by USG and American contractors in RVN and to provide other services. Korean contractors have already demonstrated competitive ability in these fields. Additionally, parallel employment of skilled Korean civilians in RVN can provide sizeable foreign exchange earnings.

C.3. To increase its technical assistance to ROK in the general field of export promotion.

C.4. To provide AID loans over and above the $150 million figure agreed in May 1965 as suitable projects are developed subject to the same considerations which apply to the $150 million commitment.

C.5. If justified by performance under the 1966 stabilization program, and subject to further review in Washington, to provide [$]15 million of program loans in 1966, which can be used for the support of exports to RVN and for other development needs.

We believe, Mr. Minister, that these proposals and assurances are not only fair, but generous, and should provide the basis for an effective presentation to the Korean people. We hope that on this basis the ROKG will be prepared to dispatch an additional brigade to RVN in April and a division force commencing in July 1966. I need not stress that the matter is urgent and the stakes very high, for Korea as well as the Free World.”

4. FYI. Your concern with respect to the possibility that procurement to be placed in Korea might not be substantial is fully understood here. Apparently the volume of procurement presently coming from the U.S. Army Procurement Agency is not substantial. However, from present planning information available here, we are confident that the amount of procurement which can be placed in Korea in the future as a result of the proposed “natural source listing” will, in fact, be substantial. In any event it is not possible to make specific commitments as to dollar volume until the necessary “natural source” list has been developed and reviewed here. We strongly urge that list be submitted soonest. In compiling list, it is important to provide a “general order of magnitude” estimate of the quantity or dollar volume of production expected to be within the capability of Korean industry to produce for export to RVN. [End FYI.]

5. Regret we unable authorize twenty-five percent increase in per diem rates or additional $6 million modernization add-ons (ref D, paras 1a and 1d).9

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Boyes at (DOD) and Fleck; cleared by Fearey, Poats (AID), in draft by Rubin, Heinz, and Friedman (all DOD), in draft by Baker (JCS), in draft by Gibson (DASD), and for substance by Rowan (BOB), and Cooper at the White House; and approved by Berger. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD, COMUSKOREA, COMUSMACV, Tokyo, and Saigon.

2 See footnote 2, Document 69.

3 See footnote 7, Document 73.

4 See footnote 9, Document 73.

5 Telegram 779 from Seoul, January 25 transmitted the terms negotiated between the Embassy and Korean officials. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S)

6 Telegram 767 from Seoul, January 24 provided a summary of the conclusions and recommendations of a Joint U.S.-ROK Military Committee investigation into death and disability benefits for Korean military personnel. (Ibid.)

7 Telegram 767 to Seoul, January 25, responded to the proposals contained in the Embassy's draft letter to Pak explaining the terms the United States was prepared to offer in exchange for sending additional Korean troops to Vietnam. (Ibid.)

8 Neither found, but their contents are summarized below.

9 The text of the letter was slightly modified in the following weeks, and the final version was presented to and accepted by the Foreign Minister on February 25. (Telegram 930 from Seoul, February 22, telegram 893 to Seoul, February 24, and telegram 944 from Seoul, February 25; all in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S) Slight modifications made to the final version to conform to Korean requests are contained in telegrams 971 from Seoul and 931 to Seoul, both March 5. (Ibid.) Brown's letter of March 4 to the Minister of Foreign Affairs documents the U.S. military and economic commitments to made to South Korea. The letter was handed to the Minister of Foreign Affairs on March 7, and a sanitized version was published in the Korea Times and the Korea Republic on March 8. The letter from Brown and related documentation on the issue are attached to airgram A–352 from Seoul, March 9. (Ibid.) The complete text of Brown's letter is printed in The Investigation of Korean-American Relations, Hearing Before the Committee on International Relations, 95th Congress, 2d Session, Appendixes to the Report, vol. I: Background to the Investigation of Korean-American Relations and Conduct of the Investigation; Listing of Congressional Documents Frequently Cited, Supporting Documents. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1978), pp. 544–545.

77. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 77. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 1, 1966, 0915Z.

805. ROK Forces for RVN.

1. I met with Yi Tong-won morning February 1. He announced immediately that his govt had decided “in principle” to accept the proposals contained in our letter of January 29.2 Accordingly, President had ordered that detailed military planning and preparations be started with a view to meeting our April and July deadlines. As we knew, these had been under way jointly with COMUSK since beginning of week.

2. However President does not wish to announce the decision until after his return from Southeast Asia trip on February 17.3 Yi asked therefore that we strive together to give impression that negotiations are continuing.

3. Although President has agreed to despatch requested additional force, FonMin asked that we give consideration to following requests of ROKG which however are not put forward as conditions. A. Per Diem Allowances. Yi says that this has become a politically sensitive matter. Both opposition and some members of DRP are arguing strongly for increase in allowances. Yi had resisted such arguments on grounds that ROK soldiers in Vietnam are much better treated than RVN troops. However MND insists that this is true only of officers and senior enlisted grades, but not of soldiers in lower grades, and he feels ROKG would be very vulnerable if it could fairly be said that ROK GI's were being paid less to fight in RVN than RVN GI's.

B. Additional Development Financing. DPM Chang Ki-yong is very unhappy at U.S. unwillingness to announce additional commitment. FonMin had argued with DPM that U.S.D.L. commitment really open-ended, with actual amount of financing dependent upon ROKG ability to come forward with suitable projects. Still it would be helpful if our willingness to make additional loans after $150 million is fully utilized could be stated more explicitly.

C. Program Loans. DPM is unhappy with $15 million offer and with encouragement from Yi Hu-rak want to hold out for $30 million. He also wants commitment untied to stabilization program with no mention of further Washington review.

4. According to FonMin, DPM also complaining about our refusal even to discuss his requests for funds for education and remuneration for property utilized by UN forces. FonMin had persuaded President that these requests were undignified and irrelevant. DPM also professes not to understand our undertaking in regard to procurement for Vietnam and is afraid that they are excessively qualified by such references as “natural source,” “reasonably competitive price” and “selected types.”

5. I expressed deep appreciation on behalf of U.S. Govt and asked him to convey this at once to President Pak. I said I understood fully the reasons for deferring any announcement until after the President's return and said that I would entreat Washington to guard against any premature disclosure. I went on to say that we would consider points which he had raised and expressed further appreciation for his statement that these points were not to be regarded as conditions. On question of allowances I said that we had recently learned that in some cases ROK soldiers in Vietnam in lower enlisted grades might receive less than their Vietnamese counterparts, especially those with large families and in certain assignments. We were trying to get more information about this. I undertook to look again at language of our proposal on development loans. FYI: I had in mind possibility of a somewhat revised offer along lines of Embtel 792 and Dept's AIDTO unn reply thereto.4 On program loans I said I doubted very much if we could modify our proposal. In regard to procurement arrangements, I stressed difficulty of blanket a priori commitment and assured FonMin that we were doing everything to bring about favorable opportunities. This was something that we would be working at continually with ROKG officials.

6. At this point FonMin assumed a conspiratorial air and said, “Now, Mr. Ambassador, we must stage a little play.” He assumed we had noticed that he was utilizing the press to create impression that negotiations with us were difficult and going slow.

Certain obstacles had been reported in the press which, as we knew, had actually been removed by our proposal. Such a stratagem was necessary and would have to go on for some days longer so that when President's decision was announced the Korean public would think that their govt had extracted great concessions from the U.S. by end of strenuous bargaining. To elaborate this impression, he was asking the Vice Minister to hold a series of meetings with the DCM. He himself would continue to report little progress to the press. Immediately upon the President's and his return from Southeast Asia he and I would meet again, the decision would be announced and immediately submitted for Assembly approval. I indicated that I would cooperate within the limits of propriety, but urged that he not carry the stage play so far that the Korean public would have an exaggerated expectation of the results and then be disappointed.

7. FonMin also asked for my cooperation after President's decision has been announced in making results of negotiations seem impressive to Korean public. He has in mind some kind of joint statement which would not embody whole contents of our letter of January 29, but merely those highlights, such as death benefits, MAP transfer suspension, modification of “buy American” policy, which seem so important in Korean public opinion. The statement would also stress that Korea was acting in its own interest and in common defense rather than as result of financial bargaining with U.S. At that stage ROKG did not want it to appear that its forces were being used as mercenaries. The favorable concessions which had in the previous act been extracted from the U.S. with such difficulty would at this stage be represented as spontaneous actions of U.S. expressing our appreciation for sacrifices being made by ROK.

Comment:

8. I believe we have attained our goal even if we are unyielding on the points on which FonMin sought our reconsideration. I do however feel that U.S. as well as ROKG would be vulnerable if ROK soldiers are paid less than RVN soldiers. We are asking USMACV for further facts. When these are received will submit our recommendations as to whether any adjustments should be made in our rates of per diem allowances. We may wish also to propose some modifications in language though not substance of our proposals on both development and program loans.

9. As we had begun to suspect (Embtel 804)5 FonMin has been applying himself not only to actual negotiations but in his inimitable way to preparing climate of public opinion for a decision, the political hazards of which should not be underestimated. We must give him credit and, within limits set by our own standards, try to help him. If to our Western eyes there appears to be some inconsistency between the themes of act one and act two of his proposed play, we should not be too concerned. I gained the distinct impression that, while DPM may feel that he lost out somewhat, President and ROKG as a whole feel that our offer is fair and even somewhat better than some of them expected, so that decision was taken in any atmosphere of self-respect and good will which has value for our future relations.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Also sent to DOD and repeated to Saigon, Tokyo, CINCPAC for POLAD, and COMUSMACV.

2 When Brown presented the letter contained in Document 76, the Korean Foreign Minister's response seemed promising. (Telegram 800 from Seoul, January 29; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S) Discussions between Embassy and ROKG officials over the next few days, however, led Brown and members of his staff to believe that the Koreans were “nearing decision but hoping to go on squeezing out more concessions right up to the wire.” Their impression was buttressed by a “barrage of calculated press leaks hinting at decision to send only a regiment on grounds U.S. concessions inadequate justify additional division.” (Telegram 803 from Seoul, January 31; ibid.)

3 In a follow-up telegram, Brown recommended that a message be sent to Pak, preferably from President Johnson, thanking him for his decision and expressing understanding for his decision to announce it only after returning from his trip. (Telegram 806 from Seoul, February 1; ibid.) A letter from President Johnson incorporating Brown's recommendations was subsequently given to Pak. (Telegram 793 to Seoul, February 2, and telegram 818 from Seoul, February 3; both ibid.)

4 In telegram 792 from Seoul, January 27, the Embassy recommended authorizing a development loan of up to $10 million with which the ROKG could purchase heavy equipment to perform contract work in Vietnam or for U.S. forces in Korea. In AIDTO 1399 to Seoul, January 31, the Department of State indicated that the Embassy's alternative proposal was being considered in light of various contingencies and restrictions. (Both ibid., POL 27–3 KOR S)

5 Telegram 804 from Seoul, January 31, contained summaries of press reports on the U.S. response to the conditions set forth by the ROKG before Korean troops could be sent to Vietnam. Initial positive reports were soon followed by reports of negative responses within the ROKG. The Embassy believed the Foreign Minister was responsible for creating the impression that the “USG is cold toward much of what ROKG considers essential and justifiable,” while bringing the “press to point of accepting troop request as fact.” The Embassy speculated “that FonMin engaged in audacious piece of news management which could redound both to his and to our benefit.” (Ibid., POL 27–3 VIET S)

78. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 78. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 1

Washington, February 3, 1966, 6:25 p.m.

SUBJECT

Sweetener for another ROK Division in Vietnam

The attached memorandum from Bill Gaud2 asks your final approval of a commitment to make a $15-million program loan to Korea during FY 1967, as part of the deal to get another Korean division and brigade into Vietnam. The loan commitment is $5 million higher than we would probably make in normal course, but is much cheaper than any of the items on the long list the Koreans requested. Moreover, Park must show that he got something from us if he is to sell his electorate on the idea of a second division.

I gave conditional clearance to the program loan component, subject to your confirmation, in order to allow Win Brown to negotiate with Park. As you know, Park has now agreed, and you have sent him a letter of thanks. This is the last loose end. I recommend that you approve Gaud's request.

McG. B.

Approved3

Disapproved

Speak to me

Attachment4

Washington, January 25, 1966.

Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

SUBJECT

A.I.D. Commitments to Korea in Connection with the Negotiations on Additional Korean Troops for Vietnam

Ambassador Brown's negotiations with the Korean Government for the dispatch of an additional Korean division and brigade have reached the point where he needs by tomorrow authority to present a packaged counter-proposal to the very excessive Korean demands, in the hope of completing the negotiations before the departure of President Park and other government officials on a Far Eastern tour February 7.

Ambassador Brown has been acting under instructions which recognize the likely necessity of some forward commitments of A.I.D. support including a modest increase in Supporting Assistance if necessary. In addition, his instructions permitted assurance of special procurement opportunities for Korean exporters to supply A.I.D. project programs in Vietnam. The Korean Government has asked for enormous increases in Supporting Assistance and Development Lending and a commitment to these higher levels for the next five years. The Ambassador has rejected these demands, but obviously needs to make some concessions if the negotiations are to be concluded successfully.

Acting upon our understanding of the President's desire for an early agreement to provide the additional troops and within the spirit of his pledge of U.S. long-term assistance to President Park last May, we have concurred (with a qualification noted below) in Ambassador Brown's proposed counter-proposal to the Korean Government which provides that A.I.D. will: 1. Exclude all suppliers except U.S. and Korean from bidding on certain items which A.I.D. is buying for its project operations in Vietnam. This restricted procurement list will be composed of commodities which we have found to be within Korea's capacity to produce satisfactorily and in exportable quantities.

2. In addition to the $150 million Presidential development loan program promised last May, finance additional acceptable development projects of an unspecified amount and during an unspecified time period, subject to the same considerations of availability of funds, legislation, and A.I.D. self-help criteria which apply to the $150 million program. (This commitment is actually no more than a restatement of the Presidential Communiqué of last May with President Park of our anticipation of undertaking additional projects when the $150 million had been obligated.)

3. Release from local currencies presently available to A.I.D. of the modest net added cost to the Korean budget of the movement of the troops to Vietnam and of the maintenance of their replacements in Korea.

4. Support the Korean stabilization and development program, if the Korean Government is fulfilling its commitments under that jointly defined program, by providing a program loan of $15 million in FY 1967. (At the same time we expect to reduce the grant Supporting Assistance by $10 million.) We had planned for FY 1967 a program loan of about the same size as, or possibly $5 million larger than, the recently approved $10 million loan. This new commitment, conditioned on stabilization performance, thus represents no significant departure from our plans, but it does limit our ability to withhold the loan next fiscal year on grounds other than failure to comply with the Stabilization Agreement.

Only item 4, the program loan commitment, requires White House clearance under the present guidelines. Because of the urgency of Ambassador Brown's need for authorization, Bill Gaud discussed this matter with you last night and got your conditional agreement, subject to later reference to the President. Accordingly, we have qualified our concurrence on item 4 as being subject to further Washington review to be undertaken immediately.

Will you please seek the President's endorsement of this item so that we may withdraw the condition limiting the Ambassador's authority on this point.

Mr. Berger concurs in this memorandum.

William S. Gaud 5

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. III. Secret.

2  William S. Gaud, Deputy Administrator of the Agency for International Development.

3 This option is checked. A notation on the memorandum indicates that the loan was also approved by Rusk on February 4.

4 Secret; Limit Distribution.

5 Printed from a copy that indicates Gaud signed for Bell.

79. Telegram From the Consulate in Hong Kong to the Department of State 79. Telegram From the Consulate in Hong Kong to the Department of State 1

Hong Kong, February 13, 1966, 0850Z.

1489. From Ambassador Brown. Ref: Def 3869 (0 120017Z) to Hong Kong.2 Korean Troops for RVN.

1) In absence opportunity consult with General Beach, I have no basis for comment on military necessity additional ten thousand ROK troops envisaged in reftel.

2) I am however, horrified at thought of now suddenly asking ROKG for even more troops.

3) We asked for a small medical unit and got it (a few hundred). We asked for a much larger non-combat unit and got it (2000 men). We then asked for a combat division and got it (20,000 men). After an embarrassingly short interval we asked for a further combat brigade and division, and we seem to have it (about 30,000 men). Now, before we have even given the Koreans a chance to solidify their decision on the last brigade and division, we are contemplating asking them for ten thousand more.

4) When will this end?

5) If I were a Korean, such a request would seem to take Korea much too much for granted, and to try to impose far too great a burden on her. This would mean almost 60,000 Korean troops in SVN, two to three times as great a proportion of their population as we, the only other substantial contributor, are providing.

6) In the absence of a fuller and better rationale than I have yet seen for such a request, I would strongly recommend against it. Quite aside from the merits, such a piecemeal approach is most unfortunate.3

7) It may well be that if “rounding out” is necessary, the Koreans will ask for it later themselves as General Choi did for the extra regiment he wants. This would be OK and much better than a request by us.

Rice

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Seoul, COMUSKOREA, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

2 Not found, but telegram 833 to Seoul, February 11, also sent to Hong Kong for Brown, advised that the message from McNamara to Beach discussed a “requirement of 10,376 ROK forces to support and service ROK contingent already in SVN plus additional contingent on which ROKG now acting.” It also instructed that the Koreans were not to be informed of the need for additional troops. (Ibid.)

3 The Embassy and Beach were also opposed to asking the Koreans for 10,000 additional troops. The Embassy noted that a “new request will lead Koreans to assume that US has open-ended requirement for Korean troops in RVN. ROKG will feel correspondingly justified in making open-ended demands on U.S. We seem to be taking their willingness to commit large numbers of young men for granted so long as we are willing to defray expenses.” The Embassy also pointed out that a new request could jeopardize the ROK commitment to send a division and a brigade promptly to Vietnam. (Telegram 869 from Seoul, February 14; ibid.)

80. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the White House 80. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the White House 1

Seoul, February 23, 1966, 0945Z.

230945Z. Eyes Only for the President from the Vice President.

1. I have just concluded a twenty hour visit to Korea with gratifying results.2 In my discussions today with Prime Minister and President3 they informed me that the President had communicated yesterday to the Cabinet and the leaders of the Government Party (DRP) his decision to deploy an additional army division and brigade to Vietnam. After my departure this will be announced publicly and a bill be introduced in the National Assembly authorizing the government to take this action.

2. Last night (February 22) I attended a dinner given by the Prime Minister in my honor along with Governor Harriman, Ambassador Brown, Ambassador Hand and Mr. Valenti. In addition to the Foreign Minister, Minister of National Defense and other government officials, the Prime Minister had invited prominent members of the government and opposition parties. After dinner the party leaders asked me a number of pointed questions of our purposes and prospects in Vietnam. I informed them about the Honolulu Conference and about our current strategy in Vietnam. I assured them of our determination to keep South Vietnam free and to fight to win against Communist aggression there. The Prime Minister assured me today that these discussions with the leaders of both parties in the National Assembly will be of great assistance to the government in winning both public and National Assembly approval for the deployment of additional forces.

3. The bill authorizing the additional forces is now being drafted in the Ministry of National Defense and after approval by the National Security Council will be submitted to the National Assembly within a few days. The Government leaders appear to have no doubt that the measure will be passed very quickly. Governor Harriman and I both urged on the ROKG officials the greatest possible speed in the deployment of additional forces in order to help General Westmoreland in his current campaigns against VC centers of strength.

4. The ROK leaders emphasized to me that their support for US actions in Vietnam was not only a matter of moral obligation but also of Korean self-interest in assuring the common defense against Communist aggression. Not unexpectedly Foreign Minister Yi asked pointed questions about our conditions for a negotiated settlement in South Vietnam and voiced desire for ROKG participation in any future summit conferences of the Honolulu type about Vietnam. He gave three reasons for his government's desire to be represented in future conferences: (a) the already heavy commitments of the ROKG in VN; (b) the experience the ROKG could contribute in negotiating as well as fighting with the Communists; and (c) the promotion of the ROKG's prestige internationally, which would be helpful not only to the ROK, but to US as well. I responded on this point by saying that I thought this was constructive and helpful suggestion and that I would recommend to you that it be given most serious consideration.

5. I met with President Pak this morning. Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, Ministers of National Defense and Foreign Affairs and Chief Presidential Secretary were present. [Here follows Pak's report of his discussions with officials in Thailand, Malaysia, and Taiwan.]

9. Pak said that the opposition statements in the US particularly from Members of Congress, were important reasons why there was a somewhat “dubious” attitude toward the US and a feeling that the US policy was “unclear”, not only in the three countries he visited, but also rather widely in Korea. The statements led “some of the people”, he said, to believe that in due course the US would pull out of VN without a firm result. He characterized as “irresponsible” statement about neutralization of SVN, negotiations with the VC, or putting VC into a coalition government. Pak vigorously underlined a statement that “it would be the greatest mistake the US could make” if the US failed to achieve its objectives in VN.

10. I personally reassured Pak as well as his Ministers separately that negotiations would take place only with Hanoi and that the VC could be conceivably represented only if Hanoi invited them to sit as members of their delegation; that we had no intention of telling the Vietnamese who to put into their cabinet; that President Johnson's position was supported by an overwhelming majority both of the people and of the leadership. I told him we hoped we could avoid any direct conflict with the ChiComs because we think it would endanger the peace of the world and might lead to a world war, but if the Chinese moved against US with massive forces the Chinese would have to suffer the consequences. I made it very clear that the policies we pursue are designed not to bring China into the struggle, however.

11. I [garble—again?] reassured the President of our strong commitment to protect their national security in the event of an attack from the North and thanked him for the leadership that he was exerting and in particular for their commitment in SVN. We agreed at the conclusion that there would be no announcement as I left about any troop despatch, that we would merely have a general statement covering the general subject of the conversation.

12. Pak looks more relaxed and confident than when I saw him two months ago. He obviously feels reassured about the strength of our commitment and is willing to back that feeling by the despatch of troops over rather considerable opposition in his own country.

13. I expressed appreciation for Pak's understanding and support of our policy and for his sending Korean troops to SVN, and promised him that we would keep him fully informed about our plans and actions. We considered Korea as an ally and equal and proposed to treat her as such.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 US/HUMPHREY. Top Secret; Flash;Nodis.

2 Vice President Humphrey, in Asia to consult with various heads of state, briefly visited Seoul in response to a request made by the Korean Prime Minister to Brown. Brown endorsed the suggestion, stating that the visit would enhance Pak's prestige and authority at home and strengthen support for sending troops to Vietnam. (Telegram 849 from Seoul, February 10; ibid.)

3 Telegram 942 from Seoul, February 24, also contains a summary of Humphrey's visit. (Ibid.) Memoranda of four conversations between Humphrey and Korean officials on February 22 and 23 were transmitted in airgram A–338 from Seoul, March 2. (Ibid.)

81. Editorial Note 81. Editorial Note

On February 28, 1966, the Korean Government publicly announced its decision to provide one regiment and one division to Vietnam. The government submitted its request for approval to dispatch additional troops to the National Assembly on March 2. Although conceding uncertainty about winning support for the action from the opposition People's Party, the Embassy was “reasonably confident” that the majority Democratic Republican Party would pass the resolution. (Telegrams 947, 954, 960, and 965 from Seoul, February 26, March 1, March 2, and March 3, respectively, all in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S)

As the Defense and Foreign Affairs Committees of the National Assembly began considering the resolution, leaders of the People's Party announced their opposition to the request because of concerns that providing more troops would weaken Korea's defenses, concerns also expressed by members of the government party. In an effort to assuage those fears and buttress U.S. security commitments to Korea, support began to congeal around efforts generated by Assembly members of both parties to revise the United States-Korean Mutual Security Pact as a precondition to dispatching additional troops. The revision called for ending U.S. Constitutional requirements preventing an immediate U.S. response to a conflict in Korea and for prohibiting any decrease in U.S. troop strength in Korea without first obtaining Korean approval. Both the Korean Government and the Embassy attempted to head off the movement by underscoring the totality of the U.S. commitment to Korean security. (Telegrams 965, 970, and 976 from Seoul, March 3, March 4, and March 7, respectively; all ibid.)

Earlier in the year the Department of State had authorized Ambassador Brown to inform the Koreans that the United States would not reduce its military presence without first consulting the Government of the Republic of Korea, if the latter dispatched additional troops to Vietnam. (Telegram 703 to Seoul, January 8; ibid., POL 27 VIET S) But in response to the treaty question, the Department of State notified the Embassy that the United States could not revise the defense treaty with Korea, not only because of constitutionally mandated procedures, but also because the treaty contained the same formulations and standard wording used in all major defense treaties. The proposed revision of the treaty with Korea could call the provision contained in numerous other agreements into question. (Telegram 950 to Seoul, March 10; ibid.) Ambassador Brown provided the Foreign Minister with several letters addressing the security issue and reiterating the totality of U.S. policy toward the defense of Korea. (Airgram A–368 from Seoul, March 24; ibid.)

On March 11 Ambassador Brown submitted to President Pak a letter of appreciation from President Johnson for his decision to send additional troops to Vietnam. The letter was written in an attempt to advance and accelerate approval of the resolution. (Telegram 937 to Seoul, March 8, and telegram 990 from Seoul, March 9; ibid.) After receiving the letter, President Pak noted that approval of the resolution might be delayed because of opposition within the National Assembly, but indicated that the situation “would not delay despatch of troops since military preparations are proceeding according to schedule.” (Telegram 1000 from Seoul, March 11; ibid.)

After a late-night session of intense debate lasting until 3 a.m., the National Assembly voted on the resolution on March 20. The Assembly approved the resolution by a vote of 95 to 27 with 3 abstentions. (Telegram 1046 from Seoul, March 20; ibid.) On June 1 the Korean Minister of National Defense announced that the White Horse division would be sent to Vietnam in August and an additional 5,000-man unit would be furnished to support all Korean troops in Vietnam. He also noted that by October 1966 the Republic of Korea would have 45,000 men in Vietnam. (Telegram 1377 from Seoul, June 3; ibid., POL 27–14 KOR/UN)

82. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 82. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State1

Seoul, March 18, 1966, 0745Z.

1039. Troops for RVN. Ref: [A.] Deptel 971;2 B. HongKong's 1489 to Department.3

1. Reftel A requests comments on proposal for “low key” approach to Korean military in Vietnam on the subject of approximately 10,000 additional Korean logistical and supply forces.

2. I believe that any US effort to push the ROKG for additional forces would be most untimely and could have unfortunate consequences for us here. Even if such approach were in “low key” and were made in SVN, it would, of course, immediately become known to ROK Government, which will just be emerging from highly difficult struggle to obtain Assembly approval for despatch additional brigade and division and which has through MND in past few days given categoric assurances that no more than a total of 40,000 troops will be deployed to SVN. This struggle, the exacerbation of relationships with us which has unfortunately accompanied it, and the strains which it has generated within the DRP as well as between government and opposition, will render atmosphere towards even hint of suggestion by US for further Korean contribution most unpropitious. US already being criticized for too much pressure.

3. We must remember that we have already pressed Koreans hard and to them unacceptably fast (Ref B). We must understand that Korea is not an inexhaustible source of supply for troops for SVN, that people's emotions are deeply involved, that there is substantial national anxiety about extent to which Korea has already gone. We must allow time for these emotions and this concern to settle. We must give Korean people time to catch their breath after two crucial and close decisions involving Korean lives and security. We should let them choose their own time and pace for requesting any reinforcements.

4. That General Chae, COMROKFV, at least, is thinking along the lines of Ref A indicated by the fact that he has proposed, with COMUSMACV concurrence, a force structure for the deployment of the division and RCT of approximately 30,000—about 8,000 above current plan. Most of these are logistic forces similar to those included in the 10,000 man proposal. COMUSMACV representatives now meeting in Korea express a strong desire for the additional logistic package proposed by General Chae, but recognize the attendant problems on the Korean scene and are working toward agreement on the 22,500 man force structure. Gen Rhee, CG Field Support Command, ROKFV, is now negotiating package with MND, JCS and ROKA. He has pressed for the 30,000 man force, but is understood to have scaled his requirement down to the 26,000–27,000 level. Apparently MND and ROK JCS show no sympathy for any increase above 22,500. We should, for the time being at least, let the ROKs work this one out for themselves, and avoid any implication of US stimulus or pressure for this move.

5. In the event of a ROK proposal for an increase over the 22,500 man dispatch, some additional quid pro quo would be required. As a minimum, MND is expected to request replacement of military personnel with US funded civilians since the ROK military contend they are already faced with serious problem of insufficient manpower to support the planned expansion.

6. I therefore consider that any further US approach on this subject at this time would be adverse to US interest, and recommend against. However, if the MND with President Pak's approval should later make such a proposal, the US could then safely support it.

7. I cannot too strongly emphasize how unfortunate it would be for our interests in this country if even a hint that we were considering the possibility of further Korean troops should ever get into the press in Washington, Saigon, or Seoul.

8. General Beach concurs.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority;Limdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense, COMUSMACV, CINCPAC also for POLAD, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

2 Telegram 971 to Seoul, March 16. (Ibid.)

3  Document 79.

83. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 83. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, April 9, 1966.

Dear Bill:

I do not concur in Ambassador Brown's recommendation, addressed to both of us in Seoul's 1102,2 that we modify the criminal jurisdiction provision in the Korean Status of Forces Agreement. As you will recall, the present jurisdiction formula was very carefully worked out over a period of long negotiation as the most practical solution for meeting Korean political sensitivities on the one hand and for assuring the protection of our service personnel on the other. Although not the optimum solution from the Defense viewpoint, Secretary McNamara accepted, over service and JCS objections, Secretary Rusk's recommendation that the German formula provides the best vehicle for accommodating Korean and United States needs on this difficult issue.

We also cannot accept Ambassador Brown's understanding that there is no legal difference between the German formula, as now embodied in the Korean agreement, and the NATO-Netherlands arrangement he proposes to substitute. The Korean proposal (in effect, the NATO-Netherlands formula) was rejected because of the substantial differences between the German and NATO-Netherlands arrangements. Our Embassy was carefully instructed to emphasize these differences, i.e., the substantive and procedural requirements before a waiver recall may be effected under the German formula, in order to impress upon the Koreans that we expect great restraint in the recall of waivers. Nor can we agree that the German formula is discriminatory toward Korea. As its name implies, the German formula governs the exercise of jurisdiction over the large number of U.S. forces in the Federal Republic and should not be an unacceptable precedent in Seoul.

We also have indications that the Koreans would like to reopen other articles (e.g. the claims and labor articles).3 Any relaxation of our position that the negotiation is complete is certain to bring in its wake other Korean requests for the modification of provisions which already reflect minimum U.S. positions. I question the desirability of reopening the negotiation of issues on which the U.S. has very little give. It may, on balance, prove more embarrassing to the ROKG to be unsuccessful in an attempted renegotiation than to conclude the present agreement which has the obvious merits of reflecting a respectable precedent and being a decided improvement over the existing Taejon arrangement.

In our view, the foregoing considerations outweigh the grounds on which Ambassador Brown bases his proposal, and I suggest we send the attached reply.4

Sincerely,

John

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15–3 KOR S–US. Secret.

2 In telegram 1102 from Seoul, April 1, Brown detailed Korean concerns about the SOFA agreement. (Ibid.) An April 8 Intelligence Memorandum issued by the CIA, entitled “Pending US-South Korean Status-of-Forces Agreement,” also discussed the situation in Korea and the problems hindering Korean acceptance of the agreement. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. III, November 1965 to December 1966)

3 In telegram 1172 from Seoul, April 18, the Embassy reported that the Korean Foreign Minister told Brown he wanted to reopen negotiations on all three disputed articles—criminal jurisdiction, claims, and labor. The request came in response to information received about the SOFA agreement reached between the United States and the Philippines, which, in the Foreign Minister's view, had been given “preferred treatment on criminal jurisdiction” based on the NATO-Netherlands formula. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15–3 KOR S–US)

4 A note on the letter indicates the draft telegram to Seoul was not attached. It has not been found. Regarding the telegram as sent, see footnotes 2 and 4, Document 84.

84. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 84. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, April 26, 1966, 1010Z.

1214. For the Secretary and Assistant Secretary Bundy from Ambassador. SOFA. Ref: A. Deptel 1118.2 B. Embtels 1200 and 1201.3

1. I am sending you this message, in order to be sure before carrying out instructions contained in para two reftel A,4 that the highest levels in Washington concerned not just with SOFA but also with the U.S. position in Vietnam are fully aware of what in my judgment will be the adverse consequences of the position stated in reftel A. I also would like to be sure that ref Embtels, which crossed ref Deptel in transmission, have been considered.

2. Under normal circumstances I would fully concur with the position taken in ref Deptel that the host government should now agree to proceed with an agreement reached after such difficulty. We do not, however, face normal circumstances. The situation here has altered considerably since the SOFA was negotiated and to the Korean mind this is complete justification for a different attitude towards it. Whatever high officials may have said in the past, SOFA as it now stands is not politically acceptable here and the ROKG at least will not see it to their advantage to sign the SOFA and try to get it through the Assembly well before the elections. They have already served notice, both in the press and privately to us, that they do not intend to do so. The argument that similar agreements have been concluded with Germany and China and other arguments in para 2 of ref Deptel will, I am afraid, not be persuasive here, valid as they may appear to us.

3. The mood in Korea today is one of uncertainty and some apprehension insofar as the war in Vietnam is concerned. The recent disturbances and shaky position of the government of SVN, fears as to the consequences of SVN elections, doubts as to what the U.S. would be prepared to settle for in SVN, fanned by incomplete and sometimes distorted press reports about statements by high U.S. Government officials, all are the subject of anxious discussion which in the end come back to Korea's relationship to the U.S. People are beginning to question whether a further division should be sent this summer in view of the changed situation in VN and fears as to changes in U.S. policy. There seems to be a growing uneasy feeling that the U.S. has somehow got Korea into a dangerous situation and doubt as to whether we are going to stand by to help.

4. Moreover, election time is approaching in ROK and most economic and political decisions, including foreign policy decisions, from here on in will be determined by political, i.e., campaign considerations. U.S.-ROK disagreement over SOFA would very probably supply the “gut” national issue which is thus far lacking. Sovereignty and national prestige is the most sensitive issue in Asia. U.S. reluctance to re-open negotiations and our refusal to accept modifications in criminal jurisdiction provision will be seized upon eagerly by press and opposition and built up as evidence that present ROKG cannot satisfactorily manage ROK relations with U.S. which goes its own way regardless of sacrifices made by ROK to help U.S. in Vietnam. Opposition parties would be supplied with a rallying cry which could easily unite them and with which they could, if they desire, call students into the streets to demonstrate. One can imagine also the glee with which Communist propaganda will seize upon and elaborate this theme in its propaganda to this country. All of this is beyond ROKG's ability to control and, as we have pointed out, there is real danger that ROKG will feel it must take an initiative.

5. An atmosphere of frustration and exasperation with the U.S. is not an atmosphere conducive to ROK public support for the despatch of further troops to VN. I am not prepared to say that the government will not fulfill its commitment, as President Pak is deeply engaged, but an uproar about U.S.-Korean relations arising out of SOFA would create very real problems for him, particularly if troubles in Vietnam are not satisfactorily resolved and ROK casualty rates begin to mount.

6. As indicated in ref Embtels, we continue to believe that the interests of our servicemen would be fully protected if we are forthcoming with respect to criminal jurisdiction and that other ROK demands can be contained to our satisfaction.5

7. My personal conviction and the unanimous judgment of my colleagues, both military and civilian, that if we take the action directed by ref A we will create a situation in this country which at best will leave scars on our whole relationship and be something which will arise constantly to plague us, and at worst could involve a really serious breach in our good relations with this country, possibly anti-American student demonstrations and damage to the ability, perhaps even the desire, of the government to continue its current policy of unwavering support of the U.S.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15–3 KOR S–US. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 The Joint State-Defense message transmitted in telegram 1118 to Seoul, April 22, informed the Embassy that the criminal-jurisdiction article in the SOFA with Korea could not be modified and set forth the reasons on which that decision was based. (Ibid.)

3 In telegrams 1200 and 1201, both April 23, the Embassy argued for reopening the SOFA negotiations to assuage Korean concerns that the current agreement was substandard to SOFAs negotiated with other Asian countries, notably Japan and the Philippines. (Both ibid.)

4 Paragraph 2 of telegram 1118 instructed the Embassy to “inform FonOff we regard negotiation completed and agreement reached fair, balanced, and workable.” Washington's decision derived from the perception that the current SOFA balanced Korean and U.S. needs and interests and that, although it was a good agreement, there would always be some political opposition to SOFA in Korea with or without further revisions. (Ibid.)

5 Documents submitted by the ROKG requesting renewed SOFA negotiations and containing proposed changes in the criminal-jurisdiction, labor, and claims articles were transmitted in airgram A–467 from Seoul, June 10. (Ibid.)

85. Editorial Note 85. Editorial Note

After the National Assembly voted on March 20, 1966, to approve the resolution enabling Korea to dispatch additional troops to Vietnam, Foreign Minister Yi Tong-won once again turned his attention to planning the Foreign Ministers Conference in Seoul. On March 22 the Japanese announced their decision to attend the conference. As a result of the timely intervention of Thai Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman, several Asian countries were persuaded to attend the conference, and a preparatory meeting to determine the agenda was held in Bangkok in April. (Memorandum from D.W. Ropa to Rostow, June 7; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. III, November 1965 to December 1966; and telegram 1065 from Seoul, March 23; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S)

The Ministerial Meeting for Asian and Pacific Cooperation (ASPAC) was subsequently held in Seoul June 14–16, 1966. In telegram 1465 from Seoul, June 16, the Embassy forwarded the text of the joint communiqué issued at the close of the meeting. (Ibid.) Afterward the Korean Foreign Minister characterized the meeting as the “beginning of new era in Asia-Pacific area leading to growing sense of regionalism and greater [garble—chance?] of solidarity among participating nations. Results of conference far exceeded anything he expected and consequently he very proud about role Korea played.” (Telegram 1472 from Seoul, June 18; ibid.) The Department of State also viewed the meeting as an “impressive achievement of Asian statesmanship” and welcomed “the constructive and forward-looking initiatives taken by the conference.” (Telegram 1365 to Seoul, June 17; ibid.)

86. Memorandum of Conversation 86. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, June 16, 1966.

SUBJECT

Mr. Bundy's Meeting with Mr. Colby, June 16, 19662

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Bundy for FE; Messrs. Colby, Smith, [names not declassified] for CIA; Mr. Jorden for WH; Mr. Stuart for INR/DDC; and Messrs. Trueheart, Slutz, Cuthell, and Fleck of FE for their respective areas

[Here follows discussion of Laos, Malaysia, and Singapore.]

Korea

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that his chief objective was to stiffen the South Koreans against increasing North Korean subversive efforts. These efforts involved the recruitment of agents in South Korea and the sending across the DMZ of infiltrating groups. He had recommended to the South Korean police a stepped-up effort to arrest agents and collaborators and to round up infiltrating groups. This would require some improved police equipment, largely in the communications and armaments field. Police at the present time were unable to communicate from region to region with sufficient rapidity. They were also considerably out-gunned by the infiltrating North Koreans. The South Koreans, through tapping President Park's contingency fund, had come up with $50,000 for the purchase of equipment. They probably could raise a somewhat larger sum [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified].3

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that there were four recent clashes between the South Korean police and North Korean infiltrating groups. The South Koreans had been out-gunned in each of these fire-fights. During one of them a North Korean agent had been captured. He told of the intelligence training of his class of 82 members. The class had been divided up into four groups, one for each area of South Korea. These groups had been further subdivided into teams of three or four men who were heavily armed and were to be infiltrated into South Korea, some by land, others by sea.

In response to inquiries by Mr. Bundy, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Kim Chong-p'il whom [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] still regarded as a possible “comer” in Korean politics. [1 line of source text not declassified]. Kim continued his scheming and it was clear that if the president made too many mistakes Kim would “get him.” Asked if this was a short term prospect, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] thought not, that Kim was continuing to bide his time while developing a political following.4

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, East Asia and Pacific General File, East Asia, FE Weekly Meetings, January through July 1966. Secret. Drafted on June 21. Koren sent this memorandum to Hughes, Denney, and Evans.

2 Agenda at Tab A. [Footnote in the source text; attached but not printed.]

3 An internal security program had been developed and reviewed by the Country Team in Korea that provided for coordination of anti-infiltration efforts by establishing a national command control center, improving communications systems, and training special forces. Pak agreed to provide $125,000 from Blue House funds to acquire equipment, and the Country Team approved the use of $250,000 in AID funds for communications equipment and some weaponry. (Telegram 1542 from Seoul, June 30; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 23–7 KOR S)

4 Periodic reports submitted by the Embassy on Kim Chong-pil's activities since returning to Korea in December 1964 are ibid., POL 12 KOR S and POL 15–1 KOR S.

87. Memorandum of Conversation 87. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, June 22, 1966, 2:35–3:40 p.m.

I–24635/66

SUBJECT

Visit of Korean Minister of Defense Kim Sung Eun, 22 June 19662

PARTICIPANTS

Defense Department Side Secretary of Defense—Robert S. McNamara

Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff—General Earle G. Wheeler, USA

Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA)—John T. McNaughton

Assistant to the Director, Far East Region/ISA—Captain Jon L. Boyes, USN

Korean Side Minister of Defense—Kim Sung Eun

Ambassador, Korean Embassy, WashDC—Kim Hyun Chul (Henry)

Assistant Minister of Defense (Installations-Logistics)—LtGen Kim Dong Bin

Assistant Minister of Defense (Manpower)—LtGen Mun Hyong Tae

Aide to the Minister of Defense—Colonel Nam Sung In

1. Military Ceremony. Full military honors ceremony was rendered Minister of Defense Kim upon his arrival at the Pentagon at 1420 hours. Secretary McNamara presented the Minister with the Legion of Merit (Degree of Chief Commander).

2. General. The Minister spoke in English throughout the visit. He expressed President Park's appreciation for continued US assistance to the Republic of Korea and the efforts of the Secretary to enhance the morale of Korean forces. Secretary McNamara said that President Park deserved special credit for the Korea-Japan Normalization Treaty which has already done much for improving relations in that part of the world. He added that General Westmoreland praised highly the performance of the Korean troops in South Vietnam. The Minister said that the efforts of General Westmoreland, Ambassador Brown, and General Beach had done much to ensure the fighting capabilities of the Korean troops in Vietnam who were happy to be fighting alongside American troops as they had done once before in Korea.

[Here follows discussion of South Vietnam.]

More ROK troops for SVN was put forward by Ambassador Kim. He said that about 25% of the ROK combat troops are assigned guard duties in rear areas. He said that the Koreans want these troops to fight, and, therefore, are thinking about offering reserves to take over rear area positions so as to release ROK combat forces to fight. He said that Korea has many reserves, strongly dedicated, well-trained, and unemployed. The Secretary said that was worth exploring further. He would be willing to see Minister Kim before he left or to see the Ambassador at a later date. If Kim preferred, he could put the idea through regular channels. (Subsequent conversations with MND Kim and Economic Minister Kim, Korean Embassy, Saigon, indicated the Koreans are proposing to offer former Korean military reserves as civilians, for rear area service and security jobs, backing up both US and ROK forces.)

The Secretary said forces in SVN will soon total 300,000 and that the US will continue to increase its forces in SVN. These troops will be removed when no longer necessary, but the US would not at that time permit a vacuum to be created. The Chinese Communists would fill in any vacuum. He said that US installations and construction in SVN might give the Vietnamese a feeling that the US plans to stay. This appearance worried him. The Secretary said that the Korean proposal to provide Korean reserves to SVN would be helpful to increase the number of Asian faces in SVN and would help to offset the large American presence there.

The Secretary said that both the Vietnamese and the Viet Cong were suffering terrible casualties. He said the Vietnamese political institutions were weak. With these factors in mind, he asked for Minister Kim's thoughts on the possible length of the war. Kim said that this was a difficult question. First, the power in-country must be put in one man's hands, who would, unfortunately, be called a dictator. This could not be helped during these difficult times. Second, the military must be unified behind this leader and the many internal frictions overcome. He said the period of the war is difficult to predict until these steps are taken. He believed at this time, there are too many factors—leadership, political stability, military stability—to give any predictions.

[Here follows discussion of bombing North Vietnam.]

US–SVN Public Relations. In response to the Secretary's request for other thoughts of Kim on Vietnam, the Minister said that he thought that there is a need for the US soldiers in SVN to have a greater capability to respond quickly with food and other comforts for refugees and survivors of areas or villages taken under attack. The ROK soldiers always take some of the extra rice furnished by the Vietnamese Government and provide this rice to refugees and survivors. The ROK soldiers are also told to dig wells and take on chores in the damaged areas quickly to avoid hardships on the people. The Americans have lots of equipment and materials but they do not respond quickly to the people's needs. The Minister said he was not criticizing but only passing on what his ROKFV commanders told him. The Secretary said this was a good point and he would look into it.

Korean Economy and Defense. The Secretary said he was very pleased with the continuing improvement in the Korean economy. Minister Kim said that there was some improvement but that the Korean economy is based on agriculture. The weather plays a major role in the Korean economy since it directly affects agriculture. Last year Korea was fortunate in having good weather. This is the first year's harvest (spring 1966) in which no rice crisis occurred. Ambassador Kim said the Korea economy is moving upward but will “plateau” in the next few years. This plateau period would be followed by some gradual improvement, the extent of incline being dependent on a number of factors. Ambassador Kim expressed concern that the US, seeing an improving Korean economy, would decrease its grant aid. He said Korea's grant aid has dropped from $300 million to $60 million. The Secretary said that it is necessary to consider the over-all number of grant-aid commitments of US and to realize that other needy countries must be helped. Their situation is much less favorable than that of Korea. The Secretary said that we must look at the Korean economy and the ROK defense budget. He is concerned about the soldier to population ratio; continuing in the present manner is not good for Korea in the long run. He was not suggesting a change now in view of the SVN situation and the present Korea economy. He thought that Korea and the US must begin to think about the size of Korean forces relative to North Korean forces, and US forces. Our forces must be considered with the size of the ROK Army. The effects of a large army on the Korean economy must be studied. The Secretary said he thought, personally, Korea's economy was being hampered by the size of its armed forces. Minister Kim said the geographical position of Korea made the people worry about their security. He said the capabilities of China and North Korea cannot be overlooked. If the ROK military is reduced, the people will be reluctant to invest their savings in the country. The US presence in Korea also gives the people confidence in Korea's future. If these conditions are removed, the people will be reluctant to do anything about Korea's development. The Secretary said that he understood this situation. He likened it to West Berlin where the people would be reluctant to invest without the presence of strong military forces. The Secretary said he still believed it necessary to explore, together, the correct size of the ROK armed forces and at the same time the methods which might be used to convince the Korean people that reduction in force levels can be undertaken without endangering the country. He proposed that he and MND Kim continue to look at the problems of force size and Korean economic development together, and to hold further discussions on it in the future.

Kim's Views on Various Policies. The Secretary suggested that he and Minister Kim discuss, after the black-tie dinner (Secretary McNamara's home, 22 June), the following: US policy on Red China (admittance to UN, US relations with, etc.), the Role of Japan in the Future, India, the Conference in Seoul-ASPAC and its possibilities, and the general security of the Far East.3

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330,OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 4443, Korea 091.112. Secret. Drafted by Boyes and approved by McNaughton on June 28. The meeting took place in McNamara's office at the Pentagon.

2  Kim was invited to Washington because of the important part he played in achieving National Assembly approval of dispatching additional troops to Vietnam. (Telegram 1111 from Seoul, April 5; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S) Kim was in Washington June 22–June 25 and, in addition to McNamara and McNaughton, met with Humphrey, U. Alexis Johnson, Berger, and the Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air Force. A summary of these conversations is in Secretary of Defense telegram 5496 to CINCPAC, June 28. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. III, November 1965 to December 1966)

3 A memorandum of Kim's meeting with McNamara and McNaughton on June 25 is in Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 6648, 333 Korea.

88. Editorial Note 88. Editorial Note

High-level Korean officials wanted a finalized Status of Forces Agreement between the Republic of Korea and the United States ready for signing when Secretary of State Rusk visited Seoul July 8 and 9, 1966. Secretary Rusk attended the SEATO meeting in Canberra, traveled to Manila and Taipei, and attended the meeting of the United States-Japan Committee on Trade and Economic Affairs in Kyoto prior to visiting Seoul. In Seoul the Secretary met with the Foreign Minister, Prime Minister, and President Pak. Memoranda of Secretary Rusk's conversations, as well as a summary of his discussion with President Pak on July 9, are in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, ANZUS/SEATO, F.E. Trip—Manila, Taipei/Seoul, Vol. 20, Seoul.

In the weeks leading up to the visit Ambassador Kim urged officials at the Department of State to work toward achieving final agreement and signature on the Status of Forces Agreement. (Memorandum of Conversation, June 21; ibid., Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15–3 KOR S–US) After the United States studied Korea's proposed changes to the agreement submitted in early June 1966, the Departments of State and Defense ultimately agreed to modify the criminal-jurisdiction, claims, and labor articles of the current agreement, thus addressing some of Korea's primary concerns. (Airgram A–467 from Seoul, June 10; ibid; and memorandum from the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara, June 24; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 6648, 250 Korea)

The most important change to the criminal-jurisdiction article, the final version of which repeated the wording used in the Status of Forces Agreement between the United States and Pakistan and incorporated the desired NATO/Netherlands formula. The final wording clarified to Korea's satisfaction the application of military law to United States forces stationed on its territory. (Letter from Brown to McNaughton, July 13; ibid.) Although primary jurisdiction remained with Korea and required the United States to request a waiver in any individual case, Korea was required to notify the United States of its desire to exercise that jurisdiction in cases of importance. (Korean SOFA Problem, July 7; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, ANZUS/SEATO, F.E. Trip—Manila, Taipei/Seoul, Vol. 20, Seoul)

Secretary Rusk, Ambassador Brown, and Korean Government officials signed the agreement on July 9 in Seoul, and it went into effect February 9, 1967. Copies of the signed agreement and related documents were forwarded to the Department of State in airgram A–13 from Seoul, July 12. (Ibid., Central Files 1964–66, DEF 15–4 KOR S–US) The text of the agreement is printed in 17 UST 1677. The statement made by Secretary of State Rusk at the time of the signing is in Department of State Bulletin, August 1, 1966, pages 183–184.

89. Memorandum From William J. Jorden of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 89. Memorandum From William J. Jorden of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 1

Washington, August 15, 1966.

SUBJECT

$12 Million Loan to Korean Reconstruction Bank

Dave Bell asks authority to go ahead with a $12 million AID loan to the Korean Reconstruction Bank (KRB) (see Tab A for Bell's proposal).2

This loan partially fulfills your $150 million commitment to President Park made in May 1965.

The loan will enable the KRB to expand its financing of medium-size industrial firms. It is part of a carefully developed industrial promotion program.

We share the financing load of the KRB with the Korean Government and the Germans, and we expect the Japanese to be involved soon. As conditions of the proposed loan, AID is requiring the KRB to make some internal organizational changes, to improve its financial analysis branch, and to use better accounting procedures.

Our loan would be used solely to finance U.S. capital goods and services. It will encourage the use of U.S. industrial equipment by Korean medium industry.

Secretary Fowler agrees that the balance-of-payments effects of this loan will be minimal.

State and Treasury concur in the AID recommendation. The Bureau of the Budget also recommends approval (see letter from BOB Director Schultze (Tab B).

I recommend that the loan be approved.3

William J. Jorden
Bromley Smith 4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. III, November 1965 to December 1966. Confidential.

2 Neither tab is printed.

3 President Johnson approved the proposal, and noted “See that Fowler conditions are met.” Fowler added a note to Schultze's letter recommending that AID “seek priority consideration for worthy sub-borrowers who would use the dollars for goods which would promote future U.S. commercial exports now ordinarily purchased commercially elsewhere.” He also stressed “the need for some highly competent U.S. trade-oriented people on our AID mission in Korea.”

4  Smith signed under Jorden's typed signature.

90. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 90. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Seoul, August 26, 1966.

Dear Bill:

Last November 2,2 I wrote you of my impression that a new climate of beliefs and attitudes was beginning to emerge in Korea and I reflected upon its implications for the future. The transformation of the Korean national attitude from one of doubt and dependency to one of increasing self-confidence and hope, which was reported in that letter, has since deepened and become even more of an influence on national and individual action.

In that letter I wrote principally in terms of individual and internal attitudes—what individual Koreans and the Korean Government were doing and hoped to be able to do about the development of their own country and their own personal fortunes. Today I want to place more stress upon Korea's new conception of its relationship with the outside world, a theme which has become increasingly important in the counterpoint of motivation and concern in Korean thinking. For Korea is no longer, and probably never again will be, the hermit kingdom which it had been for so many years.

Korea has traditionally been a country which looked backward rather than forward, looked inward rather than outward, evaded or deflected relationships with other countries rather than initiated or influenced them.

People have thus tended to think of Korea, indeed Koreans tended to think of themselves, as an introverted people, suspicious of outside influences, fighting to maintain their national individuality and ancient heritage in the face of enormous pressures from countries far more powerful than Korea.

Today we see a Korea actively claiming a position in the outside world; energetically seeking to assert its influence; sincerely expecting, as a matter of right, that greater powers should consult it and respect its opinions.

Today we see in Seoul a procession of distinguished state visitors from all over the world; the Tunku from Malaysia, the Prime Minister of South Vietnam, the Foreign Minister of Japan, the heir apparent in Taiwan, the Foreign Minister of the Malagasy Republic, the Foreign Minister of Argentina, the Vice President of the United States, the United States Secretary of State, the leader of the German Bundesrat, the Foreign Secretary of Great Britain, the Foreign Minister of Australia. The Presidents of Germany and of the Philippines are expected soon and the Indonesian Foreign Minister has said he would like to come. There is an almost automatic assumption that President Johnson would visit Korea should he decide to travel to the Far East.

We find the Koreans, who for years have been laboring under a self-imposed version of their own Hallstein doctrine in their diplomatic relations with other countries, showing signs of flexibility. Shortly after the overthrow of the Communist Party in Indonesia in the fall of 1965, they began actively to consider and then to approve the establishment of a Consulate General at Djakarta, while a North Korean Embassy is still there. Nevertheless they saw that it could be practically useful to them to establish relationships right away with the new, more pro-Western Indonesian regime. This same flexibility is influencing their thinking and attitudes toward Ghana and other professed neutralist nations.

We see the Korean Foreign Minister planning visits to several Latin American countries and we observe intense Korean diplomatic activities in every corner of Africa seeking representation.

We have the Foreign Minister of Korea stating that he is anxious to hold a conference of the nations providing troops for South Vietnam, not because of any substantive business that needs to be transacted in this manner, but as a means of demonstrating to the world that the United States is not alone in its struggle in Vietnam and has important Asian support.

Perhaps most dramatic, we see the Koreans initiating and acting as host to a conference of the Foreign Ministers of ten Asian nations, not seeking a military alliance, not seeking aid, not seeking support for any purely Korean policy or interest, but providing a forum in which Asian nations can meet together as Asians, get to know each other and begin in a quiet way some concerted attack on Asian problems of mutual interest. This conference did not include just the natural allies of Korea and those whose thoughts run along the same lines, such as China or South Vietnam, but included Japan and Malaysia and, had the Indonesians wished it, Indonesia.

When ASPAC opened, President Pak made a keynote speech which was wise and impressive.3 The Foreign Minister presided with dignity in the open meetings and acted with skill and consideration during the negotiating sessions. The substance of the communiqué and the degree of the agreement was a surprise to all the outside world and to many of the participants.

It is true that the conference probably never would have happened if it had not won the enthusiastic and skillful support of Thanat Khoman, and that the participation of Japan was in large part simply a desire to be nice to the Koreans and to help out in the process of normalization so recently and painfully achieved. But the Japanese, for whatever reason, did come and Khoman did help, and the Conference did take place.

The effect of ASPAC on Korea, of course, has been important. For the first time in its entire history, Korea finds itself in a position of having initiated an international activity, participated in by most of the free world countries of Asia, including the greatest, a traditional enemy, which was by all tests a substantial success.

The worlds of trade, commerce and finance also now offer new horizons to the Korean mood and imagination. A Korean construction company is building a highway in Thailand on a job won in international competition. Korean companies are dredging harbors and moving cargo along the Vietnamese coast. Koreans are pushing their exports not only in Japan and in the United States, but in Southeast Asia and Scandinavia and Africa and Europe with surprising success. Korea is seeking to accede to GATT. An Asian Development Bank is proposed and Korea is active in the process of its establishment, ready to contribute more than its proportionate share of the required assets and anxious to have a position in its executive direction. Korea has repaid a debt of $10 million to the National City Bank of New York. The Government of Korea is promulgating a five year economic development plan which officially contemplates the decline and ultimate abolition of supporting assistance and PL 480 food grants during the period of its life and seeks to find foreign capital prepared to invest in Korea's economic future.

Thus, to a new self-confidence has been added a new outlook and a new attitude toward the outside world in which Korea now conceives of herself as playing an important part.

This outlook is different in quality and motivation towards Asia, the United States, and the rest of the world. This is natural and derives from Korean self-interest. Korea's attitude towards Europe, Latin America, and Africa are naturally dominated by great distances, differences in culture and unrelated histories. Its interests are limited and are viewed primarily in terms of two questions: the Korean question in the United Nations and trade. Active diplomacy to win the support of as many as possible of the newly emerging African nations for the Korean position in the United Nations is only common sense. Developing trade ties with Europe and with Africa and Latin America is similarly sensible.

But with respect to Asia, Korea appears to be interested not only in its immediate self-interest, but also in playing a part in policy developments in the area. In the short space of two years Korea has come to believe that it has both the ability and the right to have a voice in Asian policy—political, military and economic. It is willing to pay its way as is shown by its troops in Vietnam, by its contribution to the Asian Development Bank, and by its active participation in the planning for future practical activities of ASPAC.

The Koreans conceive of the free Asian countries as having a responsibility for dealing with Asian problems. They feel that it would be desirable for them to do so without the interference or sometimes even the participation of the United States. They recognize, of course, that the United States has a vital and tremendous interest in Asia. They recognize that Asian power vis-a-vis the communists is negligible, certainly at present, unless supported by United States power. Nevertheless, they feel that it is desirable for all concerned that Asians should take initiative and carry responsibility with respect to their problems. They see no incompatibility between this independence of thought and action and the United States interest.

This emergence of Korea from its eremitic attitude of mind adds still another dimension to our relationship, which will involve problems as well as opportunities. These we will attempt to analyze in more detail as the shape of things to come emerges more clearly. But certain things can now be said in general.

The success of Korea's ventures into external relationships has of course added greatly to the self-confidence reported in my earlier letter and to the Korean sense of independence.

We have a very special relationship with the Koreans. The Republic would not exist had it not been for us. We make possible its military establishment. We participate in all major economic decisions of its Government. In the central sanctum of the Economic Planning Board there are always Americans. Each provincial Governor has an American advisor. We have unusual intelligence liaison arrangements. The American military review and pass on virtually every aspect of the Korean defense budget.

Everywhere one goes in Korea there are Americans in key places. These men are frequently “advising” men senior to them and as competent as they are. Sometimes their major function is to provide a counterweight to undesirable Korean political pressures. Thus far, to the credit of all concerned, the relationships have been easy and mutually rewarding. We are still needed, and badly needed, in many places and on many problems.

But it cannot be expected that this very intimate and special relationship, so pervasive and so all embracing, can continue, or indeed should continue, as the process of economic growth, political maturity, and international competence proceeds, particularly if it does so at the rapid pace which has characterized the last two years. The problem can perhaps be stated by saying that we have an abnormally close and abnormally good relationship with the Koreans. How can we best move to a close and good relationship with the Koreans that approximates more nearly the type that normally exists between two friendly sovereign nations?

Here in Seoul we have for some time been attempting gradually to establish the psychological and physical basis for this adjustment.

It can, I believe, fairly be said that an appreciable element in the recent growth of Korean self-confidence has been United States stress on the need for increasing Korean initiative and responsibility. For example, we have tried to arrange things so that we comment on their proposals rather than vice versa. This was at first purely political window dressing. It has now become substantive fact. We have encouraged wider Korean contacts with other countries and international institutions. We have helped them develop and establish the institutional arrangements which will enable them better to stand on their own feet. We have placed increasing responsibility on Korean military leaders.

But the umbilical cord has not yet been cut, and its actual and visible severance will be a slow process and a delicate one. It will have to be done in such a way as to avoid the impression that we are reducing our interest or any assistance that is legitimately needed. It is a process which may be resisted at times by the Koreans themselves. It will be wise for us not to view this process as against our interest, nor to conceive of it as constituting the loss of an influence which we could hope to retain.

I do not think that the time has yet quite come for anything much to be done overtly about this. But the time will come, probably sooner than later, and we, as well as the Koreans, must be mentally and psychologically prepared so that we can be in control of the adjustment of relationships as it develops.

Sincerely yours,

Win

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, East Asia General. Secret. The letter indicates that Bundy saw the document and had a copy of it sent to Rusk, Katzenbach, Rostow, Kohler, and Harriman.

2 This letter contained a lengthy commentary on political, social, and attitudinal developments within Korea. (Ibid., Ambassador's Private Correspondence, 1964–1966)

3 In an August 17 letter to Bundy, Brown traced Pak's transformation from an aloof and insecure military dictator into an effective and respected national leader and statesman. (Ibid., East Asia General)

91. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs (Berger) to the Ambassador at Large (Harriman) 91. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs (Berger) to the Ambassador at Large (Harriman)1

Washington, September 22, 1966.

SUBJECT

North Korean-Bloc Initiatives on the Korean Unification Question

Background

1. In its July 21 memorandum on the Korean unification problem,2 the Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea (DPRK) suggested convening of a Geneva-type conference for the “peaceful settlement of the Korean Question.” In its proposal, put forth in the context of the long time DPRK unification position, the DPRK suggested that such a conference could discuss means of attaining a lasting peace in Korea and realizing its peaceful unification. The North Koreans proposed that the conference be attended by representatives of North and South Korea as well as equal numbers of interested governments nominated by each side. They did not explain what the conference would do and continued to insist that outside powers including the UN had no right “to interfere in the internal affairs of Korea.”

2. Since the issuance of the July 21 memorandum the call for an international conference has been a continuing theme in the North Korean propaganda and various diplomatic approaches on the unification question but without any softening of the North Korean terms for unification (withdrawal of foreign troops, unsupervised national elections et al.). The latest major public statement was Vice Premier Kim Kwang-hyop's September 8 speech in which he mentioned the conference proposal in a low key—while reiterating the standard North Korean unification line.

3. The USSR has publicized the North Korean conference proposal. It requested the UN Secretary General to circulate the July 21 memorandum and in a September 12 broadcast chided the U.S. for having “categorically repudiated” the DPRK conference proposal. In conjunction with the other bloc members, the Soviet Union has also proposed a separate UNGA agenda item on “the withdrawal of all American and other foreign troops occupying South Korea under the UN Flag and the dissolution of UNCURK.” (The USSR had previously proposed a similar item in 1962.)

4. To date there has been no measurable international reaction to the North Korean conference proposal at the UN or elsewhere. The Republic of Korea has publicly dismissed the North Korean call for a conference as a propaganda gesture. The Department spokesman in response to a question commented only that our position in support of the competence and authority of the UN to deal with the Korean question was well known. He did not comment directly on the North Korean conference proposal.

Present Situation

5. We have no evidence at present that the North Korean proposal has caused weakening of international support for our traditional position on the Korean question (UN-supervised elections throughout the peninsula and seating of the ROKG alone in the General Assembly's Political Committee for the debate on the Korean question).3 However, it is clear that the North Koreans, with the support of the USSR, have embarked on a major propaganda campaign which has as its objectives a.) demonstrating that the U.S. and the ROK fear any serious moves toward unification of Korea; b.) highlighting the fact that large numbers of American troops are still in Korea thirteen years after the year of the Korean conflict; and c.) capturing the tactical initiative on this question, weakening UNGA support for the US–ROK position.4

There has been no indication, however, that the North Korean conference proposal is, in fact, a serious substantive initiative to achieve unification nor has there yet been any overt move to contrast our position on the Korean question with our Viet-Nam policy statements regarding negotiations or troop withdrawal.

6. Privately the ROKG has interpreted the North Korean proposal as a tactic to insinuate a new element into the continuing ROK domestic debate on unification, as well as a gambit to weaken UNGA support for the traditional approach to the unification problem. Since there is as yet no demonstrable evidence of loss of international support, the ROKG has not conceded the necessity of changing our traditional tactics. It has emphasized that particularly because of the 1967 elections the Korean unification question must be handled as in the past, emphasizing the competence and authority of the United Nations on the unification question and the ROKG's favored international position. The ROKG also believes that a positive response on its part could weaken its international position (the ROK is recognized by seventy-five countries, North Korea by twenty-five) by tending to equate the two regimes.

7. While the North Korean proposal has not so far generated any visible reaction, we believe that the conference proposal might elicit sympathetic reactions from some UN members, particularly neutralist countries, seriously complicating our approach to the Korean question at the 21st UNGA and, more generally, could put the ROK and ourselves on the defensive publicly and internationally. Flat rejection of the North Korean proposal could also appear inconsistent with the continued U.S. endorsement of a conference on Viet-Nam, despite dissimilarities in the present situations in Korea and Viet-Nam.

8. Based on the existing wide international support for the Republic of Korea, we and the South Koreans are now in a position to take the tactical play away from the North Koreans on this issue, without jeopardizing our substantive position. In considering future responses to the North Korean-bloc conference proposal, particularly in the UNGA, we believe that both we and the ROKG could adopt a public position which would: a. make clear that the ROK and the U.S. are ready and willing to sit down with the North Koreans to discuss implementing relevant UN resolutions on unification whenever the North Koreans announce their readiness to accept UN competence and authority;

b. emphasize that the UN forces (including American troops) in Korea under UN resolutions are there to preserve peace and security in the area and that we are prepared to withdraw our forces when the conditions for a lasting settlement have been fulfilled;

c. point out that our position in support of the UN formula for unification in fact assures that the Korean people will have the right to self-determination;

d. expose the North Korean unification proposals for what they are: propaganda devices which would deny to their own people the right to self-determination, in contrast to the UN formula which calls for a democratic election process verified by the UN;

e. point out that the North Koreans, in their propaganda and in their clandestine efforts to infiltrate the ROK, have as their sole objective the overthrow of the democratically-elected government and the social structure of the south. Infiltration of North Korean agents and DMZ incidents continue and the North Korean propaganda continues to attack the Park Government in the most vitriolic terms attempting to incite its overthrow.

9. The public position outlined above would: a. show that we are not afraid of negotiations but will not compromise on the principles set forth by the UN (free national elections under UN supervision);

b. demonstrate ROKG confidence in its ability to defend its own interests;

c. highlight North Korea's continuing refusal to accept the UN (or any outside) role in unification;

d. preserve the US/ROK substantive position on the unification question, but in a more publicly defensible context.

10. In response to the Soviet resolution regarding the withdrawal of UN forces from Korea and the dissolution of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea (UNCURK), we should make the following points: a. The UN forces in Korea are there as a result of communist aggression in 1950.

b. These forces are there under UN Security Council resolutions reaffirmed annually since that time.

c. The presence of these UN forces, including the American troops, is the major element in stabilizing a potentially dangerous point of confrontation between the communist bloc and the free world. The proof of this is in the record since the Armistice in 1953. There has been no aggressive action on the part of the UN forces and their presence has effectively deterred any resumption of hostilities in the area.

d. Under the shield provided by these forces, both the Republic of Korea and Japan have made significant economic and political progress.

We are, of course, prepared to withdraw our remaining forces from Korea when the conditions for a lasting settlement have been fulfilled. Their withdrawal before such a settlement has been reached would not contribute to peace and security in the region but rather lead to heightened tensions in an area which has been militarily secure since the end of the Korean conflict.

e. UNCURK is a political organ created by the United Nations to facilitate the unification of Korea. It has not been able to perform its function because of the North Koreans' intransigent refusal to accept any UN role in the Korean unification question.

f. UNCURK continues, however, to play a useful role in observing the political developments in the ROK and, if the North Korean Regime desires, it exists as a channel for discussion of the unification question.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 32–4 KOR/UN. Secret. Drafted by O'Donohue (FE).

2 Excerpts from the July 21 memorandum are in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, pp. 705–707.

3 U.S. policy objectives with regard to the Korea item at the UN were “to preserve ROK's favored international position vis-á-vis North Korea, to maintain UN presence in Korea, and to retain UN role in Korean unification on terms acceptable to ROKG and US, with maximum support among GA members.” (Telegram 1873 to USUN New York, February 5; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 32–4 KOR/UN)

4 While not clearly related to the North Korean proposal, abstention of nine Afro-Asian countries on inscription on the GA agenda of our Korean item is another portent of increased difficulties at this year's session. [Footnote in the source text.]

92. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 92. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Honolulu, October 10, 1966, 0115Z.

100115Z. Exclusive for General Wheeler info General Beach from Admiral Sharp. US–ROK Relations (U).

1. In view of Gen Beach's recent Korean tour I feel that his message to me which follows re US–ROK relations is of particular significance.

“1. There have been a series of events within the past several weeks that cause me concern with respect to our relations with the Koreans. Because of my past and continuing interest in Korea, I wish to bring to your attention my views concerning the importance of ensuring that the relationships between our government and the Republic of Korea, particularly with respect to the armed forces of our two countries, are maintained as closely and as strongly as they have been in the past.

2. I am referring to a series of announcements, both official and unofficial, which may give the Koreans reason to believe that the US is losing interest in Korea. These events have added impact on the Koreans when taken in context with their desirable but tough decision to support, actively, US undertakings in SVN. Among the items which cause this concern are: A. Senator Russell's recent suggestion that a US division be withdrawn from Korea. While I recognize that Senator Russell's statement does not represent national policy, it was taken very seriously by the ROK Govt, particularly in view of his important position in the Senate. When the ROK Govt resolved to provide combat troops in RVN, they had official assurance that the US would not change its force structure in Korea without prior consultation. In addition certain assurances were given to the Korean Govt with respect to improving the strength and equipment of the ROK army to accommodate their deployments to SVN without weakening their defensive posture in Korea.

B. Temporary personnel drawdowns levied on Eighth Army in order to support timely deployments to VN have been taken to mean a decreased interest in our contribution to the defense and strategic importance of Korea.

C. Our continued delay to provide the ROK Govt with a formal document agreeing to an upward adjustment and approved force levels, or some other agreement to compensate for those ROK forces deployed to SVN, is undoubtedly being taken by the ROK as a sign that we may renege on our agreements.

D. While not a direct US responsibility, the recent Govt of Turkey (GOT) decision to reduce their UN contingent to a token force was strongly opposed by ROKG and their effort to get the GOT to reconsider the action did not, in the ROK view, receive any strong US support. The rumored Swiss withdrawal from the ICC is still another indicator of declining international interest in the problem of Korea. The current move on the part of the Ethiopians to withdraw is yet another indication of diminishing international interest. There appears to be a constant lessening in the UN presence in Korea. This is extremely important since it is from the UNC that the US acquires OPCON of FROKA. No doubt if erosion of multi-national commitment continues, we will reach a point when ROK will reevaluate their position concerning UNC OPCON of FROKA.

3. Korea remains a strong and staunch ally but, like any newly emerging democratic nation, requires frequent reassurances of our interest and support. We cannot appear to minimize the importance of their in-country requirements. The Koreans join us in the recognition of the strategic importance of the Korean peninsula to the Western world at this particular point in time. Overshadowing as it does the industrial heartland of Communist China, Korea stands in ChiCom eyes as a strong free-world threat to this vital area. This hard, cold fact is a principal element of deterrence in the power balance between free world forces and the Chinese Communists. The retention of our strong strategic posture in Korea is essential to the overall balance of power in the Pacific and East Asia. Any actions that we take which give the appearance of diminishing the value to us of Korea's strategic position must be avoided if we are not to permit Communist China greater freedom of action in Asia. We cannot, apparently or actually, degrade the importance, the strength or the resolve of the Koreans as valued partners in a joint endeavor.

4. Accordingly I feel that it is essential that all of us on the PACOM team be aware of the potential problem which seems to be developing from the chain of events enumerated above. I feel that we should, through both political and military channels, make our superiors in Washington aware of the need to fulfill in a complete and timely manner, our commitments and assurances to the ROKG. I am convinced that we must evaluate all force-level actions with respect to Korea in terms of their likely interpretation by the Koreans as sign posts of our determination and resolve to maintain a multi-lateral position of strength in Korea.”

I concur with thoughts expressed in Gen Beach's message and recommend that we take every opportunity to stress the need to fulfill our commitments and assurances to the ROKG.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. III, November 1965 to December 1966. Secret;SPECAT. Repeated to CINCUARPAC. Passed to the White House, Department of Defense, Department of State, and Defense Intelligence Agency.

93. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 93. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, October 19, 1966, 0233Z.

2122. Ref: State 67927.2

1. I can think of no surer way to destroy the good effects of President Johnson's visit here than for us to raise the subject of more Korean forces for SVN either during his visit here or in Manila.3

2. The visit here is one of comradeship, of tribute to Korea's accomplishments, of hope for Korea's future, of highlighting Korea's example as one of hope for others in Asia. To ask for more troops would be to transform it in President Pak's, and later in Korean public's eyes into a case of highlevel arm-twisting.

3. President Pak in his talk with me on October 17 (Seoul 2089)4 set what he considers to be the tone of the visit. A request for more troops would come as a severe personal shock to him. The good relationship which Pak feels now exists between him and President Johnson is a great asset for us and should not be endangered.

4. There is no basis here to corroborate indications that Korean military in SVN support deployment further Korean combat troops there. Certainly it does not represent President Pak's thinking nor that of senior Korean military here.

5. I do not believe that President Pak or his government, or the National Assembly or the people of Korea are ready to send more combat troops to SVN. On the contrary, many Koreans already fear that they may be asked to do so. These fears have been expressed publicly as well as privately. Much public stress is being laid here on the fact that Korea already has a higher proportion of its population fighting in SVN than the US.

6. Any suggestion of request for further combat troops would leak sooner or later, would become major election issue, and would add heavily to President Pak's domestic political difficulties, which should not be underestimated.

7. Therefore I most earnestly recommend that this subject not be raised through any channel, either during President Johnson's visit here or in Manila.

8. General Bonesteel concurs.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 US/JOHNSON. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Manila Eyes Only for Secretary and Bundy and passed to the White House.

2 Telegram 67927 to Seoul, October 18, reported on McNamara's impression during a recent visit to SVN that the ROK might consider sending more troops, possibly another division, to Vietnam. It also requested the Embassy's views on that possibility as well as whether the question should be broached by President Johnson when he visited Seoul. (Ibid., ORG 7 OSD)

3 President Johnson attended a summit conference in Manila October 24–26 to discuss the situation in Vietnam with Asian heads of state; he made a state visit to Seoul October 31–November 2. In advance of the President's Asian trip the CIA issued an intelligence report, “Security Conditions in Five Countries of the Western Pacific Area,” evaluating the potential for violence against the President in Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, Malaysia, and South Korea. (SNIE 40/50–66, October 13; Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 110, SNIE 40/50–66)

4 In telegram 2089 from Seoul, October 17, Brown reported that Pak had no particular problems to discuss during the Presidential visit and believed “his only purpose would be to ensure the warmest possible welcome for President Johnson.” (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 US/JOHNSON)

94. Memorandum of Conversation Between President Johnson and President Pak 94. Memorandum of Conversation Between President Johnson and President Pak 1

Manila, October 23, 1966, 7:15–8 p.m.

[Here follows a brief notation recording that President Johnson met privately with President Marcos of the Philippines prior to meeting with Pak.]

MEMBERS OF PARTY

Minister of Foreign Affairs Lee; Ambassador Yoo, Korean Ambassador to the Philippines; Mr. Lee, Secretary to President Park; Mr. Cho, Interpreter

The President questioned General Park at some length on what he thought might come out of the conference. His response came to this: We must leave no stone unturned in persuading our enemies that we remain determined that our will has not weakened; but also that we are prepared for peace.

The President then responded as follows: First, he wished to recognize President Park for his role in bringing about the conference, and to express his gratitude for the troops he has sent. They have been magnificent soldiers and a great tribute to their nation. Second, he wished to tell President Park of his respect and pride for what has been accomplished in Korea in economic, social, and political development. It gives us great hope that something like that success story might emerge in Vietnam.

We seek peace. The President did not have too much hope right now that negotiations could happen. He is also aware that if we seem too anxious in this conference, our position might be misinterpreted in Hanoi as a sign of weakness.

Finally, the President said that there must be no leaks. There are those who would wish to pull us apart. We remain united and must stay that way. The President went on to say that he wished the world to know also that those closest to the danger are also strongest for our present course of action.

He wants a clear signal to Hanoi that might gain the sympathy of all the world from this conference.

We shall not escalate or threaten or blackmail. But we must altogether—not merely the U.S. but those closest to the danger and making the most sacrifice—send a strong signal: This war can't be won in Washington or Seoul as the war in 1954 was won in Paris. We must demonstrate, above all, our unity and staying power while also indicating our willingness to go from the battlefield to the conference, provided they reciprocate. We must influence the world to tell Hanoi: You cannot win; there is no sense in going on this way.

We also wish to let the world know there is an Asia—an Asia where most of the people live—where hunger, disease, and poverty are the greatest.

We still remain concerned with, and committed to, Europe, but we also know there are new men, new leaders, in Asia, like the new leadership in Korea, who are determined and capable and whom we can support. The President wants from his trip and the conference an awareness around the world that a new face has been placed upon Asia. London, Paris, and Bonn remain important; but so are Seoul, Tokyo, Manila, Singapore, etc., important.

The President then said that he had been fighting discrimination in the U.S. and he does not believe that discrimination should be practiced among nations.

The President then turned to his struggle for health, education, and higher incomes which must be pursued not merely because it is right for people to live better, but because in poverty, ignorance, and disease are the root causes of war.

The President is interested in getting the Germans, French, British, and others, through this conference and this trip—through the highlighting of the progress in Korea and in other places—to put a new spotlight on this area.

In short, the President believes, first, we must remain united at this conference; secondly, we must demonstrate our determination that we shall not pull out and that Hanoi cannot win; third, focus the world's attention on the problems of Asia: the new Asia, with new leaders and new programs, such as the Asian Development Bank, the Mekong Valley development program, etc.

As the President said in Australia: You cannot impose freedom on people who don't want it; but if they love liberty and freedom, we will stay with them and support them. If they don't want freedom, the U.S. can look after itself and meet the threat at Honolulu.

[Here follows conversations between President Johnson and other Asian leaders.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Walt W. Rostow, Asian Trip, Memoranda of Conversations, October–November 1966. Secret. Johnson and Pak were in Manila to attend the conference on Vietnam. Their conversation took place in Johnson's suite.

95. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 95. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, October 25, 1966, 0940Z.

2237. Ref: State 69284.2 US/ROK Discussions in Seoul: Korea in UN.

1. Our one really serious current disagreement with the Koreans concerns the handling of the Korean item in the UN. President Pak and his government feel that it is of vital importance to them in this election year to make a good showing in the UN without weakening their traditional formula. They are likely to raise this with the Secretary or possibly with the President in Seoul, and they probably will want to deal with it in the communique. For reasons given below, I think we should seriously consider raising it with them even if they do not take the initiative.

2. The problem is not only a disagreement on tactics to be employed in New York, but, more serious for US–ROK relations, it is a ROK conviction that the US is growing weary of this problem and is not pushing Korean interests as vigorously as the ROKs might reasonably expect from their most important ally. This feeling, which has recently reached a new peak, colors the ROK reaction to our every suggestion on tactics, leads to closed minds on their part with respect to our suggestions, and, unless we can restore Korean confidence in our understanding of their position and basic support for their objectives, can increasingly impair our overall relations.

3. To ROKG and Korean people, UN provides sanction of ROKG as only legal Government in Korean peninsula and basic framework within which ROKG functions as active member of international community. Voting pattern on Korean item is scrutinized by Korean press as measure of ROKG diplomatic efforts for entire year.

4. The Koreans feel passionately about the illegitimacy of the North Korean regime and have consistently refused to contemplate any direct contact with it. They interpret any action by US or others, particularly the UN, which tends to give any legitimacy to this regime, as a denigration of their own internationally established sovereignty. They have dug themselves in on a hard line of opposing any form of invitation to the North Koreans for discussions in New York, not only for the reasons just expressed, but because they feel that if they were in the North Korean's shoes they would recognize that it would be internationally good tactics for the North Koreans to accept an invitation to express their views and they do not want to give them any opportunity to do so. They look at this question from a purely Korean viewpoint and tend to ignore the important problems and responsibilities which the US faces in the UN, of which the Korean items is only one. They tend also to underestimate the difficulties and risks involved for themselves in refusing to modify our tactics on this issue. If the choice is between a less favorable vote on the substantive resolution and any invitation to the North Koreans which might conceivably be accepted, the ROKs would choose the former.

5. This is a question of emotion, which has been growing deeper over time and is now dangerously strong. It is enhanced by our failure to oppose the separate inscription on the UN agenda of a Soviet item on Korea calling for withdrawal of US forces and dissolution of UNCURK. It fits into the pattern of ROK thinking that they should not have their fate determined by great power interests and they suspect that we are reluctant to support the position they advocate because of desire to reach a broader accommodation with the Soviet Union

6. The most recent manifestation of this attitude occurred when an Embassy officer attempted on October 22 to discuss the Department's suggestions for GA tactics (reftel)3 with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs International Relations Bureau Director Pak Kun. The moment Pak perceived the direction of the Department's thinking, he interrupted with a thirty minute emotional speech on the question of basic US unwillingness to support the Korean position, which precluded any rational discussion of the Department's suggestions.

7. It would obviously be impossible and indeed undesirable to attempt to discuss strategy or tactics at the UN with the Koreans during the President's visit. Nevertheless, the visit will provide an opportunity which it is important for us to seize, to try to re-convince the Koreans that the US does indeed share their objectives with respect to the Korean item in the UN, that suggestions for changes in tactics are put forward as a genuine effort to meet Korean objectives in the light of the realities of the situation, that we have not grown weary of the struggle to protect their fundamental interests, and to give the Koreans a better idea of some of the difficulties which could be presented for them by rigid adherence to a static formula in a changing UN situation.

8. If through personal talks with the Secretary in Seoul or perhaps even the President the old atmosphere of confidence and mutuality of interests on fundamentals could be reestablished, future discussions on tactics and strategy in the UN with the ROKs could be more fruitful, and a potentially serious source of discord between us could be avoided.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 32–4 KOR/UN. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Bangkok for the Secretary and Bundy and USUN.

2 Telegram 69284 to USUN, Seoul, and Moscow, October 19, discussed the Soviet attempt to debate the Korean item at the United Nations and to issue an invitation to North Korean representatives. (Ibid.)

3 The U.S. Embassy official was following the Department of State's guidance suggesting that representatives from both Koreas be seated in the United Nations as long as North Korea “first unequivocally accepts competence and authority of UN, under Charter, to consider the Korean question.” At the same time, the United States would continue to urge its traditional position of supporting the UN presence in Korea. The Department also suggested approaches to North Korea by the United Nations and UNCURK as well as by the ROKG suggesting a unification conference. The United States expected all overtures to North Korea would be rejected, but believed its tactics would expose North Korean intransigence, which would quiet both the North Koreans and the Soviets.

96. Memorandum of Conversation Between President Johnson and President Pak 96. Memorandum of Conversation Between President Johnson and President Pak 1

Seoul, November 1, 1966.

President Park began by expressing his satisfaction at the Manila Conference and its various documents.2 He said the central problem was to get others to join in the Declaration. The grand objective must be to build on the principles of Manila a Pacific area community, including Japan, Malaysia, Indonesia, the Republic of China, and Canada.

He urged President Johnson to take the initiative; but he added that first we must have success in Vietnam.

He turned then to the problem of the defense of Korea at the DMZ. He looks for no aggression from the North, but faces chronic problems and incidents. In response to President Johnson's request for an example of incidents and incursions, he replied the North Koreans tended to create incidents at times when there are other events taking place in Asia; for example, at the time of negotiations in Japan there were student riots in Korea; before the Manila Conference; before President Johnson's visit.3 He concluded that at the moment these incidents are an irritating factor, but not a serious danger. If fighting increases in Vietnam, there may be increased and more sustained pressure at the DMZ.

He then turned to the importance of keeping U.S. strength at its present level in Korea. The development by the Chicoms of nuclear weapons makes the U.S. force necessary as a credible deterrent. Foreign Minister Kishi of Japan said that if the U.S. began to withdraw from Korea, the Socialist movement would gain greatly in Japan. The size of the Korean armed forces is beyond the capacity of the Korean economy, but they must be given first priority.

As for the economy itself, there had been a high rate of growth in recent years, quite remarkable for a developing nation. The rate of inflation had decreased. They were placing great hope and faith in the next 5-year plan, in which they expected to raise per capita income to $200; reduce unemployment; move toward self-sufficiency and a decline in abnormal external assistance.

In particular they wished to encourage private capital to come to Korea. Korea was a place with a stable economy, and is prepared to welcome private capital.

These, he said, are his central priorities.

President Johnson said we share his view that the Manila Conference was a success. We had dispatched Ambassador Harriman to enlist the understanding and support of others. The most important achievement of Manila was that those closest to the danger were most concerned. The image had grown in the world—and in the United States—that we were the only ones concerned, and this was dangerous. After Manila, the multilateral nature of the concern and the course of action in South Vietnam would be better understood.

We all must not repeat the mistake of the 1930's; but the local people must resist aggression seriously. This demonstration is critical in American political life.

There is no problem with Korea, which is putting up proportionately as much as the U.S. But there are relatively few troops from New Zealand, Thailand, the Philippines, and Australia.

The President underlined that he had not come to Asia to raise troops, but that Park had struck at the heart of the problem in posting his questions. The longer we “dance away” from facing the problem, the greater will be our future difficulties. He (President Park) has an election in 1967; President Johnson, in 1968. Our people will support us if we are whole-hearted. The opposition will be greater if we appear half-hearted. The President noted a decline in the percentage of popular support for our Vietnam policy, and added: “We are not moving fast enough for our people.” We have all got problems in our countries at the level of headaches or a slight fever; but the place where there is a heart attack with a nation about to die is Vietnam. If aggression is not contained there, it will quickly spread over the whole area. Westmoreland says it can't be contained without six to seven hundred thousand troops. If we had not present firepower and mobility, we would require many more. The measurement of requirements at the technology of five years ago is now out of date. What is relevant is the total power we can apply. In fact, because of new technology, we have greater strength everywhere we are committed than we did five years ago; for example, in Germany and Korea. Nevertheless, we shall need more men in Vietnam, and all of us must think how we can act promptly and decisively in Vietnam.

The Korean people should know that we have no plans to alter present strength here, although the effective power of our forces has sharply increased.

Summing up, President Johnson repeated his statement that we have no plans to alter our present strength in Korea, but added that future planners must look at effective strength and not numbers of men. The President added we should think of Westmoreland and how we would feel if we were in his position and asked help of the governments: what would we wish the governments to do?

President Park then asked Mr. Rostow to examine some of the economic problems of Korea while he is here.4 The President said that he would ask Mr. Rostow and Ambassador Brown, in whom he had unlimited confidence, to look into these matters. If Rostow and Brown didn't know more about economic problems than he did, the Government was wasting a lot of money.

President Johnson said that, next to President Park, he was the man most interested in the future of Korea. It could not be otherwise. As long as Dean Rusk is Secretary of State, the President of the United States must be interested in Korea. Secretary Rusk had invested a good many years of his life here.

The President then noted that if they didn't break up the meeting (being three-quarters of an hour late), Marvin Watson would throw a Molotov cocktail on the table. As the two Presidents walked to the door, President Johnson said that on military matters they were fully in agreement. On economic matters we would explore and see what we could do within limits on aid imposed by the United States Congress.

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Walt Rostow, Asian Trip, Copies of Memos, etc. Secret. The memorandum indicates that the staffs of both Presidents were present.

2 Documents from the Manila Conference are in Department of State Bulletin, November 14, 1966, pp. 730–735.

3 Border incursions occurred during the early morning hours of November 2, while President Johnson was in Korea. In two separate incidents ROK and U.S. patrols encountered and engaged armed units from North Korea. One of those encounters resulted in the death of one South Korean and six U.S. soldiers and the wounding of several others. The attacks brought the number of border skirmishes occurring since October 15 to 29. (Telegram 2416 from Seoul, November 2; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–14 KOR) When investigating the matter, U.S. personnel in Korea confirmed that on October 26 ROK forces had initiated a raid against a North Korean outpost. (Telegram 2417 from Seoul, November 2; ibid.) On November 3 Brown expressed his disapproval of that action to the Korean Prime Minister as being against U.S. policy to uphold the armistice agreement and harmful to the prestige of the ROK in the UN and the court of public opinion. (Telegram 2441 from Seoul, November 3; ibid.) Brown reiterated that message in a conversation with the Prime Minister on November 17, when discussing ROK actions in the DMZ. (Telegram 2691 from Seoul, November 18; ibid.)

4  Rostow met with Korean Minister of Finance Kim Hak-yol on November 1. Kim outlined areas in which Korea could assist Vietnam, such as by providing medical-service teams. He also stated that “if the United States could and would pay for them, Korea could also provide technicians in agricultural extension, textiles, and electronics.” Rostow suggested Korea could be very helpful in postwar planning and development. Kim also asked for U.S. support for Korea's Second Five-year Plan and gave Rostow a summary proposal for the economic development of Korea that included projects requiring U.S. assistance and loans. (Memorandum of conversation, November 1; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea; Memorandum of conversation from Rostow to the President, November 3; ibid., Korea, Memos, Vol. III, November 1965 to December 1966)

97. Editorial Note 97. Editorial Note

While in Seoul President Johnson also met with the Deputy Prime Minister on November 1, 1966. The following day he met again with President Pak for a farewell call and spoke briefly before the National Assembly. The Embassy reported that the President's trip was highly successful in easing fears about the U.S. commitment to Korea and Vietnam and in bolstering relations between the United States and the Republic of Korea. (Telegrams 2461, November 4, and 2614, November 14, from Seoul; both in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 US/JOHNSON) The texts of President Johnson's public statements in Seoul as well as the joint communique released at the conclusion of his visit are in Department of State Bulletin, November 21, 1966, pages 770–780. The President's statements are also in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1966, Book II, pp. 1283–1296.

Secretary of State Rusk and Assistant Secretary of State Bundy also accompanied President Johnson to Korea. Secretary Rusk held an unrecorded discussion with the Korean Prime Minister during a Presidential reception on November 1. The Prime Minister later mentioned to Ambassador Brown that he had discussed the possibility of using Korean veterans in Vietnam with Secretary Rusk. Assistant Secretary Bundy met with President Pak's Protocol Secretary on November 2. (Telegram 2534 from Seoul, November 9; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66,POL 7 US/JOHNSON)

Assistant Secretary Bundy also spoke with the Foreign Minister, who discussed the Korean items in the United Nations and indicated that the “ROK is strongly opposed to any invitation to North Koreans” and “would prefer even significant loss of votes on the items to any change in present tactics.” The Foreign Minister “cornered” Assistant Secretary Bundy during the departure ceremonies at the Seoul airport to give him a memorandum discussing the Korean view of the U.S. approach to the Korean items at the United Nations. (Telegrams 3346 and 3348 from Bundy in Tokyo, both November 4; both ibid., POL 7 US/BUNDY) To strengthen confidence that the United States continued its unequivocal support for Korea at the United Nations, the Department of State decided to revert to the traditional positions advocated by the Republic of Korea. (Telegram 85320 to the United Nations Mission in New York, November 15; ibid., POL 32–4 KOR/UN)

98. Intelligence Memorandum 98. Intelligence Memorandum1

Washington, November 8, 1966.

No. 1620/66

ARMED INCIDENTS ALONG THE KOREAN DMZ

1. The attack by uniformed North Korean troops on 2 November 1966 against a US patrol unit south of the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) was apparently in retaliation for a South Korean (ROK) raid a week earlier. Although there has been a marked increase in North Korean harassing attacks along the DMZ since mid-October, these actions probably do not reflect a decision to engage in wholesale violations of the armistice agreement. The targeting of the 2 November raid against American troops suggests that Pyongyang was seeking to force the US to prevent any repetition of the raid on 26 October by some 30 ROK troops into the DMZ.

2. There is no evidence that the North Koreans intend to open a “second front” in the Vietnam War. However, it is possible that the North Koreans believe that heightened tensions along the DMZ would serve as a warning to the ROK and the US against further deployments of ROK troops to Vietnam and demonstrate North Korean support of Hanoi to other Communist states.

3. There is no indication that this upsurge of violence was related to President Johnson's visit to South Korea. Recent interrogation of apprehended agents indicates these attacks had been planned long before the President's Asian trip was announced.

4. Neither statements by North Korean leaders nor Pyongyang's propaganda suggest an intention to divert US attention from Vietnam. Kim Il-song's major policy statement on 5 October, although it made the customary offer to send “volunteers” to Vietnam, contained no threat to open a “second front” in Korea and the US commitment to Seoul probably remains an effective deterrent to such action.

5. South Korean military officials probably hoped that the ROK raid, which is claimed to have cost the enemy some 30 casualties and may have penetrated through the DMZ into North Korea, would boost morale lowered by North Korean incursions. Although the UN commander and the US ambassador have warned the South Koreans against repetition of such incidents, there is a danger that they will undertake carefully concealed reprisals if they suffer further personnel losses.

6. The North Korean presentation at the Military Armistice Committee meeting held on 4 November at Panmunjom followed the traditional propaganda pattern. The senior North Korean representative made no direct mention of the ROK raid, probably out of reluctance to call attention to North Korean vulnerabilities or to raise the question of North Korean casualties. He did accuse the UN side in general terms of numerous border violations.

7. The recent upsurge of violence by North Korean infiltrators suggests at least a temporary shift of mission from intelligence collection and subversion to harassment. In the past, infiltration agents—usually in civilian clothes—rarely engaged in fire-fights except when challenged by the ROK military or security services. Since mid-October, however, infiltration teams have deliberately sought out and attacked ROK forces. These probing operations may have been designed to test the effectiveness and reaction of South Korean forces deployed along the DMZ as well as to undermine troop morale.

8. North Korean agent operations along the DMZ have been conducted with varying intensity since the armistice agreement in 1953. In the past year, larger teams and more heavily armed operatives have been used. Agent teams began concentrated operations in the ROK last May. After the abnormal period of inactivity in September and early October probably caused by heavy rains and agent losses, North Korean infiltrators carried out seven surprise attacks against ROK troops in a five-day period beginning on 13 October. By 2 November, ROK and US forces had suffered some 36 fatalities (six US) in 40 incidents this year as compared with 20 Korean soldiers killed in 55 incidents in 1965 and four in 32 incidents during 1964.

9. The harassment along the DMZ is expected to taper off during the next few weeks as the foliage disappears and snow begins to fall. Normally, agent operations during the November–February period are infrequent because of bad weather.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. III, November 1965 to December 1966. Secret; No Foreign Dissem/Background Use Only. Prepared by the Office of Current Intelligence of the Central Intelligence Agency and coordinated with the Office of National Estimates.

99. Telegram From the Commanding General, United States Eighth Army, Korea, and the Commander in Chief, United Nations Command, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 99. Telegram From the Commanding General, United States Eighth Army, Korea, and the Commander in Chief, United Nations Command, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Seoul, November 10, 1966, 0817Z.

KRA 1795. [5 paragraphs (35 lines of source text) not declassified]2

[3 lines of source text not declassified] NK side has shown no effort to cooperate, in fact has deliberately frustrated every constructive suggestion made to permit the Commission to do its intended job. [4 lines of source text not declassified]

His second comment, in regard to NK and Chinese illusions that US was hopelessly bogged down, was that the facts were that war in Vietnam was really being fought with only part of our power and without mobilization. We are fighting it without calling up a single reservist, let alone reserve units. US has available large number of reserve divisions, many of which have been brought to high readiness, backed up by tremendous pool of other trained reservists. US had not used the military power deployed to Vietnam as anyone could see by the restraint our air alone is exercising. He suggested [5–1/2 lines of source text not declassified].

Before coming out here I discussed with you the strategic importance of Korea as a significant element in the overall deterrent against the ChiComs (and North Koreans) more overtly intervening in South East Asia. I suggested that, even though completely supporting the concentration of our resources to meet Vietnam requirements and the needs of the training base, we should be careful not to let the military power of our Korean element of our overall strategy vis-a-vis Communist China fall to the point where its credibility is affected.

Except in the area of army aviation, particularly helicopter pilots, where we are scheduled to fall severely below a safe minimum, and in ammunition war reserves, particularly illuminating rounds, I am not gravely concerned at our military capability here to fight a major conventional action not involving massive ChiCom reinforcements. You know status of possible US reinforcements better than I.

However, it is not what we can do but what the ChiComs and North Koreans think we can do that will affect their further actions regarding Vietnam. The North Koreans and to a degree the ChiComs, unlike the Soviets, do not have an intelligence and analysis capability enabling them to arrive at a sound evaluation of either our intentions or our real military capabilities if emergency powers were granted the President.

There follows an interesting tidbit for what it is worth. It was said by a reporter of the North Korean Central News Agency to our source during a conversation [3 lines of source text not declassified].

The reporter said: “We want to know if they (President Johnson and President Park) have discussed sending more troops to Vietnam. You see we are ready to send our troops at any time whenever Vietnam (North) wants our participation. Should a war break out in Korea the US won't be able to send its troops to Korea since it's so deeply involved in the Vietnam war.”

The incident involving US troops of the 2nd US infantry division was the most vicious and flagrant violation of the Armistice Agreement and of ROK territory in many years.3 It may have been staged as a test. If we react to this flagrant violation only by the protest at Panmunjom and without any tangible indication of an increasing capability to improve our forward area security, we may reinforce the current North Korean and ChiCom misconceptions.

Our ability to effectively cope with the NK aggressive killer-patrol actions in or near the DMZ is not as good as I'd like it to be. There are three major reasons: (a) the NK flagrant violations of the DMZ while we abide by it and require the ROK's to do likewise; (b) the basic military difficulty of reacting effectively against guerrilla hit and run tactics at NH's initiative, usually at night, in a 150 mile band of generally rugged terrain covered now with fairly dense vegetation and natural cover and from which the DMZ offers an immediate sanctuary (this is what is very seriously intensifying ROK frustration, anger and desire to make retaliatory raids);4 and (c) inexperienced soldiers and junior leaders.

The above is for your background and information.

I have had two conferences on improving effectiveness of DMZ and adjacent operations with C/S, ROKA and CG's I Corps and FROKA, one on 28 October and one a couple of days ago. I started staff working several weeks ago to get under way an integrated analysis of DMZ situation to consider together enemy tactics and, on our side, possible improvements in organization, materiel (including any new ideas from US R&D and CDC), tactics and techniques, training, lessons learned from Vietnam and here, and so on. This is now under way with a joint US and ROK analysis team. All commanders are also looking at more immediate steps feasible to take with resources here.

I have no particular thoughts as to what tangible evidence of our power potential which we can show NK's except, as we are all trying to do, to clobber some of the NK patrols if incidents continue. We may use more night illumination ammo outside of DMZ. Perhaps the early provision and use south of DMZ of a few Hu-1D's each with a battery of searchlights—such as we understand are being tested in Vietnam—might be a sort of little thing to show US is not stretched too thin. At least, the ROK's would feel bolstered by some tangible evidence of US recognition of problem.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. III, November 1965 to December 1966. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Repeated to Sharp and Beach at CINCPAC and to General Johnson, Chief of Staff-Army, Washington; forwarded by the Defense Intelligence Agency to Helms at the Central Intelligence Agency, Rusk at the Department of State, and Rostow at the White House.

2  Richard G. Ciccolella was the Senior Member of the United Nations Command, Military Armistice Commission. The Embassy sent memoranda of his conversations [text not declassified] to the Department of State as enclosures to airgram A–199, November 17. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–14 KOR)

3 Reference is to the border incursions on November 2; see footnote 3, Document 96. Airgram A–201 from Seoul, November 17, contained a UNC report outlining casualty-causing incidents occurring along the DMZ and elsewhere in the ROK between 1961 and November 2, 1966. For the period 1961 to 1965 the number of casualties was listed by year, while the incidents in 1966 were briefly described and the number of casualties given. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 32–4 KOR/UN) Airgram A–203 from Seoul, November 18, contained a report prepared by the Korean Foreign Ministry describing the incidents and resulting casualties occurring along the DMZ during October 1966. (Ibid.) In telegram 2687 from Seoul, November 17, the Embassy also forwarded a summary of recent incidents along the DMZ, the Korean responses, the implications of the incidents, and the actions taken by the Embassy. (Ibid., POL 27–14 KOR)

4 In a telegram, KRA 1804, November 12, Bonesteel reported having received information [text not declassified]. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. III) [text not declassified] (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–14 KOR/UN) The objective of U.S. policy was “to prevent further escalation of tension, to de-escalate if possible, and to ensure the ROK troops do not violate Armistice Agreement.” (Telegram 85861 to Seoul, November 16; ibid.)

100. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 100. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, November 19, 1966, 6:56 p.m.

88135. Exclusive for Ambassador Brown Eyes Only. State/Defense message.

1. We are planning to build a physical barrier in South Vietnam south of DMZ. Current plans are for construction to commence in mid-February with a targeted completion date of late May. This is a highly classified and sensitive matter.

2. A nine infantry battalion division plus logistic element augmentation (about 16,500 men) will be required to man the hilly and rugged, intermittent western portion of this barrier.

3. We note that Pak told President that it would be easy to reactivate almost immediately a division of recent army veterans for combat use. We wish now to pursue with Pak this concept of an anti-infiltration Korean division, possibly made up of veterans. While Pak could be told about the barrier, our intention would be to say in wider circles only that the Korean division would be “to help prevent infiltration through the DMZ.”

4. We recognize that it might be necessary to put such a volunteer ROK division into a special category with greater pay and benefits than received at present by ROK troops, that such special treatment might create morale problems among already deployed third-nation troops, and that we would have to face a Korean attempt to increase the 600,000 troop ceiling.

5. Obtaining this anti-infiltration combat division is of utmost importance in view of limits on other manpower availabilities. It is obviously not the same as the civilian logistics service corps concept. That idea needs substantial refinement before a definitive comment on its merits can be made. And presumably would be dropped at least for the time being if 16,500 additional ROK combat troops supplied.

6. New ROK division ideally should be in SVN not later than 1 April 1967. While we recognize that upcoming elections in Korea might make impossible dispatch of regular ROK troops by that time, we wonder whether purely volunteer status of new division would make early recruitment and deployment possible. In any event, in order to program construction and US deployments it is highly desirable to secure commitment from Pak not later than 1 January 1967 that deployment could be made by 1 July 1967.

7. By mid-1967 about .25% of US population will be in SEA actively engaged in war in Vietnam; an equivalent Korean contribution would be about 72,500 men. Further, by mid-1967 over 20% of US ground forces will be in SVN; Korean equivalent would be over 100,000. We conclude that it is entirely reasonable to expect further Korean combat contribution to SVN and that it should not be necessary for US to pay too stiff economic or political price for this contribution.

8. Please give us your recommendations on how best to achieve objectives outlined above. In arriving at your position you may discuss this telegram with General Bonesteel only. Address response Eyes Only for SecState and SecDef.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority;Exdis. Repeated to Saigon and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Drafted by Steadman (DOD), cleared by General Brown (JCS), and by Shostal (S/S), and approved by Bundy.

101. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 101. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, November 22, 1966, 0315Z.

2756. Eyes only SecState and SecDef from Ambassador. Ref: State 88135.2 I have discussed reftel with General Bonesteel. We fully understand the importance of securing further forces to man the proposed activity in the SVN DMZ, and the time urgency involved.

We consider the following considerations to be relevant.

1. After President Johnson's visit President Pak personally gave a firm assurance to the Korean people that no further Korean combat troops have been requested or are being considered for SVN.3

2. This assurance has been received with satisfaction by all political parties and by all sections of Korean opinion, which have been unanimous in expressing opposition to the despatch of further Korean combat troops to SVN.

3. The fact that the further contribution suggested reftel would consist of volunteers would not make their despatch acceptable. The Koreans will feel that troops that will be assigned to frontline duties and have to fight are combat troops, whether volunteers or conscripts. Many are already arguing that the volunteer rear area guard and logistic units now being considered will also have, in effect, a combat mission.

4. No preparations for recruitment, training and deployment of a volunteer division could be made without public knowledge.

5. A key point made by President Johnson in his discussions in Seoul was that he was not here, nor for that matter had he made his Asian trip, to ask our allies in Vietnam to increase their forces there. He stressed that he wanted them to understand Westmoreland's problems—put themselves in his shoes—and think about what they could do to increase their effort in Vietnam. He went on to say that after elections in the U.S. and Korea we would have to work on this problem.

6. Pak, on his part, pointed out to President Johnson that he expected to be given a rough time before next year's elections by his political opposition because Korea was the only Asian nation with a large troop commitment in Vietnam. In saying this Pak was reflecting the feeling of many Koreans that Korea has already made a disproportionate force contribution to the Vietnam effort. Pak, no doubt in a sincere desire to be forthcoming, did respond to President Johnson's suggestion of calling up ROK reservists for combat duty in Vietnam as an aspect of easing the unemployment problem. Here again, however, the context of the discussion was that this was something to be discussed after elections.

7. You will recall that President Pak was visibly shaken by our request for a second division so soon after his agreement to send the first, mainly because of the political difficulties with which the despatch of the first division was confronting him. Pak is facing an election in May. To win it, particularly by a sufficient margin to establish him in firm control, may not be as easy as many like to think. The Korean people have accepted the fact that their government decided to send ROK forces to Vietnam and are proud of their record there. This should not mislead us into believing that ROK support of VN is a popular active cause in this country. Opposition leaders are already calling for some form of withdrawal of the ROK forces now in SVN. For Pak to agree now to send more combat troops, particularly in the face of his recent public assurances, would undoubtedly damage his election chances. It might even cost him the election.

8. Moreover, no one, not even Pak, knows what may happen between now and the election, either on the domestic scene, or in SVN, or along the DMZ.4 Pak does not know what pledges he may feel it necessary to make to his people in order to get re-elected. He cannot accurately predict the power position in which he will find himself after elections because he does not know the margin by which he will be re-elected, nor the degree of DRP support which he will have in the new Assembly. Thus he is in no position to make a pre-election commitment for further troop despatch which is worth anything even if he wanted to do so.

9. Therefore, for President Pak now to receive a request for more combat troops would, I am convinced, seem to him an embarrassing and unfriendly disregard for his political problems, which are well known to us.

10. Re para 7 reftel, the Koreans will not think it reasonable, but rather most unreasonable, that a country of Korea's small size and limited resources should be asked to contribute to the South Vietnamese war as large a proportion of their population and armed forces as a great power like the U.S. This is especially true of a small country directly [across] the DMZ from a substantial and well-armed North Korean force and almost next door to vast ChiCom forces.

11. The Koreans feel that they have already made a disproportionately great contribution to the war in SVN. When they refer to the fact that their contribution in terms of percentage of population is approximately the same as that of the U.S., they are emphasizing how exceedingly great their contribution is, not how reasonable it is. They feel that any pressure for further combat troops should be applied to gain a more equal contribution by other Asian and Pacific countries which they consider equally affected by aggression in Vietnam and which do not have a long frontier with the Communist countries manned by opposing armies.

12. An unexpressed major premise of the argument in para 7 may well be that the present Korean forces in Korea are too large. Whatever we may think of this, the Koreans simply do not agree. On the contrary, both government and public feel that their present forces should be stronger than they now are in light of the increased risk they feel they have incurred by their contribution in SVN.

13. The arguments in para 7 would seem particularly outrageous to the Koreans if coupled with any indication that we would be reluctant to provide them with iron-clad assurances of continued long term support and pay generously for any further contribution out of our vastly superior resources. Even if the government wished to avoid this attitude they could not get away with it with their assembly, press and public opinion. You will recall that President Pak had to ask for an “economic plus” to get Assembly approval of the second division.

14. Very importantly, it appears to me that we are in danger of seeming to take the Koreans for granted and of trying to do it on the cheap. They will recall that, as I mentioned in my message from Hong Kong last February (Hong Kong 1489 to Department),5 we first asked for a small medical unit and got it. Then we asked for non-combat troops and got 2,000. Then we asked for a combat division and got that. Before the ink was dry on the agreement for the first combat division we asked for a second combat division and ultimately got that. Now we would be asking for another 16,500 combat men. The Koreans will wonder when and where this will end and why others are not pressed to do likewise.

15. If we wish continuance of the attitude of whole-hearted support we are now getting from the ROKG in SVN, we will be well advised to avoid any action which would make them feel that we are taking undue advantage of their willingness to cooperate, or are giving insufficient weight to their concern about the security problems which they feel they now face and which they are sure will persist for them even after a settlement in SVN.

16. Consequently, it is my conviction, in which General Bonesteel concurs, that the best way to preserve the chances of securing our objective of further combat troop contribution from Korea, is to wait to raise this question with Pak until after the election.

17. If we ask President Pak for more combat forces now we risk a flatly negative reply, coupled with a personal sense of being imposed upon which would mar the [garble—effect of?] President Johnson's visit, especially on Pak personally, and endanger the sincere support we are now receiving from the Koreans in Vietnam.

18. Pak will probably be expecting such a request after election. He may be disposed to cooperate providing he can get what he would consider adequate remuneration and particularly long-term security assurances. His demands on these points will be large and will undoubtedly include genuine and speedy modernization of the ROK armed forces. We will have to be prepared to be very forthcoming.

19. After election Pak will be in a better position to respond affirmatively if he wants to do so. Even then a favorable response is by no means a certainty. What is much more certain is that if we make a request to him prematurely at a time when he is likely to consider it an imposition and when it would be politically impossible for him to accede, we would prejudice any changes which may exist of getting a further combat contribution from Korea later on.6

20. I have considered recommending that I be instructed to go to Pak, tell him of our new project and the forces needed to man it, and simply ask him, without pressure or formality, if he could help now, or later. In view, however, of the considerations described in this message, including the fact that Pak is really in no position to make a meaningful commitment even if wanted to, I decided that even such an approach would simply be embarrassing to all concerned, had nothing to gain for us and possibly much to lose.

21. General Bonesteel concurs in all respects.

Brown

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. IV, January 1967 to August 1967. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Passed to the Department of Defense. Attached to an undated memorandum from Jorden to Rostow in which Jorden expressed his complete agreement with Brown's views and advocated against pushing “the Koreans too hard. None of our other friends has nearly as good a record. A good deal more would not be unreasonable for the Australians, New Zealanders, Filipinos, Thai, Malaysians—to say nothing of our 'staunch' European friends.”

2  Document 100.

3 On November 10 Pak announced during an informal press conference that the ROK would not provide additional combat troops to serve in Vietnam. (Telegram 2589 from Seoul, November 13; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S)

4  Brown had previously informed Washington that political problems surrounding the dispatch of more troops had been compounded by the increase in the number of incidents along the DMZ, a combination that significantly diminished any possibility that more Korean troops would serve in Vietnam. (Telegram 2613 from Seoul, November 14; ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

5  Document 79.

6 In telegram 2760 from Seoul, November 22, Brown pointed out that the ROKG, at the behest of the United States, had shifted its focus to providing noncombat assistance to Vietnam and that an expanded Korean role in Vietnam could only be nonmilitary in nature. Brown added that “it is now beyond the realm of possibility that this added involvement could, after election, contribute to a psychological climate in which it might be possible to get further troop contributions.” (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–3 VIET S)

102. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 102. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, November 29, 1966, 0830Z.

2881. Refs: Seoul's 2687,2 2856,3 2857;4 USUN 2348,5 2591;6 Seoul's A201, dtd November 17.7 Korea Debate in UN.

1. Evidence to date appears to indicate NK regime and its supporters are conducting better organized and apparently more vigorous assault on US–ROK position in Korean unification debate than in previous years. On basis reports of NK and other Communist propaganda output we suspect there may be a new tactic employed by NK and Soviet Bloc this year, namely, to seek to eliminate UN presence in Korea (UNC and UNCURK) or, at minimum, during course of debate so impugn integrity of these UN agencies that next year Soviet effort in UNGA may have more sympathizers.

2. The Department is fully aware of actions taken by NK and Soviets, both within and outside the UN framework, to enhance the prospects for defeating US/ROK position on Korean item and is in better position to evaluate prospects of Soviet success if the debate follows traditional pattern. However, if the Soviets have estimated they cannot win confrontation with us on basic reunification issue, they may decide on gaining only limited goal this year. One way to tilt the scales in their favor is by attacking integrity of UN presence in Korea, particularly if they can demonstrate abuses and actions by UN instrumentalities that UN members would disapprove or at a minimum frown upon.

3. It seems to us that an approach of this type by Soviets would focus on the following three areas: A. Military Armistice Agreement Violations. (1) Radio Pyongyang and other Communist propaganda outlets have placed growing emphasis on allegations of US–ROK violations along DMZ. As Department aware, we have indications that there probably have been a small number of forays across the MDL by ROK armed forces. The NK regime probably has photographic and physical evidence to prove that such attacks by ROK forces occurred. (In a number of NK raids into the ROK area, they have stripped ROK and US bodies of personal belongings and pocket litter. This type of item, which is difficult to fabricate, would make dramatic evidence to support NK charges.) Soviets or other Bloc country could introduce charges of Armistice Agreement violations by UNC forces during Korean item debate and then produce evidence provided by NK to prove charges. Since ROK forces are under UNC operational control, the Soviets could then make case in the UNGA that UN forces themselves are violating the armistice agreement which they pledged to uphold and urge withdrawal UN presence.

(2) In meeting these charges, we could, of course, point to the NK violations, particularly the spate of incidents along the DMZ in late October and early November. In this connection, it is necessary for us to bear in mind that we cannot prove with any evidence, nor for that matter do we have intelligence information, that military personnel of the North Korean armed forces conducted those raids. The best we can argue is that such incidents were either the consequences of crossings by North Korean intelligence agents or infiltrations conducted by NK armed personnel, probably from the Reconnaissance Bureau. It may be a fine point but it is important to be aware that Reconnaissance Bureau personnel are civilians, though uniformed, and not NK armed forces personnel. Some elements of the Reconnaissance Bureau, however, are under the operational control of the NK field command. In brief, we have no evidence or intelligence information to charge that the NK regime breached the Military Armistice agreement by undertaking actions into ROK territory with military personnel of the NK armed forces.

(3) The distinction between the NK violations of the DMZ and the ROKG violations may be a fine one but we believe that those members of the UN who are unenthusiastic or are fence sitters on the Korean items may be less outraged by violations of the DMZ made by espionage and civilian reconnaissance agents than they would be by an out-and-out violation of the agreement by purely military personnel from regular military formations.

B. Abuse of UN Authority.

Reports from a number of posts indicate that the NK regime and other Communist nations have seized upon the fact that a ROK unit landed in Vietnam, carrying a UN flag. We expect that the Soviets and others will be looking for other evidence of such unauthorized use of the UN name, its flag or other symbol as ammunition to argue against the UN presence in Korea. The Soviets may well seize upon VUNC as another example of an unauthorized activity conducted in the UN name.

C. UNC: Operational Control of ROK Forces. (1) The Soviets could also seize upon UNC operational control of ROK forces for exploitation. They could point out that the UNC, a UN instrumentality, has operational control over the armed forces of a non-UN nation, an action going beyond the authority of the UN resolution. Though this practice has existed since the Korean War. We are unaware of any action by the UN, per se, to authorize it.

(2) We should also be aware that the UN resolution called only for a “Unified Command” and the phrase “United Nations Command” does not appear in any UN resolutions. “UNC” appears to have been adopted at the beginning of the Korean War as a name for the “Unified Command” solely as a unilateral action by the US and, though unchallenged over the years, is, nevertheless, without UN sanction.

3. In this era of UN peace-keeping forces in various parts of the world, the UNC is an anomaly in terms of its relationships to the UN. Admittedly the Korean arrangement is unique in that the UN placed the Unified Command “under the United States,” requested the US to appoint a commander and requested the US to make reports to the Security Council, all in recognition that major hostilities were underway. Now that hostilities have been over for thirteen years, the Soviets could argue that the pattern established for other UN peace-keeping forces in their relationships with the UN should be followed or UNC should be stripped of its UN cloak.

4. It can be argued that much of the foregoing is based on “hairsplitting” and highly legalistic contentions. Nevertheless, if the Soviets wish to obfuscate the basic issue during the Korean unification debate, they could, by adopting any or all of the approaches outlined above, hit us in areas where we are vulnerable and would be on the defensive. Given the sense of ennui on the Korean item that USUN reports is present among some UN members and the lack of interest in this item on the part of many new UN members, this new approach by the Soviets could attract new and undesired type of interest, particularly since the US would be cast in the wrongdoer's role. In a forum such as the UNGA, arguments based on highly legalistic interpretations often find more favor than those based on moral justification.

5. We recognize that the foregoing is speculative but it is within the realm of possibility. Because it is potentially, and could be sufficiently, damaging, we believe that thought should be given to the tactics we and the ROKG should use in reply. It also raises the question as to whether we should initiate actions, at the UNGA, such as charging the Communists with violations of the DMZ in order to preempt the possibility of their charging us with violations.

6. Department and USUN in better position to determine whether any action should be taken. We have not discussed any of the foregoing with the Foreign Minister since the Ministry does not appear to be aware of the ROK forays across the MDL. If the above speculation appears reasonable, the Department may wish to discuss matter on a personal and private basis with ROK Foreign Minister to insure that he is aware of dangers and to assure his advice on tactics.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27–14 KOR/UN. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to USUN and Moscow.

2 Telegram 2687 from Seoul, November 17, reported on the increasingly violent incursions within and across the DMZ by North Koreans; see footnote 3, Document 99.

3 Telegram 2856 from Seoul, November 28, discussed problems associated with use of radio broadcasts by the Voice of the UN Command (VUNC) as a means of psychological warfare. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, RAD 6)

4 See footnote 4, Document 99.

5 In telegram 2348 from USUN, November 15, Goldberg expressed his concerns about the UNC being used to broadcast U.S.-sponsored messages to North Korea and Communist China. He urged that such broadcasts “no longer be made in name of UN Command.” (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, RAD 6)

6 In telegram 2591 from USUN, November 23, Goldberg reported on information he received from an intelligence source “that USSR is concerned about military maneuvers by US and ROK forces currently underway in South Korea.” The source revealed that “Hanoi and Peking have been putting pressure on Eastern Europeans to 'open second front' to relieve pressure in Vietnam. Similar request went to North Korea.” The Soviets feared that Chinese influence within the North Korean Army could provoke continued actions along the DMZ. (Ibid., POL 32–4 KOR/UN)

7 See footnote 3, Document 99.

103. Editorial Note 103. Editorial Note

On December 1, 1966, Korean officials presented to Ambassador Brown the Korean Government's proposal for providing additional assistance in Vietnam. The plan, entitled “Proposed Support Program to Pacification Plan of RVN,” consisted of three components: (1) “Support for Stable Life of VN People,” centering on refugee resettlement; medical assistance and social welfare programs; development of agriculture, fishing, and light industry; cultural exchanges and a campaign against illiteracy; and a village project; (2) “National Construction: Rehabilitation and Construction of Military Establishments,” a civilian service corps consisting of Korean workers; and (3) “Assistance to Military Efforts,” with Korea providing a civilian paramilitary unit to carry out support duties within Vietnam and training for Vietnamese military personnel at facilities within Korea. (Telegram 2970 from Seoul, December 3; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 27 VIET S)

After reviewing the proposals, the Embassy concluded that component (1) “fit well into the Vietnamese 'Revolutionary Development' Program,” addressed several important needs, and could be advantageously fulfilled by the Koreans, who were “more likely fit readily into and more apt gain acceptance of local Vietnamese societies” than Caucasians from the United States or elsewhere. The Embassy considered component (2) both a continuation of current programs and a significantly more ambitious, and unrealistic, project envisaging between 20 and 50,000 Korean workers being sent to Vietnam as laborers. The Embassy acknowledged the potential value of providing military training to Vietnamese in Korea, but believed the planned paramilitary unit would appear to be an escalation of Korea's military role in Vietnam and unnecessarily create political opposition to President Pak. (Telegram 2971 from Seoul, December 3; ibid.)

104. Memorandum of Conversation 104. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, December 1, 1966.

SUBJECT

Mr. Bundy's Meeting with Mr. Colby, December 1, 19662

PARTICIPANTS

Messrs. Bundy, Berger, Unger and Lakeland for EA; Messrs. Colby and Smith for CIA; Mr. Stuart for INR/DDC; Mr. Fleck of EA for Korea Item

Korea

Mr. Colby said that his staff had done an analysis of the recent upsurge in North Korean attacks across the demilitarized zone and had come to the conclusion that these attacks might signal the adoption of a new North Korean policy which might culminate in an all-out attack.3 The fact that the North Korean party had recently held a congress during which they decided to draw away from the Chinese Communists, but without joining up with the Soviets, seemed to support this conclusion. Mr. Colby said he was not fully persuaded of the correctness of this analysis; Mr. Bundy agreed that the situation did not appear to have developed to a point warranting these judgments. Mr. Bundy went on to say that General Bonesteel had vigorously argued for the conclusion that the North Koreans had adopted a new aggressive policy. The General also called for some retaliatory action to protect his troops. One could sympathize with the General, but here again Mr. Bundy did not find himself in agreement. Mr. Bundy said, however, that he thought perhaps the General was right in believing that the North Koreans were attacking and trying to infiltrate South Korea in order to do what they could to disrupt the April elections. The opposition in South Korea had been claiming for some time that South Korean strength was not sufficient to protect the country. The North Korean strategy appeared to be tailored to aid the opposition.

[Here follows discussion of China, Vietnam, Japan, Malaysia, and the Philippines.]

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, East Asia and Pacific General File, Weekly Staff Meetings, August through December 1966. Secret. Drafted on December 5. McAfee sent this memorandum to Hughes, Denney, and Evans.

2 Agenda at Tab A. [Footnote in the source text; attached but not printed.]

3 [text not declassified] (Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Country Files, East Asia and Pacific General File, East Asia Reviews, 1964–1966)

105. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) 105. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)1

Seoul, December 13, 1966.

Dear Bill:

SUBJECT

U.S. Army Strength in Korea

Following up on our conversation with the Secretary in Tokyo on December 6,2 I enclose a self-explanatory table provided by General Bonesteel, showing authorized, assigned and on-board strength of U.S. Eighth Army in Korea as of the end of each month for the period December 31, 1965 through November 30, 1966.

You will note that as of November 30 the on-ground strength was 43,748, on an upward trend from a low of 38,711 on September 30, and with a projected on-ground strength of 49,000 for December 31, 1966.

If this figure can be reached and maintained, and especially if the quality mix in terms of specialties is such as to fill some of our more glaring present deficiencies, we should be in reasonably good shape. We have little hope of getting a good mix, however.3

You can see how disturbing the trend from March through September and even October was to all of us here.

I hope that the assumption in the last paragraph of the enclosed table is correct. We should keep close tabs on it both here and in Washington.

It was good to see you. All best wishes for Christmas and the New Year.

Very sincerely yours,

Win

Attachment

EIGHTH US ARMY STRENGTH POSTURE

1. Below are listed Eighth US Army strengths as of the end of each month for the period 31 December 1965 through 30 November 1966.

Authorized Assigned On-Ground

Dec 65 51,288 51,267 48,517

Jan 66 50,647 52,278 50,158

Feb 66 50,646 53,843 50,396

Mar 66 50,646 54,061 50,456

Apr 66 50,789 51,242 47,680

May 66 50,747 49,467 45,990

Jun 66 50,782 46,495 43,351

Jul 66 50,588 43,729 41,170

Aug 66 50,588 42,121 39,940

Sep 66 50,588 41,156 38,711

Oct 66 50,588 44,350 39,779

Nov 66 50,121 48,704 43,748

2. Projection for December 1966 from Department of the Army is:

Assigned—51,800

On-Ground—49,000

Department of the Army has given no projections for strength beyond December 1966; however, it is assumed that Eighth US Army will be maintained at approximately 51,000 assigned during the period January–June 1967.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19 KOR S–US. Confidential.

2  Rusk visited Tokyo December 5–7 to meet with senior Japanese officials.

3 In a second letter to Bundy, December 13, continuing discussion of U.S. Army strength. Brown stated that “one of our main problems here was that even when we had enough bodies we did not have people with the right qualifications and experience. The result, therefore, is that the combat effectiveness of the forces is far less than would appear from their numerical strength.” Brown attached an in-depth study of the problem done by Bonesteel. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, DEF 19 KOR S–US)

106. Memorandum of Conversation 106. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, December 19, 1966.

SUBJECT

U.S.-Korean Relations, and Korean Internal Situation

PARTICIPANTS

Tong Won Lee, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Korea

Hyun Chul Kim, Ambassador of the Republic of Korea

Kun Pak, Director, Bureau of International Relations, ROK Ministry of Foreign Affairs

The Secretary of State

William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Benjamin A. Fleck, Country Director for Korea

The Korean Elections

1. In response to the Secretary's question whether the outcome of the voting on the Korean item would affect the elections, the Foreign Minister replied that a defeat would have had a profound negative impact on the government's position.2 In his opinion, neither Yu Chin-o nor Yun Po-son had much chance of defeating President Pak, but “an election is an election.” He believed that the main issues in the elections would be Korean participation in Viet-Nam and ROK-Japan relations. The Secretary asked whether the recent smuggling case would have an effect. Lee replied affirmatively, stating that the two primary factors in that case were President Pak's determination to treat the culprits on a legal rather than a political basis and the widespread popular interest in effective government.

Bilateral Ministerial Meetings

2. The Foreign Minister proposed that his government and the United States initiate annual bilateral ministerial meetings similar to those held by the United States with Japan and Canada. Since the U.S. representatives visited Tokyo once a year for this purpose, there was no reason why they should not proceed to Seoul during the same trip. The existing lines of communication between the ROK Government and the United States Government were excellent; therefore, such meetings would bring no additional substantive benefits. They would, however, make a good public impression and would heighten the prestige of the ROK Government. The Secretary's assent to this proposal would be a Christmas souvenir for the ROKG. The holding of the first such meeting prior to the Korean elections would be a helpful gesture by the United States which would give President Pak “a shining face” prior to the elections.

3. The Secretary replied that he hoped this proposal would not be made publicly. He wanted the Foreign Minister to know that he believes such meetings are not a very efficient way in which to transact business. The agenda has a tendency to become overcrowded and there is usually insufficient time to cover the agenda items properly. The Secretary said he would think about Lee's proposal but he was convinced that individual talks with individual ministers were a highly preferable way of transacting business.3

U.S. Assistance to Pak's Election Campaign

4. The Foreign Minister then asked that the United States Government make some public gesture which would be interpreted in Korea as support for President Pak in his campaign for reelection. The Secretary asked if public opinion in Korea regarding the United States would be helpful to the government in the elections. Lee replied that this would definitely be the case and that the Secretary had seen for himself during President Johnson's recent visit to Korea the deep feeling for the United States which existed among the Korean populace. Ambassador Kim added that, in his opinion, the U.S. attitude toward President Pak and his administration will determine the results of the election. Later, as the Foreign Minister was leaving, he asked when the Secretary was planning to visit Seoul. The Secretary replied that he had no immediate plans for doing so inasmuch as he had just been there. The Foreign Minister urged the Secretary to consider the possibility of going to Seoul and publicly praising Pak's leadership, prior to the election.4

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL KOR S–US. Confidential. Drafted by Fleck and approved in S on January 4. The memorandum is Part I of II.

2 The U.S.-ROK-UNC resolutions on the Korean items were all upheld. Details of the resolutions and voting results are in Yearbook of the United Nations: 1966, pp. 138–146.

3 In a summary of this conversation, Rusk noted: “We do not favor this proposal and believe it would be particularly inopportune and almost impossible to arrange prior to Korean elections.” (Telegram 105138 to Seoul, December 19; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66,POL KOR S–US)

4 The second part of this discussion focused on Vietnam, ASPAC, SEATO, and developments in China. (Memorandum of conversation, Part II of II, December 19; ibid.) The Foreign Minister discussed similar topics in a meeting with McNamara on December 19. (Memorandum of conversation, December 22; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 4443, Korea 091.112)

107. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Smith) to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) 107. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Smith) to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, January 19, 1967.

For your clearance.

This cable replies to Win Brown's reluctance to ask Park now to commit another Korean combat division to Vietnam in 1967.

It asks Brown's views on the suggestion that he get Park's tentative commitment now, before the Korean elections, to deploy another division later this year.

BKS

Attachment2

Washington undated.

Draft Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Exclusive for Ambassador and info General Bonesteel—eyes only—from Bundy and McNaughton.

Refs: A. Seoul's 2756. B. Seoul's 2760. C. State 88135.3

1. We recognize and accept cogency of arguments you advance in refs A and B. We are aware of public statements by President Pak and MND Kim that no more ROK troops will be sent to Viet-Nam. Also aware of Pak's December 17 press conference statement that military aspect of Viet-Nam war has passed crest and that there no longer any doubt who will win.4 We recognize political difficulties with which Pak would be faced if we asked him to publicly commit more troops prior to June elections. We also understand dangers of seeking private commitment from Pak now to be made public following elections.

2. Nevertheless, our primary objective for additional ROK contributions to Viet-Nam is to secure more combat troops. We are concerned that too rapid negotiation or acceptance of Korean officers of non-military or para-military additional participation in Viet-Nam may lead ROKG to believe our desires can be satisfied by such programs. On other hand, we have noted your comment para 5 ref B that such additional involvement might contribute to psychological climate making possible additional military contribution after elections.5 While we see merit in some of the ROKG proposals, our final positions regarding U.S. financial support for them will depend importantly upon President Park's attitude toward despatching an additional division to Viet-Nam later in 1967. That division is what we really want.

3. Problem is complicated by fact that U.S. deployments to Viet-Nam may level off after mid-1967. Public discussion following ROK elections of despatch of additional ROK troops might thus coincide with publicity regarding stabilization of U.S. effort in Viet-Nam.

4. It occurs to us that one approach to solving this dilemma would be for you to have frank informal chat with Pak. In course of conversation you might make following points: a. As President Johnson, Premier Ky, and General Westmoreland have indicated, more Free World forces are necessary in Viet-Nam to bring struggle to early favorable conclusion;

b. Accordingly, President Johnson has decided to increase U.S. forces there during CY 67 to level 35 percent above that existing at time of Manila Conference. This for President Pak's private information and no one else. This will result in participation in Viet-Nam of about 25 percent of all U.S. ground forces by end CY 1967 and we would be hard pressed to further increase ground forces, in view commitments elsewhere, including Korea. About .27 percent of U.S. population will be involved in Viet-Nam by end 1967. An equivalent Korean contribution in Viet-Nam would be in excess of 70,000.

c. Additional troops will be needed for various purposes. One requirement will be for troops to man a physical barrier in SVN south of the DMZ, for which plans now being developed. Size and character of additional manpower requirements for this barrier will depend on decisions yet to be made on the form the barrier will take. U.S. and GVN forces will both be employed in this undertaking but Korean anti-infiltration training and experience could be particularly valuable in this type of assignment. This is one possible area for employment of additional Korean troops;

d. USG welcomes ROKG proposals to send non-military or para-military forces to participate in SVN pacification program. We hope agreement can be reached on arrangements both useful in SVN and beneficial to ROK. However, we regard such participation as additive to, rather than as substitute for more combat troops;

e. The USG would be prepared to support additional troops in whatever form was most desirable from ROKG viewpoint;

f. We hope ROKG could provide as soon as possible after ROK elections an additional division, perhaps composed of volunteer veterans;

g. USG knows that Pak is confronted by elections and that this makes it difficult for him to make any commitment now. However, in order that we may make our fiscal, manpower and other plans for 1967 we are at this time asking if President Pak would be prepared to make a tentative commitment for the despatch of another division to Viet-Nam later in 1967.

5. Request your comment on approach suggested para 4 above or any alternative suggestions you may have for expediting ROKG decision to send another division to Viet-Nam.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Top Secret. According to an attached memorandum from Donald Ropa of the NSC Staff to Smith, January 19, both he and Walter Jenkins of the NSC Staff did not object to the proposed telegram.

2 Top Secret; Exdis. The telegram as sent was not found, but it was apparently transmitted to Seoul.

3  Document 101; footnote 6, Document 101; and Document 100, respectively.

4 A summary of Pak's comments was transmitted in telegram 3258 from Seoul, December 20. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 15–1 KOR S)

5 In paragraph 5 of telegram 2760 from Seoul, November 22, 1966, Brown wrote that with regard to expanded Korean involvement in Vietnam “the only path which appears likely to be successful is the non-military one. It is now beyond the realm of possibility that this added involvement could, after election, contribute to a psychological climate in which it might be possible to get further troop contributions.”

108. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 108. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 22, 1967, 0325Z.

4420. Subj: ROK Troops to Vietnam.

1. Prime Minister has told us that he and Min of National Defense, as result recent visit to Vietnam, have concluded that marine brigade now in Vietnam should be reinforced by one additional battalion, provided it could be equipped and supported by U.S. Subject had not been discussed with President but PriMin plans see President this week and to recommend additional marine battalion.

2. To avoid difficulty with National Assembly additional company would be attached to each marine battalion in Vietnam as replacement /reserve company. Some time after elections, companies would be reassembled and fourth battalion formally constituted as part of marine brigade. PriMin feels pre-election despatch in manner he suggests would be within present National Assembly authorization.

3. Comment: If President approves despatch of additional marine battalion,2 question will undoubtedly be raised with us promptly by ROKG on financial and equipment support for additional unit. Assume in light of discussions here during President Johnson visit and messages in this series, that U.S. would welcome additional marine battalion and that we would be prepared to provide equipment and financial support for that unit along lines governing second despatch of ROK forces to Vietnam.

4. MND has also told CINCUNC of his plans send additional marine battalion to Vietnam. Press also hints of further troop despatch as result PriMin visit to Vietnam (see Seoul 4413).3

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority;Exdis; Louisiana. Repeated to Saigon.

2 In telegram 4443 from Seoul, February 23, the Embassy advised that Pak approved sending three additional replacement/reserve companies for the marine battalions already in Vietnam. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 4413 from Seoul, February 21, discusses press coverage of the Prime Minister's visit to Vietnam, particularly media speculation that Vietnamese leaders had requested additional Korean troops. (Ibid.) In a February 23 conference with visiting Vietnamese journalists, however, Pak stated that Korea “faces ‘one million' North Korean troops along DMZ and cannot afford to deploy additional troops to Viet-Nam.” (Telegram 4470 from Seoul, February 24; ibid.)

109. Memorandum From the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg) to President Johnson 109. Memorandum From the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg) to President Johnson 1

New York, undated.

SUBJECT

Report on First Leg of Asian Trip

Because of my responsibilities in connection with the Outer Space Treaty, I was able to visit only five countries on the first leg of the trip to Asia and to spend a shorter time in each one than I would have desired: one day each in Korea, Taiwan and the Philippines, two and a half days in Japan, and three days in South Vietnam.

IV. Korea

In Korea, I talked to both the President and the Prime Minister with candor about the difficulties of preventing some action within the UN which would denigrate Korea's standing in the international community; I noted that composition of the UN is far different now than it was in the 1950's; that many Afro-Asians were inclined to avoid taking sides in disputes they see as US-Soviet “cold war” disputes; that others are tempted to side with North Korea to encourage its continued movement away from Peking toward Moscow; and, finally, that our intimate connection with Korea can mean that African dissatisfaction with the US on issues vital to them, but quite extraneous to the Korean problem, can adversely affect African support of the joint US-Korean position on the Korean problem.

I believe this explanation, plus assurances I gave that US is not prepared to sacrifice Korean interests in the UN or elsewhere for the sake of getting along with the Soviets, has helped to dispel suspicion among the Koreans that our doubts about continuing with the same tactics on the Korean question in the UN may stem from a desire to reach a detente with the Soviets and a willingness to sacrifice Korean interests in the process.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Secretary's Miscellaneous Correspondence. Secret. Attached to a March 9 letter from Goldberg to Rusk transmitting the memorandum as a supplement to Goldberg's “oral report to the President on my trip to Asia” and noting that he “restricted its distribution because of its sensitive nature to the President” and to Rusk.

110. Memorandum of Conversation 110. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, March 14, 1967, 12–12:40 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

The President

H.E. Il Kwon Chung, Prime Minister of the Republic of Korea

Mr. Yoon Sae Yang, Interpreter

Ronald P. Myers, Interpreter, Embassy Seoul

The President welcomed the Prime Minister to his office and told him that he wanted to talk privately before they joined the rest of the official party in the Cabinet Room. The President wanted to tell the Prime Minister that, of all the nations he had visited during his Asian tour last fall, he enjoyed Korea the most. He wanted the Prime Minister to tell President Park and the Korean people how impressed he was with the courage, friendship, gallantry, and love of freedom evinced by the people of Korea. Moreover, General Westmoreland has said that there are no finer fighting men in Viet-Nam than the Korean troops there, and the President wanted the Prime Minister to tell the mothers of these fine boys just how proud we all are of the job they are doing in Viet-Nam.

The President said he would be going to Guam to discuss matters of personnel, planning and the pacification program with Ambassador Lodge and General Westmoreland; he would be leaving next Saturday night (March 18). The President was aware that the Prime Minister had been in Viet-Nam not long ago and would want to hear the Prime Minister's impressions of the situation there.

The President said he wanted to talk about what Korea might be able to do in Viet-Nam after the Korean elections—not only explore the possibility of sending more military forces, but also civilian groups. The President noted the great contribution which Korea has already made in Viet-Nam: he said it had been an impossible job, which the Koreans had done magnificently. The problem now, the President said, is to get our men out of Viet-Nam as soon as possible. It is not only essential to finish the military job quickly, but also to work toward building up civil institutions—creating a proper environment for elections and transferring power to a civilian government. In this connection, the experience of the Koreans in recent years will be of great value to us and to the Vietnamese. We need to concentrate on the civilian programs. The President said he was hoping for more help in this regard from Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, and others. The President asked the Prime Minister's views regarding this matter.

Continuing, the President pointed out that he was sending Mr. Ball to Korea on March 16.2 The President said he was very anxious that this mission be successful, since it is of vital importance that we find ways to promote American private investment in Korea and trade between our two countries. The President said he would be talking with Mr. Ball and the members of the mission prior to their departure, and would underline to them the importance of what they could do.

The President then asked the Prime Minister for his views on Viet-Nam.

The Prime Minister conveyed to the President the warm personal regards of President Park. The Prime Minister said that the President was now known to all Koreans, even in the smallest villages.

[Here follows discussion of Vietnam.]

The Prime Minister then presented to the President a personal letter from President Park. (The letter concerned modernization of Korean military equipment, US assistance in supplying Korean food to Korean troops in Viet-Nam and Korean participation in the pacification program.)3

The President told the Prime Minister that we would consider immediately the points raised in President Park's letter. He said he would consult with Secretary McNamara on the question of supplying Korean troops and on military equipment immediately. Regarding the pacification program the President told the Prime Minister that this would be a subject of conversation during his Guam talks with General Westmoreland and that our new ambassador would be in touch with the Korean Government to see how we can join together in our efforts.

The President asked the Prime Minister when the Korean elections would be held. The Prime Minister replied that the elections were scheduled for May 3. The President asked if the Government were having any troubles. The Prime Minister replied that, although the opposition was now united, President Park was very popular and respected by the people. The Prime Minister expected that President Park would enjoy a majority of a few million votes. The President asked if Viet-Nam were a difficult issue for the Government. The Prime Minister said it was, but that the normalization of relations with Japan was the biggest issue for the opposition. The President asked if President Park would make it all right; the Prime Minister said that he would—with President Johnson's help.

The Prime Minister said that he wanted to discuss the modernization of Korean forces, and had three specific requests: (a) The Prime Minister requested that Korean helicopter pilots be trained for duty in Viet-Nam in conjunction with Korean forces there. The Prime Minister noted that, at present, American helicopter pilots are being used to transport ROK troops, but said that the problem of language was hampering the efficiency of this operation. The President said he would talk with the Defense Department about this problem.

(b) The Prime Minister referred to the recent sinking of a Korean navy vessel by a North Korean shore batteries and said that Korea needs one more destroyer. The Prime Minister said there was a danger that the North Koreans would intensify their espionage and other military activities in the pre-election period. The day before the Prime Minister left Korea (March 9) three North Korean agents had been apprehended. The Prime Minister believed that more and more of these agents would be sent down to the South as the elections grew nearer. The Prime Minister repeated his request for a “small” destroyer as soon as possible. He said the destroyers presently in service in the Korean navy had been in use since 1946 and were the oldest type still in operation. Their speed was only in the 18–24 knot range, and they were simply not competitive as compared with North Korean naval equipment.

(c) Referring to President Park's letter to the Prime Minister described to the President the importance to Korean troops of kimchi, which he said was vitally important to the morale of Korean troops. The Prime Minister said that, when he had been in the United States at the Command and General Staff College he had longed for kimchi even more than he had longed for his wife back in Korea. Similarly, the Korean troops in Viet-Nam vitally needed their kimchi. Last Christmas President Park had sent some kimchi to the troops in Viet-Nam, paying the expense out of his own pocket. To supply sufficient quantities of kimchi would cost something like $3–4 million per year. The Prime Minister apologized for raising what he said appeared to be a minor matter but said that President Park had specifically asked him to mention the problem to President Johnson.

As President Johnson started to proceed to the Cabinet Room, the Prime Minister said he had one last request to make. In view of the importance of developing the Korean economy—which President Johnson himself had often stressed—it is vital that Korean exports to all parts of the world be increased, especially to the United States. The Prime Minister proposed that an annual meeting of the Korean Minister of Commerce and Industry and the US Secretary of Commerce be instituted.

The Prime Minister said that this matter is very important to his Government. The President said that we will accept this proposal.

The President and the Prime Minister ended their private conversation at this point, proceeding to meet with the rest of the official party in the Cabinet Room.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 KOR S. Secret; Nodis. The meeting took place in the Oval Office. The Prime Minister, accompanied by the Minister of Defense and the Minister of Commerce, visited the United States March 14 and 15. U.S. objectives of the visit were to maintain close and warm relations with the ROK, to continue bilateral U.S.-Korean relations on Vietnam, to assure Korea of continued U.S. military and economic support, and to demonstrate U.S. support for Pak. (Memorandum from Rusk to Johnson, March 11; ibid., POL 15–1 KOR S) A summary of the topics discussed and the U.S. responses was transmitted in telegram 157793 to Seoul, March 17. (Ibid., POL 7 KOR S) A joint statement issued at the conclusion of this meeting is in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1967, pp. 775–776.

2  Ball, an executive at the Lehman Brothers investment firm, headed a group of business representatives from 23 companies and 3 banks visiting Korea. The Embassy and Ball deemed the mission highly successful, because most of the representatives expressed an intent to invest in Korea or to study investment potentials further. (Telegram 5130 from Seoul, March 28; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69,POL 7 US; and letter from Ball to President Johnson, May 16; Johnson Library, National Security File, Special Head of State Correspondence, Korea, April 1, 1967 to December 31, 1967)

3 A copy of Pak's March 8 letter, attached to a March 14 letter from Fleck to Rear Admiral Lemos is in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 KOR S.

111. Editorial Note 111. Editorial Note

On the morning of March 15, 1967, Prime Minister Chung Il-kwon met with Secretary of State Rusk in the Secretary's Conference Room and discussed Korean economic relations with Vietnam and with the United States, Korean relations with Indonesia, fulfillment of the agreement between the Republic of Korea and the United States arising from Korea's 1966 decision to dispatch additional troops to Vietnam, and the pacification program in Vietnam. Memoranda of their conversations, background materials, briefing papers, and similar information relevant to this visit are in National Archives and Records Administra- tion, RG 59, S/S Visit Files: Lot 67 D 587, October 1966 to May 1967.

That afternoon Minister of Defense Kim Sung-eun met with Secretary of Defense McNamara at the Pentagon and discussed the equipment needs of the major branches of the Republic of Korea's armed forces as well as Korean forces in Vietnam. A memorandum of their conversation is in Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 72 A 2468, Korea 091.112.

112. Letter From President Johnson to President Pak 112. Letter From President Johnson to President Pak 1

Washington, March 23, 1967.

Dear Mr. President:

All of us here were delighted to have the Prime Minister here for a visit, and to talk with him and his colleagues on a variety of subjects in which we have a common interest. We now have a better understanding of your main concerns and problems, and I think the Prime Minister and his party left with a better understanding of ours.

The various departments are now examining the matters which were raised and we shall be in touch with your government when we have finished these studies. As I told the Prime Minister, we cannot help in all respects, but I assure you that we shall do what we can.

In your letter of March 8,2 you spoke of your desire to do more in the civilian area in Viet Nam and to help in the pacification program. The 120 Korean medical people working in the provinces on health programs are doing excellent work, as are the several thousand Koreans on various contract projects. Specific new projects in which a Korean effort would be both practical and beneficial are under study, and our people will soon be discussing these with your officials and the Vietnamese government. There are certain problems: the South Vietnamese capacity to absorb additional ventures, the inflationary impact of these projects, the shortage of housing, the dollar and piastre resources available to support these projects, et cetera. Still I believe we can work something out.

I fully understand the desire of your men in the field to enjoy familiar rations. That is the way it has always been with soldiers throughout history. Therefore, I have asked Secretary McNamara to work out with your officials a way to meet your request that the Korean forces be supplied with “kimchi.”3

We have already taken steps to meet your desire to have your forces in Viet Nam supplied with more modern equipment. A Korean-manned helicopter company will be operating in South Viet Nam by this summer. Distribution of the new rifle to your combat maneuver elements has been authorized and will be completed within the next few months. Secretary McNamara is looking into the other suggestions made to him by your Minister of Defense.

As you know, we have just returned from Guam. The primary purpose of the meeting was to permit our new diplomatic team to become acquainted with those whom they will succeed; for all of us to take stock of the situation, as we periodically do every six months or so; and thus to assure a smooth transition. We informed the Government of Viet Nam that we would be there and told them they would be welcome, if it were convenient, although we would understand if their current pre-occupations made it impossible for them to come. They chose to join us and used the occasion to accelerate the work in the Constituent Assembly and in the Directorate on the constitution. Prime Minister Ky was, therefore, able to present us with a copy of the new constitution.

All of us committed to the defense of South Viet Nam should, I believe, feel a real sense of satisfaction at the evolution of constitutional politics in South Viet Nam. I am told that the constitution reflects elements from the constitution of South Korea; and, even more important, I am sure the leadership in South Viet Nam is inspired by the success of South Korea in moving towards constitutional government since 1961.

It will be a very great achievement, indeed, if our friends in South Viet Nam can carry through successfully the election schedule of the next six months.

As you know, military operations are proceeding with steady success. There is much evidence of pressure on both the main forces and the guerrilla infrastructure. But none of us can state with confidence when the enemy effort will collapse.

We remain ready to respond to any effort that might lead to a peaceful resolution of the conflict which safeguards the independence and territorial integrity of South Viet Nam. We have wide support in Asia and elsewhere in what you and we and our allies are doing. Meanwhile, we must continue to maintain the pressure, and we may need to step it up with additional forces.

We will all have a chance to review these matters together and take stock at the meeting of the troop contributing countries in Washington, April 20–21.4

But I would take this occasion to say that your contribution has been a mighty one, for which we are all grateful. You and I know what resolution and courage are needed to make these hard decisions. But we are trying to prevent a third world war. We are trying to create conditions for a durable peace in Asia. We are trying to help the Asian nations and Asian people get for themselves a chance to live in peace and freedom. These are great aims, and they will require a great and sustained effort.

Sincerely,

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Special Head of State Correspondence, Korea, November 1, 1966 to March 31, 1967. Secret.

2 See footnote 3, Document 110.

3 After studying the matter McNamara approved a program whereby Korean soldiers in Vietnam would be provided kimchi and peppers once each day. The Department of Defense estimated the program would cost approximately $2 million per year. (Telegram 201874 to Seoul, May 25; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, DEF 19–8 US–VIET S; memorandum from McNaughton to McNamara, May 20; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 71 A 4546, 430 Korea)

4 The conference, which was renamed the Seven Nation Meeting on Vietnam, continued the consultative process established at Manila the previous year. Documents pertaining to Korean participation in the conference are in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69,POL 7 US. The meeting is documented more fully in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume V.

113. Memorandum of Conversation 113. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 23, 1967.

[Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, East Asia and Pacific General File, East Asia, FE Weekly Meetings, 1967. Secret. 2 pages of source text not declassified.]

114. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 114. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, April 21, 1967.

SUBJECT

Korean Election

You asked to be kept informed of developments in the Korean election.

This is a brief situation report.

President Pak made his first formal campaign appearance on April 17 at a rally in Taejon. Good turnout (about 100,000). Speech well received.

Opposition candidate Yun Po-sun is concentrating on larger cities (Pusan, Taegu) after an early start in the provinces.

Pak's main lines have been: —shallowness of opposition's promises;

—determination to move against corruption;

—remarkable economic progress of Korea under his administration;

—pledge to continue vigorously Korea's economic growth and modernization. Press coverage has been balanced thus far.

No troop movements related to politics have been reported.

There are reports one or two splinter candidates may pull out of the race in favor of the opposition candidate.

Embassy prediction that Pak will be re-elected by a majority stands unchanged.2

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Confidential. The memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

2 In telegram 5984 from Seoul, May 6, the Embassy reported that Pak won the May 3 election, having received over 5.6 million votes or 51.4 percent of the total ballots cast. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 14 KOR S)

115. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 115. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 1, 1967.

SUBJECT

Loans to Korea for Power Development

AID (Administrator Gaud) asks your approval to make two development loans to South Korea.2 They would finance the foreign exchange costs in improvements of the country's electric power system. The total of the two loans is $34.7 million: —$22 million to finance a new thermal power plant in southeast Korea, the nation's fastest-growing industrial area;

—$12.7 million for improvements in Korea's electric transmission [cl12]and distribution system.

You will recall that in May 1965, a commitment was made to President Park that we would provide Korea with $150 million in assistance this year. With the two proposed loans, we will have fulfilled that commitment up to $142 million. AID is considering additional loans of $8 million and expects to fulfill the commitment to Park completely by this summer.

Under our urging, the Koreans have boosted electricity rates by 24 per cent. The new loans will carry the requirement for another 10 per cent raise. Other requirements are aimed at enabling the Korean power company to meet its own future needs for capital investment.

Korea's need for additional power resources is urgent if the country is to maintain its encouraging high rate of growth. Demand has increased 19 per cent a year since 1964.

The loans would be used solely to finance purchase of United States equipment and services. Secretary Fowler agrees they will have a minimum adverse impact on our balance of payments. The Budget Bureau (Director Schultze) supports AID's proposal.3

I recommend that you approve these loans.

Embassy Seoul has strongly urged that announcement of the loans be held until after the presidential election (May 3). Their judgment is that announcement just in advance would do President Park more harm than good. Announcement after will strengthen his party in the up-coming legislative elections.

Walt

Loans approved4

Disapproved

See me

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Confidential. The memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

2 Reference is to an April 15 memorandum from Gaud to President Johnson. (Ibid.)

3 Reference is to an April 21 memorandum from Schultze to President Johnson. (Ibid.)

4 The President checked this option.

116. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) 116. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)1

Seoul, May 2, 1967.

Dear Bill:

With the presidential election due to take place on Wednesday,2 I thought I would pass on to you some election eve thoughts about the presidential campaign, its significance and its meaning for the democratic process in Korea. Our forecasts and predictions about the outcome of the election you will have received in our daily reporting and you will know the results by the time you receive this letter.3

I believe that time will show that political scientists will view the 1967 campaign as a landmark in the developing political process of this country. It has not been an inspired or very exciting campaign. In fact in many ways it has been rather dull. This is part of its significance. It has been a struggle between the presidential candidates of two parties who by and large have gone before the people of the country, to state their case in terms of the issues of the day.

The campaign has been a policy contest, for the most part, with both sides stating their position, with each candidate strongly criticizing the views of his opponent, with people in a position to hear and evaluate the promises of the candidates. Pak has chosen to rest his case on his past performance and to seek a mandate to continue along these lines. His theme has been modernization of the country and the prestige and position of Korea. Yun on the other hand has argued that the Pak administration's economic policies have benefited only a few of the chosen and has proposed alternative economic policies which he claims will benefit the masses, particularly the farmers.

Another major theme of the opposition has been to call for a peaceful transfer of power to demonstrate to the world that Korea is a democracy. Salting all the opposition campaign speeches have been the traditional charges of corruption, military dictatorial rule, police and intelligence agency politics, privileged power and sell-out to foreigners diplomacy.

The campaign was hardly under way when the NDP was loudly voicing its charges of illegal campaigning by the DRP, and the DRP lost no time in responding in kind. To its charges, the NDP soon added its fear and concerns that election rigging and other illegal election activity would occur. These fears and concerns were rapidly replaced with more positive statements that they knew of DRP/Pak administration plans to engage in such nefarious deeds.

During the campaign Yun Po-sun, Yu Chin-o and others of the NDP went at their tasks in a most strenuous manner with the aged Yun and other NDP stumping teams covering the countryside and the cities in a highly effective manner. Considering the newness of their organization and their comparatively limited funds, the NDP conducted quite an intensive campaign. The crowds they gathered, particularly in the cities, were of respectable size and reflected the deep election interest of the people, though most observers reported the crowds as being relatively quiet and unresponsive.

The opposition coalition was not as solid as it looked. A number of old respected figures stayed out of the campaign or made only a perfunctory effort on behalf of Yun. George Paek took a trip to Geneva and was away during most of the campaign. Madam Pak entered the fray in the closing days and made only a few speeches. Others such as Yi Pom-sok and Yu Chin-san could never be accused of undue exertion on behalf of Yun. Nevertheless the NDP kept its cohesion and campaigned without any overt rifts.

The DRP followed a different strategy in its campaigning, a strategy in part shaped by their analysis of American election campaigns. The brunt of the battle in the first half of the campaign was carried by KCP aided by selected party faithful. Their efforts were mainly concentrated in the rural areas and the small towns where the significance of the size of the crowds they drew is hard to determine.

The big gun was unlimbered in the last two weeks of the campaign when President Pak officially began his electioneering. (Prior to then his public appearances were claimed to be part of his normal ceremonial duties as President, though I suspect Pak's rate of ribbon cutting hit an all-time weekly high over the past months.) Pak concentrated his efforts in the urban areas and, even by conservative estimates, he attracted (or the DRP arranged for) rather massive attendance. He clearly outdrew Yun whenever the two spoke in the same city. The opposition, of course, claimed that Pak's huge crowds were mobilized by illegal activities of the DRP and Government, and this belief is probably shared by most Koreans.

There is ample evidence that the DRP machine with its substantial resources did help considerably to increase the crowd sizes, but the predisposition to attend, sheer curiosity about or interest in the President was probably present in the first instance. The DRP crowds were generally cheerful and well behaved, and showed little overt evidence of regimentation. There is no evidence that coercive measures were used to create crowds for Pak. In addressing his audience, Pak had no better luck than Yun in developing any responsiveness or a real fervor for the cause. Many observers attribute this to his style and to his speeches which were coldly logical, factual and full of dull statistics.

Both parties and the press have paid tremendous attention—perhaps too much—to the size of the crowd a stumping team would gather. The size of the gatherings was used by both sides as a barometer for election success and a sign of public support. Because of this, the charges and countercharges relating to efforts to mobilize attendance at rallies have been numerous and vehement. Both sides, needless to say, have been guilty with the DRP excesses outnumbering the NDP efforts. This is not because the NDP by nature is purer in soul than the DRP, but is simply a reflection of the fact that DRP organizational capabilities, funds and other resources were far greater than those of the NDP. Nevertheless in the public exchange, the NDP probably did succeed in leaving the impression with most Korean voters that the DRP used illegal means to gather huge crowds to its rallies.

The press had great fun and games in estimating crowd sizes, as did the parties. The formulas used by various reporters and other estimators became the subject of considerable examination and discussion. The officials of both parties believed press figures consistently underestimated their rally gatherings and the NDP charged that the Government forced the papers to underestimate their crowd size. Most impartial observers felt both sides overestimated the numbers at the rallies, as did the police and [K]CIA in their reporting. Nevertheless the general feeling is that the crowds exceeded those of 1963 and that Pak did outdraw Yun in the urban areas where they both spoke. Pak's margin, however, cannot be accounted for solely on the basis of superior DRP legal and illegal efforts at crowd gathering.

The role of the splinter parties in the campaign was interesting, in that it simply was not a factor. None of the five made any serious effort to campaign and when they did they drew little public attention. Only random mention was made of their activities in the press and the general impression was that they would have little effect on the outcome. The withdrawal of So Min-ho, the candidate of one of the more significant splinter parties, from the presidential race is, of course, a good indication of the little influence the splinter parties expect to have on the outcome. So's withdrawal probably will add votes to Yun's total and he doubtlessly was able to extract a price for his action.

It is interesting to note how with the passage of time the number of splinter parties involved in Korean elections have decreased. While a few of these parties revolve around particular individuals who expound a specific political philosophy, most of them are organized around political opportunists. These latter groups are centered around individuals who have usually been frustrated in their efforts to gain position and prominence in one or the other of the major parties. They then organize a splinter party because they see an opportunity for personal financial gain by securing political funds from one of the major parties who provide the funds in the belief that divide and conquer is a good tactic, or because they feel that there is a chance for political blackmail, at a crucial time a deal can be made with a major party to give the splinter group a piece of the political trade.

The first group of splinter parties will no doubt continue to be present in the Korean political scene permanently, just as we have our Prohibition Party and others. The second group is beginning to disappear from the scene as the political party system has matured and become more institutionalized, a process which I feel is well under way and is being given a strong push by this Presidential election. This process is being helped along by time as well, as it takes its toll of the various aged political personalities who have dominated the political scene in this country since 1948 and who gathered followers on the basis of personal allegiances rather than fellow political believers.

Another interesting aspect of the campaign has been the role of the press and government influence over it. The NDP has been most outspoken on this point and, as always, where there is smoke there is some fire. Rather foolishly, the government through the [K]CIA did seek to intensify its influence on the press. This is not new, for even in non-election time the [K]CIA has special teams that cover the newspaper offices leaving word what to print and what not to print. The tempo, however, has been stepped up in the sense that [K]CIA agents make their visits more often and for longer periods of time.

Nevertheless, setting aside the several outspokenly pro-government and pro-opposition papers, the press treatment of DRP and NDP activities was balanced, arithmetically so well balanced in terms of inches of news space as to make some of us feel that the press had been instructed to hit this balance. Our reading of the press did not lead us to conclude that there was any real substance to the NDP charges. Certainly the press coverage we have observed does not justify the appellation of “controlled press” being applied here. In many ways, it was a mature and responsible coverage. Possibly the fact that the press did not automatically side with the NDP, picking up and expanding on its many unsubstantial accusations, so frustrated and disappointed the NDP that they could only conclude the government was controlling and suppressing the press. The DRP and the Government supporters did many things such as buying up advertising space, more favorable placing of stories about the Pak and the DRP on the front page and other foolish stunts, that warrant a charge of “dirty pool” but hardly can be considered to involve an effort to suborn the freedom of expression. At any rate it is hard to see this type of political gimmickry really affecting voter attitudes.

The press played an unusual role in the early part of the campaign that had far reaching effect. Both parties had started off on a tactic of heavy personal abuse of the opposition candidate. The audiences and the press reacted negatively, with the press particularly criticizing both parties for resorting to the personal abuse theme and strongly urging that campaign speakers stick to the issues. Thereafter personal attacks diminished considerably and substantive issues were the heart of most speeches.

The press did give its readers in roughly equal proportion the basic facts on what the candidates were saying. It did not grossly or irresponsibly distort the arguments or claims of either side. It did give the readers the papers criticism and commentary on the issues and the pledges of the candidates. The restrictions and inhibitions on the press caused by the Government were in large measure foolish, consequently damaging to its cause, and reminiscent of an era which the country has outgrown but is simply experiencing a cultural lag.

The major campaign issues were those relating to the economy. Domestic political issues of corruption, maladministration, civil service wage scales, length of military service were not lively ones and such foreign policy subjects as the Vietnam troop dispatch or the Japanese normalization treaty in terms of public interest hardly qualified as election issues.

Both sides presented their views on the economic issues extensively. There were not only speeches but numerous newspaper articles, radio and TV programs where DRP and NDP spokesmen were provided an opportunity to present their case on a particular subject. An interested voter had available to him many ways to determine party views on specific issues of interest to him.

Agricultural policy was probably the most important substantive issue and very likely the most significant when it came to swaying votes. Yun and the NDP went at this issue heavily, playing to the predominant rural voter and promising him high rice prices and low fertilizer costs. The “rich get richer and the poor get poorer” theme was for the farmers' benefit. Contrasts were drawn between the plight of the farmer and the gains of the urban population. To this was added the promise of lower taxes and the dangers of continuing present government policies which were bringing higher prices and saddling the nation with foreign loans that would keep the nation in debt to foreigners for many years to come.

Pak and the DRP sought to counter these arguments by pointing to the progress of the past, promising a faster rate of economic progress in the future and logically analyzing the opposition claims and promises to demonstrate their lack of realism, irrationality and weakness. They sought to make their case on the need for a balanced development between agriculture and industry—a rather sophisticated economic argument to make stick in a country with a predominantly rural/farming voting population. The DRP is worried about the psychological effect on the rural voters of the NDP campaign promises.

The other issues in the campaign are not likely to have much effect on the voter. Corruption as an issue has become standard in Korean electioneering and does not seem to have had any impact on the voters. To be meaningful it needed a hot, specific scandal at this time to stir up emotions. The Samsong scandal was six months too soon. Furthermore Pak admitted the existence of some corruption in his administration and promised to continue his efforts to eradicate it if elected. Lastly, the Korean voter has always lived with corruption and only gets excited about it if it exceeds the bounds of his standards of propriety. This has not been the case.

Probably one of the most fascinating features of the past weeks has been that of the charges and countercharges of illegal activities. First, let me say that under Korean election laws, it is virtually impossible to run a modern election campaign without violating the law. The detailed restrictions and limitations that were enacted after the military revolution to control political election activity border on the absurd. Campaign activities which are proscribed by the election laws were engaged in by both sides, but at home we would consider most of such activities as part of practicing the “art of politics” and not illegal. Many of the violations were undoubtedly committed in sheer ignorance of the administrative red tape involved. At the same time there was no doubt considerable deliberate violation for the simple reason that present legal restrictions severely handicap modern day campaigning.

In spite of NDP charges, Pak has consistently called for honest and fair elections. Where there have been transgressions so far, we do not see these as deliberate, planned efforts by Pak or the senior DRP hierarchy. Most of them stem from overzealous subordinates and local officials. There is no evidence to show that there was any massive interference by the police or the government machinery during the campaign. Local incidents did, of course, occur and were duly reported by us. These, however, were not of sufficient magnitude or frequency to appear to have any significant impact on the electoral process.

As of election eve, we have no evidence to support charges of election-rigging, ballot box stuffing, etc. There will be some hanky-panky in some of the voting districts without question but then I doubt if there has ever been a free election anyplace in the world that did not involve some of them. The sound and fury here of illegal activities and election rigging far exceeds the realities of the situation. Such tactics are part of the Korean political scene because it has been true in the past; it prepares the ground and provides the alibi for the loser; it also places the loser in a good position to call for a recount if the margin of victory is narrow. From what we have seen and heard from impartial observers, this will be as honest and fair an election as you will find at home or in Britain or any other generally accepted politically mature democracy.

If our forecast is right, the final results should show Pak as the winner. This is based on our soundings, which show that most Koreans feel that Pak has made a reasonably successful effort to modernize the country and to improve the lot of the people as a whole. It is also based on the recognition that the DRP organization can effectively deliver the vote. If Yun should win, it will be not because the people have faith in him, in his leadership or in his policies. It will be, rather, a vote of protest against Pak. We have seen no signs of an “opposition boom” and it would surprise everyone if a protest vote carried Yun into the Blue House.

There is a question, however, that many people are asking themselves—what will happen if by some chance Yun should win; will Pak turn over the government? Our reaction is that he would and would ask the people to rally behind the new government. This would not be the end, however. We suspect that the military would accept this change but watch it very closely. If Yun could not maintain political stability in the country, continue the pace of economic growth and development, and preserve Korea's international position and prestige, we believe they would move against him. The military would give Yun at least a six month trial period but we doubt whether they would permit him to stay in power if his administration started to lose the gains achieved since the 1961 military revolution.

As I mentioned in the beginning, I see this election and its campaign as being most significant. It has been more a confrontation of policy issues and public pledges between two major political parties than a battle between personalities seeking to attract adherents by virtue of personal magnetism and charisma. The audiences at rallies were quiet, but their magnitude evidenced a high level of interest in the election. The strong adverse reaction to the early phases of the campaign, when speeches were peppered with personal abuse of the opposing candidate and his functionaries, revealed the seriousness with which the voter approached his civic responsibility. Both sides promptly turned to stuffing the voter with their views on substantive issues and they paid close attention to voter reaction.

The debates over issues affected party strategy as the campaign moved along. Yun's and NDP efforts to stir up the people in terms of their dissatisfaction with the circumstances in which they lived had its effect. In the closing days the sensitivities of the DRP to the possible inroads being made by the NDP on the farmers sent the DRP stumping teams scurrying into the countryside, particularly in the Chollas. Pak, in the meantime, continued his efforts in the cities in an effort to capture the urban areas which were his weakness in 1963.

The campaign and the elections are significant in another sense for they involved as candidates the leaders of two different political generations. In Yun, we had the type of political figure who dominated Korean politics from 1948 to 1961—the individual who gathered followers on a personal but very fluid basis; who spent most of his life fighting against the institution of government, which was an alien power; whose life was mostly shaped by traditional and ancient Korean thought, values and mores, with little exposure to the outside world and its ways.

In Pak, we have the prototype of the new political figure in Korea. He is an organization man, not an individual; a manager of a political party, not a leader of a personal cult. He spent his mature life (his 30's and 40's) in a free Korea and not under an alien regime. He has been heavily exposed to the ways and ideas of the outside world. He has seen and experienced the implications of modern science and technology and has recognized that these must be appropriately introduced into Korean life if Korea is to survive.

We have, in brief, in this election a conflict of generations. If Yun loses, as we believe he will, it will mean the demise of that generation politically. This demise will have its greatest meaning for the opposition. Will the current opposition coalition shatter into numerous pieces or will it stay substantially together with only chipping away of bits and pieces? We are inclined to think that the latter will be the case. The opposition will keep itself largely intact with small groups breaking off to start their own party. There are too many younger men in the opposition today who can see a successful political future for themselves only if they remain united. They have not yet been possessed by the type of egotism, vanity and self-assurance that make them feel that the party needs them more than they need the party.

To summarize: the campaign itself was heavily spotted with illegal practices by both sides. But what was involved were minor actions designed to lure, entice and convince the voter to support a particular candidate, which violated an impractically strict election law. There was no evidence of efforts to manipulate the actual vote or impair or frustrate the individual's right of free choice in the polling booth. The atmosphere of military government which prevailed in 1963 was gone. Freedom of political discussion was prevalent. There were no concerns about the police, [K]CIA or military would haul off to jail anyone who talked against Pak. The people took the election and its issues seriously though unemotionally. Violence and extremism were notable by their absence. The 1967 campaign was a mature and responsible one; the Korean people and its emerging party system can be proud of it.

It will be interesting to see whether tomorrow and time bear out these thoughts.

Sincerely yours,

Winthrop G. Brown 4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Secret. Attached to a memorandum from Rostow to the President, May 8, in which Rostow noted that the campaign showed “much progress between 1963 and 1967 in a working democracy.” The memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

2 May 3.

3 Analysis of the campaign and its results were transmitted in telegram 6166 from Seoul, May 16, and airgram A–546 from Seoul, May 31. (Both in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 14 KOR S)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

117. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 117. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, June 7, 1967, 0841Z.

6635. For Secretary and Bundy from Ambassador. Subject: Tactics and Considerations on Any New Request for Further Troops for Vietnam.

1. Before leaving this post,2 I would like to give you my thoughts in the event we decide to ask for a further contribution of Korean forces to South Vietnam in the near future.

2. If we plan to make such a request, the manner in which the question is raised with President Pak will be of primary importance.

3. I would recommend that we do not confront him with a formal request for more forces as the first step. Rather, we should go to the President and tell him that we wish to consult with him about a common problem. We should explain to him in detail our estimate of the situation in South Vietnam, the strategy which we propose to follow in the long and short term, how we would propose to carry it out, what forces we think would be necessary to do so, what we are planning to do ourselves. Recalling that President Johnson and he both agreed that it would be in the interests of both of them to bring the affair to some sort of satisfactory conclusion at the earliest possible date, we should then ask him whether and to what extent Korea would be able to assist.

4. This would avoid confronting him with a formal request, to which he would have to answer yes or no. He is probably expecting a direct request. Having the matter presented to him in the form of consultation about a common problem with a view to planning common action would provide him greater room for maneuver in handling his domestic problems and would be greatly appreciated. It would enable him, if he felt that he could respond in some degree, to do so in the form of a voluntary, self initiated offer of cooperation. It would make clear our understanding of and consideration for the problems which he personally will face, and I think would be the approach best calculated to put him in a responsive frame of mind.3

5. President Pak's personal attitude is, of course, the most crucial single factor in the whole situation.

6. Secondly, I have already made it clear that we will have to be prepared to pay a substantial price for a further contribution. I would recommend that we be generously forthcoming at the outset and not adopt a bargaining approach. This also will contribute to the proper frame of mind on the Korean side and will help President Pak in his problems with the Assembly and the public. Regrettably, many Koreans, including high officials, do not feel that we have yet adequately fulfilled our commitments for the last troop dispatch and consider our attitude as being far from generous or understanding. The price that we should be ready to offer should include something very dramatic, even though this might not be strictly appropriate or necessary for military or economic reasons. But something of this kind, calculated to appeal to Korean pride, to reflect a noticeable gain or advantage to the nation, and to provide a reassurance to Korean public opinion, would be a real and perhaps necessary element for an affirmative response.

7. Lastly, I must reiterate that securing a further ROK troop contribution will be difficult under the best of circumstances and that success is by no means a certainty. If we are seriously contemplating such a move we should now be preparing the ground against that time by doing the relatively small things that benefit the ROK, reflecting our generosity and understanding toward a steadfast friend and ally. Our current attitudes and positions on a number of items under discussion between ourselves and the ROKs, e.g.,ROK civilian participation in the Vietnam pacification program, troop strength levels, the Korean combat ration, and procurement in Korea, while quite justified if taken in isolation, are not helping to create a frame of mind that would make them respond instinctively in a cooperative and friendly manner.

8. In all this, we must bear in mind that, in response to opposition charges during current election campaign, President Pak has consistently maintained that his government has no intention of sending additional troops to Vietnam. If additional troops are to be sent, he would have a very real practical problem in obtaining the required authorizing legislation from the Assembly. The Assembly and the public would have to be persuaded that circumstances make it necessary for the President to do what he has publicly said he has no intention of doing and that this will be to the clear advantage of Korea. The President himself must be given solid grounds for believing that he can accede to our request without seriously damaging his own political position.

Brown

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Secret; Nodis. Attached to a memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson, June 7, in which Rostow noted that the telegram contained “a wise observation” on approaching the Koreans for more troops “with perhaps a bit more iron than he suggests.” The memorandum indicates the President saw it.

2  Brown left Seoul June 10; he was replaced by William J. Porter.

3  Bundy instructed the Vice President to follow Brown's suggested approach during his talks with Pak when attending the President's inauguration in Seoul. (Telegram 217692, TOVIP 2, to Seoul, June 28; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S) Humphrey discussed the matter with Pak during a meeting on June 30 and broached the subject again during a farewell call on July 3. (Telegram 23 from Seoul, July 1; ibid.,POL 7 US/HUMPHREY; and telegram 72 from Seoul, July 5; ibid., POL 27–3 VIET S)

118. Editorial Note 118. Editorial Note

On June 8, 1967, Koreans voted to elect 175 members of the National Assembly. Although several splinter parties participated in the campaign, the contest focused on candidates from the two major parties, the Democratic Republican Party and the New Democratic Party. When the results were tallied, the Democratic Republican Party won a majority of 130 seats, while 44 seats went to the opposition New Democratic Party. The Masses' Party, the sole successful splinter party, won a single seat.

Since the Democratic Republican Party's margin of victory, giving it better than a two-thirds majority in the Assembly, was unexpectedly large, the opposition New Democratic Party charged that the Democratic Republican victory had resulted from illegalities and fraud. The charges of corruption spurred student unrest and demonstrations, which intensified post-election dissatisfaction. Opposition party leaders sought to nullify the election results by demanding a new election, and newly elected opposition members refused to take their seats at the start of the Assembly session on July 1. Those circumstances produced a serious political crisis.

Both parties acknowledged election irregularities, but the Democratic Republican Party and President Pak denied the opposition's charges that the election had been manipulated from Seoul. The Embassy also reported that irregularities, in fact, stemmed from lack of central control, allowing local candidates and local officials willingly to engage in or encourage malpractices and to ignore election rules. Post-election investigations identified persons who had engaged in such practices, leading the Democratic Republican Party to expel nine of its newly elected Assembly members from the party immediately after the election and an additional eight members in September and October.

Fearful that the Democratic Republican Party would use its majority to change the Constitution, thereby enabling President Pak to serve a third Presidential term, and concerned about future election prospects, opposition party leader Yu Chin-o demanded that 1) President Pak publicly apologize for rigging the election, 2) the election results be nullified and a new election held, 3) those responsible for the irregularities be punished, and 4) guarantees be instituted to prevent future election irregularities. Largely because of disarray within the New Democratic Party and because of conciliatory moves made by the Democratic Republican Party, both sides negotiated to end the impasse, which officially ended on November 29 when all but two elected Assembly members took their seats. (Airgram A–33 from Seoul, July 20; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69,POL 14 KOR S; and INR Intelligence Note No. 960, December 1; ibid., POL 15–2 KOR S)

119. Memorandum of Conversation 119. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, June 22, 1967.

SUBJECT

Mr. Bundy's Meeting with Mr. Colby, June 22, 19672

PARTICIPANTS

Messrs. Bundy, Berger, Habib, and Burke for EA; Messrs. Colby, Smith and Hickox for CIA; Mr. Stuart for INR/DDC and Mr. Bean of EA for the Singapore item

[Here follows a discussion of Singapore.]

Korea

Mr. Colby reported that in response to Mr. Berger's request, his people had reviewed North Korean infiltrations of South Korea and had come to the conclusion that their purpose was the establishment of cells which might eventually be used not only for the collection of intelligence but for the support of guerilla warfare. He cited interrogations of the few agents who have been captured and said that his analysts had concluded that large numbers of North Vietnamese were in training for eventual infiltration. There was considerable speculation among members of the staff both at Headquarters and in the field that the North Koreans were taking a page from the North Vietnamese book and planned to establish a base for eventual warfare in South Korea.

Mr. Berger questioned Mr. Colby closely as to whether there were indications that the objective of the North Korean infiltrations might be assassination of South Korean leaders. Mr. Colby's reply indicated that he believed any attempts at assassination would depend largely on opportunity and that he felt that this was not a major objective.

[Here follows a discussion of Vietnam.]

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, East Asia and Pacific General File, East Asia, FE Weekly Meetings, 1967. Secret. Drafted on June 29. Sent to Hughes, Denney, and Evans.

2 Agenda at Tab A. [Footnote in the source text; attached but not printed.]

120. Report Prepared by the Office of National Estimates of the Central Intelligence Agency 120. Report Prepared by the Office of National Estimates of the Central Intelligence Agency1

Washington, June 23, 1967.

SECURITY CONDITIONS IN SOUTH KOREA

1. The risks involved in Vice President Humphrey's visit to the Seoul area and his attendance at the 1 July inauguration of ROK President Pak are twofold. Pak's domestic political opponents may use the occasion to demonstrate against his regime, creating a situation in which the safety of the Vice President might be jeopardized. More serious, it is possible that North Korean Communist agents will carry out violent attacks on Pak, members of his government, or on Vice President Humphrey himself.

2. Domestic Political Opponents. South Korea is presently experiencing considerable political tension. Members of the leading opposition party and anti-regime student elements have been angrily protesting alleged rigging of the 8 June legislative elections by the Pak government and its party machinery. The government has conceded that illegal tactics—vote buying, open balloting, ballot-box stuffing, police pressures, and the like—were used in certain districts and has moved to right a few of these wrongs. But it has refused to consider opposition demands for new elections nationwide. A compromise of sorts, perhaps involving the resignation of a few high administration officials, seems likely. But it is also probable that before the dust is permitted to settle, some opposition elements will mount additional public protests and carry out plans for obstructing legislative business, including a boycott of the inaugural ceremonies.

3. Anti-regime protests by students, in Seoul and elsewhere, reached a peak of intensity last week, but have been terminated as a result of firm police action and the suspension of college classes by the government. If classes resume, however, additional student street demonstrations may take place.

4. In sum, there is a possibility that Vice President Humphrey's visit will be marred by public protests of some sort against the Pak regime. It seems unlikely, however, that any demonstrations or other antics by the political opposition and its student allies would be carried out so as deliberately to embarrass or endanger the Vice President. There has been no hint that opposition leaders hold the US in any way responsible for the alleged election frauds. Moreover, in recent years, South Koreans have evidenced an unwillingness to wash dirty linen in front of foreign dignitaries; on the contrary, domestic factions have tended to submerge differences on occasions of international significance in the interest of preserving national prestige.

5. In any case, we believe that South Korean security forces available in the Seoul area would be capable of controlling any demonstration by anti-regime elements. The National Police, who will have the main responsibility for the safety of the foreign guests, are tough and experienced in crowd control. So are the ROK Army contingents permanently assigned to internal security duties in the Seoul area. Intelligence organizations—the ROK CIA and the ROK Army CIC—are efficient and cooperative with their US counterparts. They will probably round up known troublemakers and issue stern warnings in appropriate political and student circles.

6. North Korean Communist Agents. In October 1966, on the occasion of President Johnson's trip to South Korea, we were able to dismiss the danger of violence by North Korean Communist agents with the notation that “their missions have not involved deliberate violence but rather intelligence collection and recruitment.” (SNIE 40/50–66, para. 11)2 Since that time, the situation has changed markedly. For various reasons, some related to ROK participation in the Vietnam War, Pyong-yang has stepped up its infiltration of agents southward, and more important, it has initiated a campaign of sporadic violence against UN forces in the DMZ area. North Korean agents are also attempting sabotage missions for the first time since the Korean Armistice.3 And the North Koreans have begun to infiltrate small teams of highly-trained agents to scout for likely guerrilla base areas in remote rural regions.4

7. It is apparent, therefore, that North Korea is no longer disposed to refrain from acts of violence in the South; indeed, Pyongyang has evidently decided to accept the risks involved in shedding a limited amount of South Korean and US blood. Would Pyongyang take the added risk involved in any attempt to assassinate leaders of South Korea and the US? We are aware of several North Korean direct threats against the life of President Pak and the dispatch of occasional agent teams charged with this mission. The possibility of another Communist effort of this sort during the inaugural period cannot be dismissed. The political gains for the North could be considerable; Pak provides the only real cement for whatever degree of political stability exists in South Korea. An attempt on Pak, of course, would endanger those notables, including the Vice President, in his vicinity.

8. It seems unlikely, however, that the Communists would focus an assassination effort on Mr. Humphrey. The political justification from the North Korean viewpoint would be much less compelling than that for an attack on Pak.

9. We cannot, of course, exclude the possibility of an assassination attempt by some Communist or other radical acting on his own or an attempt by a psychopath.

For the Board of National Estimates:
Sherman Kent
Chairman

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Secret. Transmitted to the White House under cover of a June 24 memorandum from the CIA Operations Center to Rostow.

2  SNIE 40/50–66, October 13. (Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 110, SNIE 40/50–66)

3 One such effort, on 22 May just south of the DMZ, resulted in the destruction of two US infantry barracks with the loss of two men killed and nineteen wounded. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 Three such groups have been discovered by ROK security forces. Attempts to run them down have resulted in the deaths of thirteen ROKs and eight North Koreans; at least 29 North Koreans remain at large. [Footnote in the source text.]

121. Memorandum of Conversation 121. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 29, 1967.

[Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, East Asia and Pacific General File, East Asia, FE Weekly Meetings, 1967. Secret. 3 pages of source text not declassified.]

122. Editorial Note 122. Editorial Note

Vice President Humphrey visited Seoul June 30–July 3, 1967, to attend the inauguration of President Pak July 1. The Vice President and President Pak met privately on June 30 for an hour and 15 minutes during which time the Vice President briefed President Pak on President Johnson's meetings with Soviet Prime Minister Kosygin at Glassboro, New Jersey, on June 23 and 25 and discussed with him the situation in Vietnam. President Pak expressed his support for U.S. policy in Vietnam, stating that in his view the conflict could be resolved by: “1) continuing military pressure on the enemy; 2) careful support of the process of building constitutional government and of the pacification program; 3) opening of all avenues of discussion and dialog toward a possible peace settlement in Vietnam.” (Telegram 7076 from Seoul, June 30; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US/HUMPHREY)

In addition to attending the inauguration ceremonies on July 1, Vice President Humphrey met with Prime Minister Sato for a wide-ranging discussion of the Glassboro summit, the Middle East, and economic issues. (Telegram 24 from Seoul, July 2; ibid.) He also met with members of the South Vietnamese delegation. The primary focus of their discussion was the political situation and upcoming elections in South Vietnam. (Telegram 20 from Seoul, July 1; ibid.)

The only untoward incident occurring during the inaugural program involved members of the New Democratic Party broadcasting over loudspeakers in close proximity to inauguration ceremonies. The Embassy reported that President Pak “was personally insulted and nation humiliated in front of foreign dignitaries by conduct of NDP.” (Telegram 280 from Seoul, July 17; ibid., POL 15 KOR S) An ill-conceived remark about the incident was erroneously attributed to Vice President Humphrey and widely reported by the media in Korea and in the United States, causing him personal embarrassment and distress. (Telegrams 61 and 69 from Seoul, both July 5, telegram 98 from Seoul, July 6, and letter from Humphrey to Rusk, July 15, among others; all ibid.,POL 7 US/HUMPHREY)

On July 2 Vice President Humphrey met with President Pak and Prime Minister Chung, as well as Vice President Yen of the Republic of China and Prime Minister Sato of Japan. The 1 1/2 hour meeting, labeled by the media as the “Little Summit,” focused on concerns about Communist China and its emergence as a nuclear power. (Telegram 29 from Seoul, July 2; ibid.) The following day, July 3, the Vice President met with Vice President Yen for a discussion of regional issues, including Vietnam. (Telegram 48 from Seoul, July 4; ibid.) Humphrey also paid a farewell visit to President Pak. They reviewed comments made at the Little Summit and matters pertaining to Vietnam, particularly the upcoming elections, the pacification program, and security matters. (Telegram 47 from Seoul, July 4; ibid.)

Vice President Humphrey submitted on July 6 a detailed report to President Johnson and Secretary Rusk discussing his trip to Korea. The report summarized his discussions in Seoul, recorded his impressions of the Asian leaders with whom he met, outlined the relevant issues important to each Asian leader, and contained policy recommendations. On Korea, the Vice President recommended giving high priority to Korean requests for security and communications equipment to assist in the fight against North Korean infiltration, granting generous technical and economic assistance in case Korea decided to furnish additional troops for Vietnam, continuing support for the Korean Institute of Science and Technology as well as for educational exchange programs between the United States and South Korea, and using “United States leverage and assistance in the political field” to foster the continued development of constitutional democracy in the Republic of Korea. (Memorandum from Humphrey to the President, July 6; Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Vice President, Vol. II) The Vice President received a detailed commentary on the points raised in his report from Secretary Rusk in which Rusk noted that the Vice President's recommended actions relative to Korea were already being implemented or under consideration. (Memorandum from Rusk to Humphrey, July 28; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US/HUMPHREY)

123. Memorandum From Alfred Jenkins of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) 123. Memorandum From Alfred Jenkins of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, July 26, 1967.

SUBJECT

Bonesteel's “Eyes Only” of July 21

State, Defense and CIA have now all agreed that a SNIE is desirable as Bonesteel recommends in paragraph 15 of the attached telegram. I am told that the terms of reference for the SNIE should be arrived at before the week is over, that it will take about two weeks to write it, and perhaps another two weeks to coordinate and clear the results. We can expect the end product near the first of September.2

Ambassador Porter has requested, however, that the Country Team message, also referred to in para. 15, be held up until his arrival August 9.

Sam Berger was not inclined to believe the situation was quite so serious as Bonesteel implies. Ben Fleck observed that while the Country Team in Seoul was in substantial agreement as to the seriousness of the situation, there was not full agreement as to what should be done about it. Perhaps the SNIE will be beneficial to their thinking as well as ours.

This seems to fit the picture of heightened tension all around Communist China's periphery. I doubt that these days North Korea is concerting its plans in any way with Peking. They may, however, be taking advantage of heightened tensions by acting concomitantly. In doing so, they can indicate support for their Vietnamese ideological brothers, at least be in line with China in its anti-American policy, and not be irritating their Soviet friends in the process. They would seem to be out to cause maximum trouble short of precipitating any real confrontation with us.

AJ

Attachment3

Korea, July 21, 1967, 1207Z.

Telegram From the Commander in Chief, United Nations Command, Korea and the Commander of United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

KRA 1579. Following message passed to you for your info per DIA. Subject: Situation in Korea as of mid-July 1967.

1. Events here since my last summary in my KRA 1374 dated 25 June 19674 have continued at a somewhat intensified pace.

2. Internal political affairs are well covered by current Embassy cables. There appears to be little hope for DRP compromise with opposition and internal scars of June 8 elections are by no means healed.

3. In regard to North Korean actions, it becomes clearer as time moves on that a significant effort is underway to try to apply subversive war against the ROK.

4. An interesting facet of this derives from review and analysis of NK statements at Panmunjom and the parallel NK propaganda line pushed out increasingly since last autumn for Pyongyang, Moscow and NK embassies world wide. The theme has two parts. First is that the imperialistic Yankees and their ROK puppets are trying to reopen the Korean War to take pressure off Vietnam and are flagrantly violating the armistice to provoke such an event—and the North Koreans are prepared for such a war so that if it occurs they will annihilate us. (Of note in this regard is that interrogations of recently captured agents reiterate NK view I reported in my KRA 1795 of 10 Nov 665 that NK's evaluate US as so overextended in support Vietnam that we would be unable adequately to reinforce Korea in case of war.) The second part of propaganda theme is constant repetition of the big lie to the effect that none of the aggressive actions along DMZ or in interior of ROK are result of NK activity. On contrary they reiterate monotonously that this is all due to South Koreans who are fighting to throw off Yankee yoke; i.e., it is an indigenous, Korea-style “Vietcong” activity. Absurdity of this in light repeated proof that all actions are by North Korean agent/guerrillas does not faze them.

5. I consider this propaganda line the tip-off to the growing seriousness of North Korean intentions and capabilities. NKs seem seriously embarked on a large scale effort to try to develop a subversive war in ROK and I think it now timely for us to conscientiously review the bidding on policies re North Korea, on how and what US and ROKs should be prepared to do if NKs escalate their subversive activities, and on priorities re MAP and AID assistance to ROK. North Koreans are arrogantly disavowing their flagrant and large scale violations of the armistice in what seems to be an effort to build acceptance by world public opinion for their intensification of hostile subversive acts with little or no risk to them for their de facto abrogation of the armistice. They are, in other words, carefully trying to make the US and rest of world accustomed as a matter of course to steadily increasing hostile action against ROK at no great risk to North Korea, in same way that in Vietnam the Geneva Accords and Vietnam DMZ were eroded and bypassed by Communists in effort to delay timely and effective free world reaction and confuse the real issues. All this jibes with speeches and directives by Kim Il-sung from his March 65 requirement for more effective espionage activities against ROK, in context of how Mao's Chinese Communists had “liberated” China by guerrilla action and how guerrillas in Vietnam were “successfully” carrying out their mission, through to his policy address of 5 October 1966, when he stressed the need for expanding preparations for war and adopting more aggressive tactics in anti-ROK operations to achieve earlier unification of the “fatherland.”6

6. Intelligence indicates NKs have now trained in special unit schools and have available for dispatch some 1200 or more specially selected agent-guerrilla personnel. Some instructors have been in Vietnam. All are capable of conducting subversion, espionage, agitation, and supporting or carrying out militant guerrilla action. More are currently in training. In addition they have been carefully training for two years 500 subversives in each of the nine NK provinces for guerrilla activity in a target ROK province assigned to each of the NK provinces. This adds up to 5,000 or more specially trained thugs. We must also take into account their 4,070-man reconnaissance brigade, a special-forces-type unit capable of being employed in guerrilla operations. Thus total available for future NK subversive utilization adds up to about 10,000.

7. Current para-guerrilla action in interior of ROK is now clearly confirmed to be test of ability to operate in current ROK environment and reconnaissance to support later large-scale real guerrilla action. We call current activity “para-guerrilla” because so far sabotage and widespread terrorism has not been practiced. One interrogated captive has said [garble—current] plan is to start active phase of sabotage, blowing up railroads, bridges and buildings, terrorism, etc., next year but perhaps later this year if conditions permit. Another has said they may put in up to 400 agents this year. NKs appear at this time to be able to land para-guerrilla teams from their fast boats almost at will. [5–1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

8. Detected para-guerrilla activity has now developed in three areas: Taebaek-san, West Chiri-san, and west of Ulsan. Every day there are sightings, contacts and firefights. Box score since 1 January from actions in interior of ROK, excluding DMZ and contiguous areas, is: firefights 63; North Koreans 81 KIA, 33 captured; ROKs (ROKA, KNP and civilians) 40 KIA, (including four or five farmers murdered), 88 WIA. These figures do not include another sizeable number of agents and collaborators picked up by normal police action. We have identified in action about a dozen teams of from seven to sixteen NKs each but are hard put to figure how many overall actually have been introduced so far, but might be as many as twenty. Rainy season now beginning will facilitate SEA infiltration if NKs wish to continue buildup. ROKs with our support are giving them a really rough time and civil population is being extraordinarily helpful. With difficulties of getting food and of resupply, plus loyalty to ROK of the people, the para-guerrilla effort so far this year has faced real difficulties.

9. Embassy and UNC for past year or so have taken position that internal security of ROK against agent and subversive activity should be function of ROK civilian security and police agencies, with ROK military supporting internal operations only when necessary while concentrating on trying to stop infiltration through DMZ or by interceptions at sea. We have emphasized internal security should be prime responsibility of ROKG not UNC though we of course willing to help when needed. President Park now considers trend of NK subversive activity potentially dangerous to sense of security of ROK as well as to its economic investment programs and progress. He has in past week called together senior cabinet members a number of times and put heat on ROK CIA and Korean National Police to rapidly build up better internal security capability and to reduce required support by military. KNP has long way to go, however, so I have authorized temporary use of one-and-a-third active divisions from FROKA reserve for counterguerrilla action in Taebaek-san and Chiri-san areas in effort to be so effective against NK testing this year as to discourage next year's intensification.

10. Activities of ROK 32nd division in Taebaek-san and 16th regiment of 8th division near Chiri-san in conjunction with KNP has been pretty good so far but several suspect areas not covered. We are converting our annual US/ROK special forces exercise “Doksoori” from a guerrilla/counterguerrilla maneuver to a real counterguerrilla action to begin right after the rainy season and, with support from ROK troops and police, to sweep the extremely rugged parts of Chiri-san and other suspect areas. I consider this effort extremely important to assure no undetected NK test enclaves survive the summer. Embassy [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and ROKs enthusiastically support the concept.

11. Actions along DMZ are also continuing with increasing viciousness with more planned, small-scale attacks being made. Firefights are occurring almost every night. A few days ago three more U.S. soldiers were killed. This year's score along DMZ to date: firefights 69; NKs 64 KIA, 2 captured; ROK/US 35 KIA, (including 6 U.S. KIA), 87 WIA. Irritating factor is that in last few weeks NK along DMZ are improving their kill ratio.

12. Following show overall figures: 1965 1966 1967 to date

DMZ incidents 42 37 286

Firefights (DMZ plus interior) 29 30 132

NK, KIA 34 43 146

NK, captured after firefights not comparable 35 (excludes police pick-ups)

ROK/US, KIA 40 39 75

ROK/US, WIA 49 34 175

13. ROK MND Kim under personal direction of President Park is effectively coordinating ROK military support to civil internal security agencies. He repeatedly has asked our assistance to expedite deliveries of counterinfiltration materiel already programmed. He believes with me that we must be as nearly totally effective as possible in meeting this year's testing by NKs to discourage next year's effort, but also thinks as I do that overall NK intentions and investment in resources are such that they will take greatly increased and classically destructive guerrilla actions next year regardless of hard time this year. He is afraid of possibility they may switch from testing to destructive action later this summer. I have told him we all are trying to speed up delivery of useful materiel such as fast boats, commo equipment, coast surveillance radar, searchlights, helicopters and miscellaneous items. He also hopes the new DD and APDs will be available for use against NKs 1968 activity.

14. We are conscientiously trying to carry out instructions to keep Korean situation and DMZ quiet and out of press sensationalism. But I believe increased NK activity has reached point where this cannot be effected much longer. In fact, because of NK propaganda theme mentioned above and their blatant violations of armistice, we should now bring it out in the open by a planned psy war and counter-propaganda campaign showing the scope and intentions of NK action and falseness of their propaganda.

15. Because of the Commie propaganda theme and because of clarifying intent of NKs to energize subversive warfare, I reiterate recommendation that, in effect, an SNIE on North Korean subversive and conventional war capabilities and intentions be produced expeditiously, and additionally that IRG actively review current policies regarding US/ROK collaborative effort and countermeasures we should be prepared to take. Embassy and my staff are working up a Country Team message with some recommendations in this regard.

16. Have just heard of Clark Clifford's and Gen. Taylor's mission to Asian/Pacific countries contributing forces to Vietnam.7 North Korean intensification of activity here may add to difficulties for ROKG to contribute significant additional combat forces to Vietnam.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Secret.

2  Document 130.

3 Secret; Eyes Only. Repeated to Generals Wheeler and Johnson in Washington; General Beach, CINCUSARPAC, Hawaii; and General McKee in Japan; and passed to Bundy and Jorden at the White House; General Carter, Director, NSA; and Helms, Colby, and Jack Smith of the DDI at CIA.

4 Not found.

5  Document 99.

6 A discussion of the points made by Kim Il-sung in his October 1966 address is in Intelligence Note No. 94, February 2, 1968. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69,POL 32–4 KOR)

7 The White House announced on July 20 that Clifford and Taylor would travel to Saigon to assess the war effort and visit the countries with troops in Vietnam for consultation and to discuss additional manpower needs. They spent August 2 and 3 in Seoul.

124. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 124. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, August 3, 1967, 1420Z.

552. From Charge. Subject: Clifford/Taylor Visit.

1. First meeting with Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, Foreign Minister, Minister of National Defense and Minister of Health and Social Welfare was devoted to listening to their views on conduct of war in Vietnam. In terms basic purpose Clifford/Taylor Mission, this meeting produced no significant developments beyond PriMin's hawkish views on countering North Vietnamese forces in DMZ and bombing of Haiphong. Meeting being reported by separate memcon.2

2. After meeting briefly with President at which time Clifford/Taylor outlined their proposed manner of presentation to the President and other ROK officials, group joined PriMin and Cabinet members mentioned above. Steadman and Charge present on US side with Clifford and Taylor. Yi Hu-rak, President's principle secretary, also joined meeting.

3. Clifford opened discussion explaining why President Johnson had sent Clifford/Taylor Mission, and what purpose of mission was in meeting with other Vietnam allies and with President and ROK ministers. He then asked Taylor give his report on Vietnam war.

[Here follows discussion of the conduct of the Vietnam war.]

[5.] Clifford continued that President Johnson understands that if the war continues the US must bear the major burden and US is prepared to carry the main share of men and costs. Clifford went on to describe the budgetary problems and tax increase requirements confronting President Johnson. Clifford stressed that if President Johnson is to be able to get Congress to approve and the American people to go along with this necessary tax increase, he must be prepared to answer the question of what our allies are doing in the way of additional effort. If he has to answer negatively, he will not get what he feels is needed for the US to be able to bear the main brunt of the battle and meet most of the cost of the struggle. Clifford continued that we are building up our forces in Vietnam to 480,000 and that President Johnson recognizes that we are going to have to increase these forces by very substantial amounts. The American people will want to know what our allies are sending since many of the people feel that the nations of Southeast Asia and the far Pacific area are closer to the danger than we are.3

6. Clifford concluded saying that the mission had presented this statement of facts to each nation visited and the team recognized that each nation must make its own decision. President Johnson wants each to know what the situation is as he sees it so that these facts can be taken into account as each nation decides what its decision should be. President Johnson wishes it made clear that he is not requesting troops on behalf of US. The US will handle its problems and do its part. President Johnson wished, however, that as each nation's leader looked at the problems in his own enlightened self interest, he should know what the US views are. President Johnson recognizes that President Pak has problems but suggests, however, that the problems of the war in Vietnam are transcendent. He hopes President Pak will place them first during his considerations. President Johnson appreciates this is a matter on which President Pak cannot make an immediate decision. The allies cannot rest on contributions to date but must go on to make additional contributions so that the allied military leaders can have the men and tools to get the job done. Taylor added that now is the time to do everything we can to show Hanoi the firmness of the allies and their intention not to permit a war of attrition to develop. We need to show Ho Chi Minh that the allies are prepared to put in the necessary resources to bring the war to an early termination. The group then broke up for lunch.

7. After lunch Clifford/Taylor met with Pak. Foreign Minister, Yi Hu-rak and Charge also present. Pak asked Clifford/Taylor to express thanks to President Johnson for sending them to give report on the Vietnam war efforts. He has high regard and respect for President Johnson's resolution to finish the Vietnam war rapidly in spite of many problems facing him. Pak stated he feels morally obligated to extend help so far as he can. He wished to say frankly that in view of the domestic situation it difficult to come up with decision at this time. One reason is that the majority of Korean people since the earlier dispatch of ROK forces to Vietnam are concerned over their own security. The last time the ROK sent troops the majority of the people supported the government but now they express worries and apprehensions about ROK security if more troops dispatched. The recent increase in North Korean agent and infiltration activity has added to these apprehensions and concerns of the people over their own security. Pak acknowledged that we have the same objective of settling the war as rapidly as we can and he will give due consideration to how ROKG can contribute. He fully appreciates US cannot take on whole burden and he will look into seeing how he can share in it.

8. Taylor then suggested that during these considerations ROKG take into account the order of priorities set out by General Westmoreland—(1) the basic need is for combat infantrymen and there is a requirement for more infantry divisions, including a ROK division; (2) there is a need for additional support units for ROK troops; and (3) there is a need to make arrangements which will provide ROK civilian technicians and laborers to support the Vietnam effort.

9. Pak indicated that General Chae had asked for supporting units and for the dispatch of ROK air force units for air/ground operations. Both requests were now being studied by ROKG.4 Pak then pointed out that the earlier dispatches of troops required National Assembly approval. However, he thought that in the case of support units he might be able to get away without seeking Assembly approval. In case of additional combat units it will be necessary to get National Assembly approval and he is faced with a difficult position on this point since the opposition is boycotting the Assembly.5

10. Clifford in concluding meeting pointed out that President Johnson felt close friendship and excellent working relationship existed between himself and President Pak. Clifford then suggested that Pak after he had finished his deliberations and reached his conclusions might wish to write directly to President Johnson, sharing these thoughts with him. President Pak replied that he would be happy to do so.6

11. Comment: I feel that visit here has been useful and profitable. Pak understands our problems and wants to help but he has his problems. He may be prepared to help out in near future on support units and civilian technicians. On major combat troops, however, his domestic political problems are a major stumbling block and he did not predict when that will be solved. It is certain he will do nothing on this front until things here are back to normal on political front.

12. Pak's references to concerns of the people over ROK security relates to the price for any combat troops sent to Vietnam. It means they will have to be replaced here and modernized at US expense. We can expect the price to include something to help ROKG counter North Korean agent and infiltration activities. Though it did not come out in our discussion there are likely to be other requests in economic and possibly political area to make any future combat troop dispatch more palatable and acceptable to Korean people.

13. With reference to summit meeting they felt any idea of meeting is good but should be looked at after VN elections to decide on timing and place.

Newman

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to Saigon and CINCPAC.

2 Not found.

3 President Johnson reinforced many of these points in a follow-up letter to President Pak on August 17. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Special Head of State Correspondence, Korea, April 1, 1967 to December 31, 1967)

4  ROKFV Commander Lieutenant General Chae Myung-shin later spoke to Korean journalists in Saigon, stating that for Korea to send additional combat troops and an air force unit to Vietnam would enhance ROK defenses because of the combat experience acquired by the troops in Vietnam. (Telegram 693 from Seoul, August 11; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S)

5 On July 27 George S. Newman, Charge d'Affaires ad interim, met with the Prime Minister in advance of the Clifford-Taylor visit. Regarding additional Korean troops, the Prime Minister mentioned the political deadlock and stated that the situation must first “return to normal and there needs to be a cooling off period” before a decision could be made. He pointed out that “a matter of such importance could not be submitted to a one-party Assembly,” for the political opposition had already indicated it would resist sending additional combat troops to Vietnam. (Memorandum of conversation, July 27, attached to a letter from Newman to Bundy, July 28; ibid.,POL 7 US)

6 In his July 27 conversation with Newman, the Prime Minister suggested that the question of additional troops would best be handled between President Johnson and President Pak. In his subsequent letter Newman urged Bundy “to give serious thought to the use of this tactic if and when we have to ask for additional Korean troop contribution. I become more convinced that at the right time this can be the key to success.” (Ibid.)

125. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 125. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, August 23, 1967, 0945Z.

912. For Bundy and Berger from Porter. Subj: ROK Internal Security. Ref: Seoul 818.2

1. Since my arrival I have had an intensive and careful look at the internal security problem here. I have gone into the matter at considerable length with Gen Bonesteel and USOM as well as Emb [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] officers. The CT assessment contained reftel has my full endorsement. I particularly want to underscore the urgency of meeting the problem now and with vigor and ingenuity. The CT elements have a well developed and thoroughly integrated concept of how to deal with the threat and have been working closely with all agencies, civil and military, of the ROKG. The ROKG is moving on the problem and in the right direction. We need to move with them if our help is to be meaningful and timely.

2. The government, particularly Pres Pak, see the task of dealing with the agent/infiltrator problem as one for which the civilian agencies must be properly equipped and trained and not one which should be permitted significantly to divert the attention and energies of the armed forces from their primary mission along the DMZ and the offshore waters. We have strongly encouraged this attitude at all levels in the government. If this attitude and momentum is to be sustained and the goals achieved, the ROKs will need selective help from us in a timely manner. The help we provide now, though unanticipated when our programs were first developed, can prevent more serious problems later that will be far more costly to eliminate.

3. In the next few days, USOM will be submitting urgent program changes relating to the Korean National Police (KNP).3 These are critical for the effective development of the police is the key to maintaining the civilian agency orientation in coping with the agent/infiltrator problem that Pres Pak wants. (I understand he talked at great length on this point during the lunch he had with Clark Clifford and Gen Taylor.) I am not urging a normal police improvement program but one with a specific purpose and goal—stopping a serious NK agent/infiltrator threat to the ROK that is on the doorstep and before it moves into the house in serious proportions. It is from this perspective that I urge you and Poats and Bullitt to consider the USOM recommendations. They have my full support.

4. As part of the effort to equip the KNP field units to deal with agent/infiltrators, ROKG has made KFX available to CAS for the purchase of weapons on an urgent basis. We must have authorization [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] for certain weapon and ammo purchases and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] action to give the ROK request a high supply priority. [2 lines of source text not declassified] I consider fulfilling the ROKG request a matter of the highest priority and that I would be sending you word of my deep concern over the importance of speedily providing the weapons and ammo the ROKG wants and needs for the police.4 To have ill-equipped police teams operating in the mountain areas of this country against the well-trained, well-equipped NK agent infiltrators will only result in serious friendly casualties and invite doubts on the part of the populace as to whether their government can deal successfully with the threat from the North.

5. I am looking into the training aspect of the KNP effort and will shortly have a recommendation which may need your support.5

6. On the military side, General Bonesteel has submitted a restatement of his urgent needs for US and ROK forces (COMUS/K msg UK 59745) and his staff and ours are working up comprehensive counter-infiltration concepts with the requirements involved. His restatement has received the endorsement of CINCPAC (CINCPAC 1922092 Aug). I fully support COMUS/K's request and consider its fulfillment a vital part of the total effort if it is to succeed.6

7. I cannot stress too strongly the importance of helping Pres Pak to take those measures that are needed to assure his people that the North does not pose a threat to ROK security that the ROKG cannot deal with and, more importantly, to demonstrate concretely that the government has the means to prevent an NK subversive threat of any significance from developing in the ROK. If he cannot create this sense of confidence and assurance, we are likely to find that other objectives of his in which we have a vital interest are severely prejudiced and possibly imperiled. We must do what is necessary now to help Pak if we are to succeed in achieving our other objectives.7

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Telegram 818 from Seoul, August 18, contains a Country Team message outlining the threat North Korea posed to the ROK and the latter's attempts to counter it. The message concluded that North Korea's goal was “to destroy public confidence in ROK, force withdrawal U.S. forces and unify Korea on Communist terms.” It noted that North Korean subversive activities had increased to unanticipated levels and could only be expected to escalate, with large-scale operations expected in the spring of 1968. (Ibid.)

3 Not found.

4 At a meeting attended by Bundy, Berger, [text not declassified] on August 31, it was reported that the requested weapons had been obtained and would be delivered to the Korean police as soon as the Koreans paid for them. (Memorandum from Trueheart to Hughes, Denney, and Evans, September 1; Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, East Asia and Pacific General File, East Asia, FE Weekly Meetings, 1967)

5 Further information on this topic not found.

6  COMUS/K and CINCPAC messages not found.

7 In telegram 27837 to Seoul, August 26, Bundy expressed his full agreement with Porter's and the Country Team's recommendations and stated that the matters were being given priority attention. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S) Also in late August the Embassy, Department of State, and UN Mission decided to prepare a White Paper documenting North Korean violations of the DMZ for presentation to the General Assembly. Documentation on the UN presentation is ibid., POL 23–7 KOR S, POL 23–7 KOR S/UN, and POL 27–14 KOR/UN. The report submitted to the United Nations on November 2 is in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1967, pp. 788–790.

126. Editorial Note 126. Editorial Note

On September 4, 1967, President Pak met with Ambassador Porter and informed him that Korea would attempt to fulfill President Johnson's request for additional troops for Vietnam. The size of the contingent to be furnished awaited the results of a report that President Pak had requested from his Minister of National Defense. (Telegram 1120 from Seoul, September 5; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S) The Embassy, however, believed that President Pak intended “to supply up to another division.” (Telegram 1121 from Seoul, September 5; ibid.)

In his talk with Ambassador Porter as well as in a subsequent letter to President Johnson, President Pak outlined domestic problems affecting his ability to dispatch additional troops abroad. Those problems involved public concerns about Korea's own security and defense capabilities, particularly in light of the escalation in incidents along the Demilitarized Zone and in North Korean infiltration activities. President Pak also indicated that any final decision depended on the extent to which equipment and anti-infiltration support promised in conjunction with the dispatch of Korean troops to Vietnam in 1966 had been furnished. (Telegram 1120 from Seoul, September 5, and letter from President Pak to President Johnson, September 8; both ibid.) The Embassy prepared periodic reports on the progress made in implementing commitments made to Korea in 1966. Airgrams and telegrams addressing that topic are ibid., DEF 19 US–KOR S and DEF 19–3 US KOR S.

127. Memorandum of Conversation 127. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, September 15, 1967.

SUBJECT

Mr. Bundy's Meeting with Mr. Colby, September 15, 19672

PARTICIPANTS

Messrs. Bundy and Burke for EA; Messrs. Colby, Smith [name not declassified] for CIA; Mr. Stuart for INR/DDC and Mr. Fleck of EA for the Korean item

Korea

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that the infiltration of North Korean agents across the DMZ, or by sea on both the East and West coasts, is the major current problem for the Republic of Korea.3 [2 lines of source text not declassified] Present plans calls for the establishment of 123 nine-man teams which would be trained in the establishment of information networks and the setting up of ambush points. The teams would be equipped with some automatic weapons and radios. There would be some cross training so that if one or two members of the team were killed the team could still carry out all its functions. It was hoped that by March 1968 the number of teams could be doubled. The eventual ceiling for these units would be in the neighborhood of 3,000 men. The program is now handicapped by the failure of the Korean government to budget for the increased expenses of equipping the teams and by the inability of American radio companies to supply satisfactory radio equipment fast enough. What had once been a major problem, the question of military as against police control of the units, had been resolved favorably in [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] view; that is, in favor of the police.

[1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] said that agents that had been captured had made it clear that current infiltrations were to test out South Korean defenses and that the agents were to find the “soft spots” and then return to North Korea in September and prepare for an intensified effort next Spring.4

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] had surveyed briefly several of the new economic development projects in South Korea and had come to the conclusion that most of these projects were highly vulnerable to North Korean sabotage. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] had recommended stationing of security units from the Korean armed forces at all of these developments.5

Mr. Fleck questioned [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] with respect to the alleged North Korean espionage net among South Korean students in Europe and the United States. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] replied that there appeared to be a valid case against some 68 teachers and students who had been arrested. The North Koreans appear to have concentrated on medical doctors who were trained abroad. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] added that the North Korean object did not appear to be purely espionage but that long range political action working toward the eventual reunion of North and South Korea was also involved.

[1 paragraph (4 lines of source text) not declassified]

[Here follows a discussion of operations on Taiwan.]

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, East Asia and Pacific General File, East Asia, FE Weekly Meetings, 1967. Secret. Drafted on September 19. Sent to Hughes, Denney, and Evans.

2 Agenda at Tab A. [Footnote in the source text; attached but not printed.]

3 Reports indicated that in 1967 there were “more than 300 DMZ incidents compared with 42 in 1966” and “nearly 300 US/ROK casualties compared with less than 70 in 1966.” (Research Memorandum REA–40, September 17; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69,POL 23–7 KOR S) In addition, “there were more DMZ firefights and by far more United Nations Command casualties in August [1967] than in any other month since the armistice.” (Memorandum from the Defense Intelligence Agency to McNamara, September 11; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 72 A 2468, X-Korea 370–64)

4  INR intelligence analysts attributed the increased activities to North Korea's desire to force unification under terms favorable to Communist rule, a diminishing possibility in view of South Korea's enhanced political and economic position and improved military capabilities. They also pointed to the influence of the Vietnam war, arguing that increased border activity was intended to discourage the ROK from sending additional troops to Vietnam. (Research Memorandum REA–40, September 17; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S; and ibid.)

5 The Korean Minister of National Defense called a high-level military conference on September 14 to discuss ways to intensify security in the ROK in the wake of two incidents of sabotage perpetrated on South Korean train lines. Proposals included building a barrier across the DMZ, assigning military units to guard railways, power plants, and similar facilities, and strengthening security forces by adding unemployed veterans to their ranks. (Telegram 1371 from Seoul, September 15; ibid., POL 23–7 KOR S)

128. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 128. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, September 19, 1967, 0755Z.

1402. Dept please pass DOD and CINCPAC. From Ambassador. Subj: Additional ROK Forces for Vietnam. Ref: State 37911.2

1. After careful weighing of Korean factors and atmosphere, I am submitting following proposal for Dept/DOD consideration in connection with current MND study, requested by Pres Pak, of numbers of additional troops which might be sent to Vietnam and method of recruiting them. In presenting this proposal my aim is to (1) get more ROK troops to Vietnam; (2) minimize the cost impact of the additional ROK contribution on our own budgetary and foreign exchange burden in immediate future; and (3) improve domestic position of ROKG to extent which will permit it to take necessary action in Assembly and evoke public support for dispatch of more troops.

2. We have previously explained why we must help Pak overcome domestic political obstacles in this connection. Our task is not becoming easier because boldness of NK sabotage of DMZ and pressure on DMZ itself is creating (as it is undoubtedly designed to do) in public mind much uneasiness about ROK ability to defend itself. Moreover, when railroad sabotage is carried out miles south of DMZ and relatively close to nation's capital, it involves face and builds up ROKG desire for riposte. In circumstances, question naturally arises whether new military manpower should be used at home rather than in defense of country two thousand miles away.

3. My concept on timing is to make known to Pak that as soon as he has considered MND report mentioned above that I would like to discuss it with him. If atmosphere suitable I would at that time say we have been giving much thought to matter of his need to reassure assembly and public about security of country, particularly in relation to possible troop dispatch.

4. I would tell Pak that I was authorized, in consideration of an additional troop dispatch, to say that the US was prepared to3 — A. Equip those forces and finance the net additional won costs of the forces deployed;

B. Equip, provide for training and finance forces in Korea to replace those agreed forces being deployed to Vietnam;

C. Help meet the threat of NK infiltration by providing expeditiously specific equipment and assistance to improve land and sea border security systems maintained by ROK military and to improve the capability of civilian internal security agencies to detect and eliminate NK infiltrators; and

D. Agree that ROK forces serving in VN when hostilities ceased would retain and return home with special equipment we have loaned to them for combat operations in VN.4

5. In presentation of above I would point out that first two items intend make sure ROK defense capability not lessened and no economic burden placed on ROK economy due to dispatch. Third item designed to meet in timely manner intensified NK infiltration threat and to provide tangible and visible evidence to Korean people to reassure them of ROKG's ability deal with NK threat. Last item aimed at enhancing ROKG long-term defense posture.

6. Please have in mind possibility that ROK may consciously or sub-consciously expect to retain equipment on loan to them in VN and may adopt a “thank-you-for-nothing” attitude. Much of equipment they are using in VN would of course be well worn at time of implementation of any such agreement but we would not expect this to be major factor in their consideration of proposal. Similarly they are very likely to feel that the “anti-infiltration” help is something we would do anyway, given our concerns over ROK security, our treaty commitments and our pledges.

7. I submit the above suggestion which I consider to be a barebones minimum for even a token additional contribution because it meets considerations cited para one above. These proposals should induce Pak to begin thinking in specific terms and possibly undertaking necessary initial preparations of public opinion for another dispatch. Among ROK military elements above arrangements would probably be regarded with favor, and Pak is not insensitive to opinion from that quarter. We would ensure that ROKs do not miss point that by contributing more troops now they can expect to enhance their own defense capability during post hostilities period when MAP can be expected to phase down markedly. Please note that I have not included in my suggested offer anything that touches on the economic side and that the offer is “de minimis” insofar as ROK military modernization is concerned. How much further we go in any offer should, in large part, depend on the size of the additional ROK dispatch.

8. We would like to try these proposals on for size and they should at least evoke their counter-proposals. I am particularly interested in seeing what they come back with in the economic area which may be the real key to the problem. If they renew their proposal that we negotiate logistics and tech assistance package for VN, I would state our willingness to negotiate such, as indicated President's message to Pak, but I would point out that VN approval of ROK-US agreement in that sense not likely during next few months at least in view changing patter [pattern?] of govt and Assembly in VN and that proposal for “anti-infiltration” help their retention of equipment used in VN much more useful to assure public that govt dealing effectively with problem of ROK security.

9. Please let me have your comments or questions as soon as convenient. I wish to stress that my suggestion in para four is only an opener to get the process moving with an air of specificity about it. If the ROKG is thinking in terms of one-half to a full division, my package will not come close to meeting the Bill.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis.

2 In telegram 37911 to Seoul, September 15, Bundy asked Porter to provide information concerning the request for additional ROK troops for Vietnam. (Ibid.)

3 In reply the Departments of State and Defense suggested allowing the Koreans to present their demands first “rather than open the bidding ourselves.” (Telegram 42939 to Seoul, September 23; ibid.)

4 Telegram 42939 also authorized Porter to make general references to items 4A, 4B, and 4C but to withhold mention of the proposal in item 4D because of the potentially negative Korean response to it and because the dollar amounts involved could not yet be determined.

129. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 129. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, September 19, 1967.

Text of Cable From Ambassador Porter (Seoul, 1392)

SUBJECT

Internal Security: Views of President Park

On September 16, General Bonesteel in his capacity as Commander in Chief, United Nations Command, briefed President Park Chung Hee at the latter's request on the Demilitarized Zone infiltration problems and North Korean subversive activities. The briefing lasted over one hour and was attended on the Korean side also by the Minister of National Defense and Yi Hu-Rak. Brig. General Huffman was also present.

General Bonesteel first briefed the President, following an outline in English and Korean which had been distributed. President Park listened attentively. The outline covered: (1) enemy threat, both conventional and subversive war aspect; (2) actions taken by friendly elements with regard to increased Demilitarized Zone incidents; (3) actions taken regarding North Korean agent and guerrilla activities in the interior; and, (4) future cooperative self-help, mutual support and development of further plans.

When the briefing was finished, the President himself spoke at length. He stated that he and the people of Korea fully respected and supported United Nations Command authority over the Republic of Korea Armed Forces and he had full confidence in the United Nations Command's ability to carry out its mission for defending the Republic of Korea.

The President indicated he agreed with General Bonesteel's detailed views on anti-infiltration operations and was well satisfied with actions taken or being taken. He would like to see comprehensive requirements plan now being completed worked out as soon as possible and hoped that it would stop enemy infiltration through the Demilitarized Zone and along the coast.

The President said that he had been a division commander along the Demilitarized Zone and fully understands the problem. A full effort would limit enemy activities but would not, he feared, stop them completely because of the great length of the coast line and the Demilitarized zone.

He said he would like to get at even more basic factors. The basic problem is that the North Koreans do not intend to abide by the armistice nor will they. Unless they give up their announced goal, we can expect further intensification of efforts to cause sabotage and subvert the Republic of Korea next spring and on indefinitely.

The difference between United Nations Command and North Korean operational concepts is as follows: Our concept is defensive—to defend the Republic of Korea against aggression; North Korean concept is offensive—to wage subversive aggression against the Republic of Korea, to reconnoiter and attack industrial and military installations and to create continuously what damage to the feeling of security of the South Korean people that they can. They will do this so long as they feel that it can be done at no risk to North Korea and from the sanctuary the United Nations Command provides by unilaterally abiding by the armistice.

The President said that during the past fourteen years, there have been about 5,000 significant North Korean violations of the armistice. As for our side, he said, he would have to admit to some few violations by Republic of Korea. These occurred because of the hatred engendered by North Korean attacks on our soldiers. However, the ratio of violations is several hundred to one on the enemy side.

Whenever the North Koreans violate the military demarcation line, the President said, all the United Nations Command has done so far is to table the complaint at Panmunjom, where the North Koreans categorically deny it. For the last 14 years, the United Nations Command has abided by the armistice while the North Korean side has ignored it.

The President believes that we must do our best to capture or kill every North Korean infiltrator into the Republic of Korea in order to make enemy abandon his plans. He foresees, nevertheless, that this alone will not stop the North Koreans and he expects more violations along the Demilitarized Zone and increased efforts to sabotage industrial and military installations. We should, he said, do more than table the problem at Panmunjom.

The President said he believes that counter-measures are most important to stop North Korean attacks, whenever the North Koreans violate the armistice they must be made to pay by retaliation.2

The President went on to make the following interesting statement. He said that he respects the fact that Republic of Korea forces are under the operational control of the United Nations Command and therefore retaliations will never be done without due coordination with the Command. However, unless the United Nations Command undertakes strong measures, the people of Korea will complain increasingly against the Korean Government. We have, he said, almost 600,000 men in the armed forces. If no counter-measures are taken, the people's patience will wear very thin. The President then said he would be very grateful if General Bonesteel would tell him what countermeasures the United Nations will take if the enemy continues and intensifies his attacks.

General Bonesteel stated that he was sure the President understood his position. That he is a soldier and he follows orders and that his mission was very clear, that he was not only to defend the Republic of Korea against Communist aggression but also to enforce the armistice. He had to agree that there was a plausibility to the President's evaluation of North Korean intentions but that the matter was a most complex one and that there were many factors of great policy import to Korea and to U.S. involved in this question.

General Bonesteel said that he thought that the name and the meaning of the “United Nations Command” is highly useful and important to the Republic of Korea, especially in these days of Communist activity over much of Asia. It should be remembered that the United Nations Unified Command in Korea was established by the Security Council of the United Nations in 1950. The United States Government had been designated as the executive agent for the Security Council to direct the operations of the Unified Command in Korea.

The composition of the United Nations has changed greatly since 1950. Undoubtedly, one of many reasons for the increased North Korean activity was a hope by the Communists that they could at some time in the proximate future get the U.N. General Assembly to repudiate the United Nations Command in Korea.

Since the matter was of such great importance and so complex, unilateral action by the Republic of Korea would be bad and it would be wisest course for the President to discuss the matter with the personal representative of President Johnson in Korea, that is, Ambassador Porter. General Bonesteel said he felt it important both for Korea and the U.S. that the integrity of the United Nations Command be preserved. It might not be impossible to find other adequate answers to President Park's expressed concept but this should be done by explorations in greatest confidence with Ambassador Porter. President Park, he felt sure, appreciated that President Johnson himself had troubles with small but vocal elements of the U.S. public and that there were many critics of U.S. policy towards Vietnam who confused some of the American public. Certainly the wisest course would not be to totally abandon to the Communists the full initiative to do what they wished, but it was a fact that it would be hard to preserve and continue the United Nations Command in Korea if the Command were party to violating the armistice.

President Park stated he fully understood General Bonesteel's position. He said he did not mean to imply that the United Nations Command should take the total retaliatory reaction against North Korean aggression. However, he felt if the North Korean actions continued to increase, authority should be given to the Commanding Chief of the United Nations Command to wage coordinated, carefully controlled, small-scale retaliatory action. He said he would talk to Ambassador Porter about this. The President went on in an apparently philosophical mood and said that it was his frank view that the United States Government applies too many restrictions and red tape on the authority of U.S. theater commanders. This, he said, applies also to Vietnam. His next sentence, as interpreted into English, went to the effect that the U.S. Government might lose something but so does the Republic of Korea through continued and vicious North Korean aggressions. The North Koreans, he said, are fully aware of the heavy U.S. commitments in Vietnam and believe the U.S. does not want the extension of another front in Korea. Hence, the North Koreans feel relatively safe against retaliation. He thought the North Koreans do not want open hostilities but felt secure against risk in the subversive actions they were now taking increasingly.

In closing the meeting, the President said that the matter requires most serious thought and a prudent approach. However, only positive and appropriate counter-measures will stop the North Koreans.3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. V. Top Secret; Exdis. Attached to a September 21 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson that indicates the President saw it. The source text is the retyped copy given to the President. Telegram 1392 is in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S.

2 On September 4 CINCUNC received information about ROK retaliatory raids into North Korea along the DMZ and reminded the Minister of National Defense of U.S. opposition to retaliatory acts. (Telegram 1136 from Seoul, September 5; ibid.) Porter also voiced concern about the forays to the Prime Minister, stressing that such actions undercut the ROK's position at the UN, provided fodder for North Korean propaganda, undercut General Bonesteel's authority, and jeopardized U.S. Congressional support for military assistance to Korea. (Telegram 1311 from Seoul, September 13; ibid.)

3  Porter concluded from his comments that Pak intended to put the U.S. “on notice that northward actions by ROK personnel will continue at a greater pace and with greater vigor than in the past, with or without U.S. cooperation.” The United States could expect to be informed of South Korean incursions after they occurred, so that U.S. forces in Korea could be prepared for possible retaliation by North Korea. Porter recommended reminding Pak of U.S. disapproval of ROK incursions and requesting “ROK discuss with UNC means of making North Korean actions more costly for NK elements as they occur.” (Telegram 1483 from Seoul, September 22; ibid.) Bundy concurred with Porter's recommendation and stated that the matter was being given “urgent attention” in Washington. (Telegram 45165 to Seoul, September 28; ibid.) On October 11 Porter discussed his approach with Pak, who was receptive to meeting North Korean actions as they occurred. (Telegram 1797 from Seoul, October 11; ibid.)

130. Special National Intelligence Estimate 130. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, September 21, 1967.

SNIE 14.2–67

NORTH KOREAN INTENTIONS AND CAPABILITIES WITH
RESPECT TO SOUTH KOREA

Conclusions

A. We believe that the recent, more vigorous activities of North Korea against the South have several motivations: to create new pressures on the Pak government; to tie down large ROK forces; to strengthen the Communist clandestine apparatus in the South; and to be in a position to exploit any new and major disruption in the ROK. The timing of these tactics has been strongly influenced by the Vietnamese War, for example by such factors as the absence of 50,000 ROK troops in South Vietnam.

B. The North Koreans will almost certainly continue their campaign of military harassment in the DMZ, at current or even increased levels. We believe that North Korea undertook its program of violence of its own volition, not under pressure from either Moscow or Peking, and that this program does not indicate a present Communist intention to invade South Korea. Pyongyang is conscious of the risks inherent in such an action and would be reluctant to accept them. Similarly, there is probably no intention of escalating the DMZ attacks to a point at which open warfare might result. The North might miscalculate, however, and raise the ante along the DMZ until the ROK resolves to strike back in force. A series of actions and reactions might ensue which could lead to open hostilities.

C. North Korea will also continue attempts to infiltrate guerrilla-type teams into rear areas of South Korea. Communist chances of establishing viable bases for guerrilla operations are probably poor, but some teams will be able to carry out short-term terrorist and sabotage missions.2

[Here follows the Discussion section of the estimate.]

1 Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 99, SNIE 14.2–67. Secret; Controlled Dissem. According to a note on the cover sheet, the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense and of the National Security Agency participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred with this estimate on September 21 except the representatives of the Atomic Energy Commission and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

2 As a result of North Korea's “current activities” and “its incipient campaign of terror and sabotage in rear areas of South Korea,” on October 25 the USIB agreed that intelligence efforts concerning the political, economic, and military situation in North Korea should be increased. (Memorandum for the United States Intelligence Board, October 25, with attachment; ibid.)

131. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Kohler) 131. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Kohler)

Washington, undated.

[Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, 303 Committee Meeting 61, October 27, 1967. Secret; Eyes Only. 1 page of source text not declassified.]

132. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 132. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 1

Saigon, October 31, 1967, 1630Z.

10112. VIPTO 51. Subj: Vice President's Meeting with Prime Minister of Korea.2

1. After an exchange of greetings, the Prime Minister stated that during his recent visit to Washington President Johnson had voiced concern about North Korean infiltration into South Korea. At that time the Prime Minister understood that a Bill authorizing three destroyers for Korea had passed the House of Representatives, and been forwarded to the Senate Armed Services Committee. He has recently learned that the request for two of these destroyers was cancelled by the Armed Services Committee of the Senate. This will have unfortunate political repercussions in Korea as these three destroyers are badly needed to patrol their 600-mile coastal area. In view of the relationship of Korean public opinion to the Vietnamese war, the loss of the two destroyers is actually less important than the decline in the morale of the Korean people. If the Korean Government should in the future attempt to increase its troop strength in Vietnam, the opposition can effectively use this destroyer issue to criticize the government and weaken its position.

2. The Vice President stated that he would check into this matter of destroyers carefully. The U.S. has received a number of requests for destroyers and for modern jet airplanes recently, including requests from a number of South American countries. There has been a general reaction in the Congress against excessive military assistance in the past, and this has resulted in a tendency to refuse all requests. The Vice President counseled patience and stated that he believed the matter could be worked out.3

3. The Prime Minister stated that he hoped so as this had become a matter of great urgency in Korea during the past year. 450 South Koreans had been killed during the past year. The Korean Government is incapable of countering espionage activities along the sea coast because when they detect North Korean attempts, they cannot catch them because they do not have the fast boats required. They anticipate that North Korea will accelerate its attempts to disrupt the internal security, the political stability and economic growth of South Korea in the next several years. Whereas the North Koreans trained 900 guerrillas this year, they are planning to train 2,500 next year for the purpose of sabotage in South Korea.

4. The Prime Minister confirmed that Korea had received the communications equipment and radar requested earlier. General Westmoreland assured the Vice President that Korean forces in South Vietnam received the same equipment as American forces. The Vice President asked the Prime Minister directly if the U.S. is failing to provide anything the Koreans expected. Is the U.S. keeping up with shipments of equipment to the regular forces in Korea?

5. The Prime Minister expressed appreciation for the continued presence of U.S. forces in Korea, and expressed the hope that deliveries on the equipment promised—such as trucks and jeeps could be speeded [up].

6. As of this date only 30 percent of the total commitment has been fulfilled. Also the Korean troops are using outmoded weapons and hope to be able to obtain modern weapons soon. In response to the Vice President's question he stated that he was talking about M16 rifles. The Vice President said that although we have had a supply line problem on rifles, we intend to keep our word on this. In response to the Prime Minister's specific expression of their interest in helicopters, the Vice President said that we would review this but that the Prime Minister should understand that General Westmoreland has first priority on helicopters. The Prime Minister said he hoped that Korea would have second priority. He stated that he would be happy to pass the word to President Park that Vice President Humphrey “would take care of this matter.” The Vice President said it would be more accurate to say that “he would look into it.”

6. [sic] The Vice President expressed the gratitude of American Government and the American people for the Korean participation in the Vietnam war. He is aware that Ambassador Porter has been talking to President Park about the possibility of additional troops for Vietnam. He knows of the political problems that this might cause and has not been sent by President Johnson to make any request for additional troops. But Korea is among the few close and trusted allies the U.S. has in Asia, and Korea is among those countries that will benefit from the increased commitment which the U.S. has made to Asia. We have no desire to tell Asians how to run their lives, but we both need each other. In such a situation there is no doubt that we will need more help in Vietnam. The details of this subject can be discussed in Seoul. When the world knows that we all stand together in Asia, the Communist forces will draw the appropriate conclusion. The Prime Minister should know that President Johnson stands by his friends and helps those who help us.

7. The Prime Minister stated that Korea is not afraid of any sacrifices that are required. Korea will stay with the U.S. till the final victory in Vietnam and this is important not only for Vietnam but for Korea and the United States.

8. The Prime Minister referring to the recent demonstrations in Washington against the war, stated that we might want to send those demonstrators to Korea and have them brainwashed there. Perhaps at the next Seven Nation Conference it would be well to mobilize 200,000 people in all the nations in support of the war to offset the demonstrations against the war.

9. The Vice President stated that the U.S. is aware of the great problem presented by the infiltration from North Korea. But South Korea must not respond unilaterally, must not act without consultations with General Bonesteel or if necessary Ambassador Porter. On this matter, as on all others, we must think and act in concert. We are aware of the pressures to respond to these provocations, but unilateral action can only lead to misunderstanding. He asked the Prime Minister to pass on this message to President Park. The Prime Minister made no response to the Vice President's remarks on this subject.

10. The Prime Minister expressed concern about the possibility of restrictions on the importation of Korean goods into the U.S. For the past 18 years, U.S. officials have encouraged Korea to increase its exports. Korea has succeeded in doing this and now its exports total $350 million. They hope to continue increasing their trade so they can eventually end their reliance on U.S. economic assistance. But to be self-sustaining they must have the possibility of increased trade.

11. The Vice President stated that there is increasing protectionist sentiment in the Congress, from industries such as steel, textiles, glass and others. We have to take a look at our textile situation and possibly we might want to consider discussing extending the present long term agreement on textiles, to permit both nations to share in the growth of the market for man-made fibers. There are strong pressures here, but the U.S. will not act precipitously in this matter.

12. The Prime Minister also asked why the U.S. is so strict about its Buy America policy. Korea expected to benefit considerably from off-shore procurement but has in fact realized very little. In 1966, offshore procurement for Vietnam amounted to $30 million while for 1967 it has fallen off to $6.5 million.

13. The Vice President encouraged the Prime Minister to think in terms of competitive trading. The Koreans should have trade missions and not rely wholly on the American market. We hope to maintain the American market as an open market, but nevertheless the Koreans might do well to find new outlets for their production. The Koreans should also use their special position with the U.S. public to explain their problem to the U.S. Congress and Senators. As one who worked hard for the success of the Kennedy Round, the Vice President stated he would do all he could to resist protectionists' pressures in the U.S. but this would not be easy.

14. Addressing General Westmoreland, the Prime Minister asked if it might be possible for the American logistics command in Vietnam to hire Koreans for maintenance positions from the groups of Koreans who have completed their military service in South Vietnam. This has now become a problem for Korean veterans returning from Vietnam who do not always have suitable opportunities for employment in Korea.

15. The Prime Minister stated that he had been told that the U.S. is agreeable but that the GVN is opposed to this. He had discussed this with Prime Minister Ky in Feb. and although he agreed in principle, nothing has happened. This has been discussed many times during the past year but with no results. General Westmoreland responded that he had recently instructed his staff to look into this matter. With a new government coming into power, and a new draft law which would absorb 65,000 more men, he believes that the situation is now more hopeful. He has the matter under detailed study and believes it possible that something can be worked out in the near future.

16. In conclusion, Westmoreland expressed to the Prime Minister his great admiration for the performance of Korean soldiers in Vietnam and for their leaders. He specifically praised General Chae and presented the Prime Minister with a highly favorable report on the Korean forces which had been prepared by his staff.

Bunker

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US/HUMPHREY. Secret; Immediate;Exdis.

2 The Vice President and the Prime Minister were in Saigon to attend inauguration ceremonies for the newly elected Thieu-Ky government. Bundy arranged the meeting at Porter's request after being advised that Bonesteel had received information indicating that the ROK planned further actions against North Korea. Porter recommended that since Humphrey “enjoys great prestige in Korea” he could caution the Koreans against such actions and demonstrate that the “matter has come to attention of highest levels of USG.” (Telegram 2119 from Seoul, October 27, and telegram 61160 to Seoul, October 27; both ibid.)

3 The Korean press reported that “Humphrey had agreed in principle that the US will provide two destroyers.” Bundy labeled the statement a “mischaracterization” that was “tantamount to an attempt to blackmail us” and one that could jeopardize Congressional reconsideration of the matter. (Telegram 64926 to Seoul, November 4; ibid.) Noting he would bring the matter to the attention of the Prime Minister as soon as possible, Porter also explained that the “use of press by [Korean] government is most trying aspect of doing business here,” since high-level officials “endeavor to make themselves look good in press by representing statements of Americans and others in manner bearing little resemblance to facts, and designed, as you say, to blackmail us.” (Telegram 2256 from Seoul, November 6; ibid.)

133. Memorandum of Conversation 133. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, November 13, 1967.

SUBJECT

North Korean Harassment and U.S. Commitments

PARTICIPANTS

Korean Foreign Minister Choe Kyu-ha

Ambassador Dong Jo Kim

The Secretary

Samuel D. Berger, Deputy Assistant Secretary for East Asian & Pacific Affairs

Benjamin A. Fleck, Country Director for Korea

North Korean Harassment

The Foreign Minister stated that North Korean harassment of the ROK and UN troops along the DMZ was taking place on a large scale and that infiltration of the ROK further south by North Korean agents was a serious problem. When asked by the Secretary to explain North Korean motives, Choe replied that he thought the North Koreans were attempting to accomplish two objectives. The first was to slow down the rate of economic progress in the ROK and the second was to stimulate tension within the country.

The Secretary asked whether any changes had been noticed in the deployment of the North Korean armed forces. Choe replied that new airfields were being built in the North and that the North Korean forces were being equipped with new Soviet equipment.2

Modernization of ROK Forces

In view of the North Korean activities which he had just described, the Foreign Minister urged greater effort in improving the capability of the ROK forces to counter the North Korean activities which he had just described. He urged that the equipment of the ROK armed forces be modernized and referred specifically to the need for fast patrol boats.

Mr. Berger pointed out that the fast patrol boats referred to were in the process of being delivered to Korea. Ambassador Kim countered by stating the ROK possessed only one destroyer and needed more. The Foreign Minister emphasized that in view of the establishment of small-scale guerrilla forces by the North Koreans, there was need for anti-infiltration equipment. Mr. Berger pointed out that a great deal of such equipment had already been provided to the ROK Government and that more was on the way.

Joint Working Group

The Foreign Minister then referred to the establishment of the joint US–ROK working group in Seoul, with military and economic sub-committees, to explore the extent to which the commitments made in Ambassador Brown's letter of March 4, 1966, had been carried out. He reported that the military sub-committee had worked out a project for providing additional equipment and he hoped that the working group's report, including this project, would soon be ready for submission.

ROK Participation in Viet-Nam

The Foreign Minister pointed out that the working group was also considering the problem of increasing ROK participation in programs in Viet-Nam. He said that although ROK exports in general were rising, his government wished to increase its exports to Viet-Nam. Participation was also desired in the pacification program in Viet-Nam. Mr. Berger pointed out that ROK receipts from Viet-Nam, including remittances, for the first half of 1967 totaled $60 million, which was equal to the total receipts from the same sources for all of 1966. The Foreign Minister did not deny the accuracy of these figures but said that his government keenly desired to increase exports to Viet-Nam. It also wished to participate in the pacification program and it had proposed a Korean Logistic Service Corps designed to relieve for combat duty troops now serving in rear areas. The Secretary asked if the KLSC was intended to be a military unit. The Foreign Minister replied that the intention was to have it comprise civilian reservists who would act as guards, drivers, etc., in the rear areas.

The Foreign Minister then referred to his government's desire that Korean firms be given a chance to participate in bidding on contracts for delivery of goods and services in Viet-Nam. He alleged that Korean troops in Viet-Nam were wearing underwear manufactured in the United States and that Korean textile-makers should be given the opportunity to bid on such items. Mr. Berger reminded the Foreign Minister that certain actions had been taken above and beyond the commitments of the March 4 letter. He cited specifically the provision of Korean combat rations to the Korean troops in Viet-Nam.

The Foreign Minister said that the present situation in Viet-Nam was that large bids went to U.S. firms and small bids to Vietnamese firms. If the Koreans tried to compete on the small bids, it might cause difficulties with the Vietnamese. Therefore, they desired to share some of the contracts which now went to U.S. bidders. He said the National Assembly had set a deadline of mid-November, after which it had threatened to begin interpellations of the government on these subjects. He hoped, therefore, that the joint working group's report would be finished by that deadline.

Mr. Berger commented that he was certain that the working group's report would show that the U.S. Government had performed very well in living up to its commitments.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27 VIET S. Confidential. Drafted by Fleck and approved in S on November 17. The memorandum is Part III of VII. Memoranda of the remaining parts of the Rusk-Choe conversations are: Part I, “Korean Question in the United Nations” (ibid., POL 32–4 KOR/UN); Part II, “ROK Assistance Program in Africa” (ibid., AID(KOR S) 8 AFR); Part IV, “ROK Internal Developments” (ibid., AID(US) 15–9 KOR S); Part V, “ROK-Japan Relations” (ibid., POL JAPAN–KOR S); Part VI, “Summit Conference” (ibid., POL 27 KOR); and Part VII, “ROK Retaliation Against North Korea” (ibid., POL KOR N–KOR S). During his visit Choe also met with Bundy on November 13 and with McNamara on November 16. Memoranda of those conversations are ibid., POL 7 KOR S, and Washington National Records Center, RG 330,OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 72 A 2468, KOREA 091.112, respectively.

2 As recorded in Part VII, Rusk suggested to Choe that other governments in the UN Command should be discreetly apprised of the situation. Cautioning that the ROK should respond to North Korean actions with considerable restraint, Rusk reminded Choe of the consequences of any significant North-South conflict and stated that “if any such clash occurred the ROKG should appear to be the victim of aggression” since the ROK “needs the support and sympathy of many foreign governments” and, therefore, should keep its record clean. Rusk also instructed Kohler to discuss North Korean harassment of South Korea with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin and to suggest to him that the USSR counsel restraint on the part of the North Koreans. (Memorandum of conversation, December 4; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69,POL 23–7 KOR S)

134. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 134. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, November 25, 1967, 0528Z.

2576. For Secretary and Bundy from Ambassador. Subject: Additional ROK Troop Contribution to Vietnam.2

1. Recent developments indicate ROK domestic political situation may soon be restored to something approaching normalcy. This raises question of when and how we approach Pak on additional troop dispatch for Vietnam. We have been deferring any real pressure on him in recognition of his domestic political problem. However, time is approaching when this should no longer be overriding consideration. Before proceeding with Pak, believe we should reevaluate prospects for and consequences of additional troop dispatch in light of recent developments and present conditions.

2. Situation with respect to further ROK contributions is not the same as it was for earlier dispatches or even last spring and summer. Since Vice President's visit and Clifford/Taylor mission, the picture here has changed sufficiently to warrant examining the desirability of a further ROK contribution, particularly in light future disadvantages and difficulties it may create for US in our total relationships with ROK. A. Recent statements by US officials on better prospects in Vietnam, including prospects for troop withdrawal and lessening need for additional US troops have been noted here and may lead Pak and his advisers, and Korean public as well, to question need for additional dispatch in light of pressures along Korean DMZ and perhaps other areas of country next spring. General Beach's talk with Pak this week, for example, clearly reflected optimistic view on military outlook in Vietnam which Beach had received in Saigon.

B. Increased NK activity during past year along DMZ and interior has disturbed ROK Govt and the Korean people. They now anticipate greater North Korean efforts at infiltration, subversion and sabotage next year and are exhibiting considerable concern over security in ROK. In past, ROKG was prepared send troops to Vietnam if this did not impair ability handle threat from the North. In light of anticipated increase NK activity, important sectors of opinion are already saying that troops cannot be spared and any dispatch would spur North to increase pressure against ROK.

C. ROKs not likely to be in position to act on any new troop dispatch until early next year since National Assembly action would be required nor could troops be deployed until well into year due to planning and implementation lead time required. In meantime, announcements of increase by Thailand, New Zealand and Australia will have become past history and if you decide that I should maintain pressure, it may look as though ROK alone is being subjected to pressure from US.

D. There has been growing feeling in ROKG and Korean public that ROK troop dispatch to Vietnam has strengthened “special relationship” between US and ROK which justifies having their desires, whether in political, economic or defense area, being given special and unique consideration by USG. They display considerable assuredness in presenting this theme and complete insensitivity to problems that granting special treatment would create for US domestically and internationally. They are uninhibited in expressing their demands or their disappointment when they do not meet with specific encouragement. In short, they see the 50,000 ROK troops in Vietnam as their “Alladin's Lamp” to make all their dreams come true.

E. Pak will have domestic political problems particularly in the National Assembly if he seeks to send additional troops. Though he and other government spokesmen have carefully hedged their statements on dispatch of troops, they continue to give opposition and public grounds to believe ROKG has strongly implied if not pledged that it will not send additional troops. Opposition will seek to take issue with any troop dispatch proposal in effort to embarrass Pak and ROKG. Opposition will find greater public acceptance of their arguments because of pressures mentioned above.

F. On size of any possible dispatch, we are not as optimistic now as when we were considering matter earlier. We are inclined to believe that Pak is currently thinking more in terms of another brigade and supporting elements. These likely to be combined with Marine brigade to form composite division in Vietnam, permitting Korea to claim that it has three divisions in Vietnam. Before more troops are committed, however, Pak's problems will undoubtedly cause him to raise ante considerably. His requirements will be expensive, varied and complicated in line with what he judges necessary to overcome opposition to dispatch.3

3. We are not in position here to judge real need for additional ROK troops in Vietnam nor to assess political impact, at home or internationally, of an additional ROK contribution. In this connection, we have in mind fact that the impact of large scale ROK participation has long since been made and further participation will undoubtedly involve us in an exercise with rapidly diminishing returns.4

4. On balance, we still believe troops can be obtained and would be ready to begin process as soon as substantial numbers of opposition move into Assembly. At least we would expect to ascertain price and commence bargaining process in line with your views as to required size of contingent, need and resources available.

5. Bonesteel has seen this message. I suggest you talk it over with him before giving me your comments. He is also aware of my feeling that until Pak makes clear to us his intentions with respect to additional troop dispatch, we should continue along our present line of support for ROK programs, including those submitted or being developed to support ROK civilian and military effort in counter-infiltration area, without making additional adjustments in their favor, either in matters of principle (i.e., force levels) or material support. They are being generously treated, I believe, for their current contribution and I would not expect to recommend approval of KLSC or other items without substantial augmentation of ROK effort.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis.

2 The contents of this telegram were summarized in a November 28 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson as background to the Tuesday lunch meeting on that date. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5D(3) Allies: Troop Commitments, Other Aid, 1967 to 1968)

3 In telegram 2660 from Seoul, November 30, although he had received no further information from Pak or other officials, Porter outlined the proposals Korea was likely to present in exchange for additional troops based on public and private statements made by Korean officials over the past months. Porter submitted a substantial list of proposed items and expected that the Korean “package” would not contain all of the recommendations. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S)

4 In his reply Bundy stated that the United States still wanted “maximum additional ROK troop contribution,” while avoiding “the ‘diminishing returns' and ‘Aladdin's Lamp' pitfalls” Porter discussed. (Telegram 76010 to Seoul, November 29; ibid.)

135. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 135. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, November 29, 1967, 0400Z.

2621. Subj: ROK Internal Security.

1. In recent weeks there have been a number of developments relating to ROK preparations in internal security field for next spring's anticipated intensified NK infiltration effort. A. President Pak has disapproved Korean National Police plans to double size of combat police forces from 23 companies to 46 companies and to improve coastal watch organization. Police plan submitted to Pak would have required a won 1.1 Billion supplemental budget as well as about $5 million in equipment (commo, transport, patrol boats, helicopters etc.) to be furnished by U.S.

B. President Pak has approved for planning purposes strengthening of ROK Army for counter-infiltration activities by 8 new counter-infiltration battalions in each of 8 reserve divisions under second ROK Army. MND plan presented to Pak points out that this would require by contrast with police plan a supplemental budget of won 317 million and that equipment for battalions is on hand in reserve divisional stocks.

C. MND Kim on Nov 22 sent letter to COMUS/K advising him of plan to organize 8 battalions, stated that personnel strength of these battalions will be temporary augmentation of present authorized strength of ROK Army.MND has not requested COMUS/K concurrence of this augmentation but requested concurrence for use of equipment from ROK Army stocks for new battalions.

D. At briefing given to senior U.S. personnel by ROK MND on military counter-infiltration plans, as tentatively approved by President Pak, MND said ROK military would assume control of CI operations in those areas and situations where experience shows that police lack capability to cope with infiltration situation.

2. Understand President Pak disapproved increase in police and approved additional ROK Army battalions because use of military was budgetarily much cheaper. On basis information available to him Pak believes North Korean infiltration threat south of the DMZ will be of magnitude that will require the use of military forces and even augmented police will be unable cope with this level NK activity. Pak concerned by NK sabotage efforts aimed at ROK industrial base and at govt organization, including use of NK military “suicide squads” for this purpose.

3. ROK military now submitting requests to COMUS/K for assist- ance on variety of projects to improve capability. To assure coordinated U.S. efforts in dealing with requests from the ROK military and civilian agencies and to assure that the ROKG develops the soundest possible plan for dealing with the intensified infiltration next spring, Country Team has established a special committee chaired by DCM to include USFK Chief of Staff, Chief, PROVMAAG/K, Deputy USOM Director [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].

4. Comment: We see problem of dealing with internal security matters to be responsibilities of ROKG with USG providing such assistance as it can. We also continue believe that ROK civilian agencies, primarily augmented KNP, are best instrument for dealing initially with various aspects of NK activity in ROK outside of forward areas under ROK military control and that ROK military effort should be focused along DMZ, coast and offshore as collateral activity to their regular military missions and providing spot assistance to civilian authorities when requested. We believe present concept reportedly accepted by Pak that military forces be applied if dimension of threat such that civil agencies cannot handle is sound. Pak of course will decide when and if to bring military power to bear on problem, but for reasons connected with population, training problems, and eventual expense arising from military participation, we hope his judgment will be measured in this matter.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S. Secret. Repeated to the Department of Defense and CINCPAC for POLAD.

136. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 136. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, November 30, 1967, 2356Z.

77501. Seoul Eyes Only for Porter. Saigon Eyes Only for Bunker and Locke.2 Tokyo Eyes Only for Johnson.

1. Highest levels now wish to pursue additional ROK troop contribution with maximum urgency. Since Ambassador Locke is returning to US for consultation on December 7 in any event, our proposal is that he go via Seoul for short visit, possibly bearing Presidential message to Park.

2. Purpose of visit would not be to nail down all details, but to convey sense of urgency felt at highest levels here and to carry forward from Clifford/Taylor mission. At same time, we wish his message to be as specific as possible in terms of type and scale of additional forces, and we would hope that Seoul can provide us best judgment on what kind of “package” ROK might ask in return, so that we can provide Locke with instructions and put him in position either to respond under some headings or at any rate to undertake to get rapid answers on his return here.

3. To minimize visit appearing wholly as solicitation of additional contribution, we would in any event wish to depict it as normal US/ROK consultation on Viet-Nam situation. Depending on Tokyo's judgment, we might also schedule short visit in Japan, recalling that GOJ has expressed interest in reports on Viet-Nam situation. Possible schedule might take Locke to Tokyo on December 4 and 5, with visit to Seoul on December 6 and departure from Seoul during day December 7.

4. Request urgent Seoul and Tokyo comment on this schedule and basic outline. You should not approach host governments until we have final exchanges. Your comment should cover receptivity of host government, date problems, and whether you see additional elements that could be used effectively to further the general picture of routine consultation on a regularly scheduled consultation return to the US. For example, would it be useful or the reverse to depict Tokyo visit as related to non-military areas in which GOJ already helping and in which such additional projects as educational television are pending? Replies should be Nodis with copies to other posts concerned.

5. Seoul already has our Exdis request (State 76010, Notal)3 for best judgment on ROK views both as to type and scale of forces and as to “package” they might seek.4 Your reply on this subject should be sent at once on Exdis basis separate from traffic dealing with possibility of Locke visit. Please copy your response to Saigon for Locke's preliminary information.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret. Also sent to Saigon and Tokyo. Drafted by Bundy; cleared by Rostow, Meehan (S/S), and McNamara; and approved by Rusk.

2  Ellsworth Bunker was Ambassador and Eugene M. Locke was Deputy Ambassador to Vietnam.

3 See footnote 4, Document 134.

4 See footnote 3, Document 134.

137. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 137. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, December 6, 1967.

Text of Cable from Ambassador Porter (Seoul, 2769)

The result of a two-and-one-half-hour conversation today between President Park, the

Prime Minister, the Minister of National Defense and the Foreign Minister on one hand, and Locke and Porter on the other, was that the South Korean Government has agreed to make available one “light division” to augment allied forces in South Vietnam. The timing of the availability of these additional troops is to await South Korean Government assessment of Assembly willingness to pass enabling legislation. In the meantime, Porter and the Minister of National Defense may open conversations to determine “arrangements” which will permit activation of such a light division.

Park, who clearly maintained control of the essentials of the conversation for the Koreans, said that when the Minister of Defense turned in a report indicating he was unable to recommend the dispatch of more troops because of Korean security problems, the President had returned the report to the Minister, telling the latter to find a way to meet the obvious needs of the Vietnam situation. He also made clear to the Minister he wished to help President Johnson. Locke went through the points cited in a State Department telegram,2 putting special stress on the current coming U.S. troop contribution, the need to increase pressure on the enemy at this point when his problems are severe, the excellent effect additional Korean contribution would have on the situation, and on public and Congress in the U.S.

President Park revealed that the Defense Minister had replied to his request for re-study of the possibilities by indicating that if rear and logistical elements now supporting Korean troops in Vietnam could be replaced by civilians, enough combat troops would be gained to form a “reinforced regimental combat team.” Additionally, Park continued, this regiment could be found in Korea which would bring the total new contribution to the level of a “light division.”

The Prime Minister and the Defense Minister then spoke in turn. Both opposed sending more troops. The former said his opposition resulted from the assurances given by the Americans that the previous troop dispatch was the last which would be requested and because such assurances had been passed to the Assembly and the public. He qualified his resistance to a new dispatch, however, by stating that something must be found which would enable his President to face opponents of the new dispatch, adding that he had been disappointed by the American refusal thus far to “take initiative” in that sense. Locke replied that we, too, had exceeded what Congress expected in way of troops for Vietnam because no one could predict requirements, but that President Johnson had faced up to leadership problems in the matter.

The Defense Minister said that in addition to his opposition on grounds of security, he had been very disappointed by the American performance on March 4, 1966 undertakings, that whereas the Koreans had sent every man they had agreed to send, the Americans had not kept their promises.3 Porter replied to this rather characteristic pitch in low key, (knowing Park fully aware of performance figures), and said we would endeavor to phrase future commitments in more precise terms. Locke assured the President that the U.S. is greatly concerned with maintenance of Korean security and economic welfare. He related our intentions re the Military Assistance Program in the coming year, support fund level, and the $10 million program loan.

The Foreign Minister then made a statement which related to his own success in turning off Assembly inquiry into the matter of implementation of the March 4, 1966, agreement. He also referred, as did the Defense Minister, to the “anti-infiltration measures commitment of $35 million” which, he said, Secretary McNamara indicated he had not received from CINCPAC and would consider when he did. Rather than get into a bargaining session then and there, we indicated that this was a matter we could discuss later and perhaps General Bonesteel would have some comments on it when he returns. The Ministers' performance may have been intended to permit Park to assume a constructive role. If so, it was well designed for its purpose.

Before the discussion ended, Locke asked Park if we could set a date for discussion of the “arrangements” to support the “light division” he had mentioned. Park replied that Porter and the Minister of Defense could arrange for a mutually convenient time to open conversations.

I recommend very careful handling of this matter. Park's problems will be greatly increased if the Assembly or the press learn of the foregoing, which they would surely interpret, Korean aid, as a commitment. This is a matter of real concern to me in view of local predilection for press leaks.

I will seek an appointment with the Defense Minister immediately after Ambassador Locke has an opportunity to discuss the matter in Washington and I have your comments.

Our arrangement with the President's staff about the press is that the meeting will be described as a general review of the Vietnam situation.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. V. Secret; Nodis. Attached to a memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson, December 7, which indicates that the President saw it. The source text is the retyped copy given to the President.

2 Not found.

3 Reference is to Brown's March 4, 1966, letter detailing the military and economic assistance extended to the Koreans in exchange for troops for Vietnam; for a draft, see Document 76. Regarding the letter as sent, see footnote 9, Document 76. The Embassy issued periodic progress reports on the extent to which the United States had met its commitments relative to the 1966 ROK troop deployment. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, DEF 19 KOR S-US, DEF 19 US–KOR S, and DEF 19–3 US–KOR S)

138. Memorandum From the Director of Defense Research and Engineering (Foster) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 138. Memorandum From the Director of Defense Research and Engineering (Foster) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, December 7, 1967.

SUBJECT

Korea

General Bonesteel visited me yesterday and provided a complete rundown on the situation in Korea. There is definite information that Kim Il Sung has embarked on a course of drastically increased conflict along lines proposed by Che Guevara. Based on the theory that the United States cannot support more than one “Vietnam” at a time, he hopes to create a situation that will prevent the ROK from sending more troops to Vietnam, cripple the ROK economy, cause the United States to withdraw, and eventually communize the country. A force of special agents, commandos, and guerrillas specialized for various locations in the ROK, already averaging about 25,000 strong, is being trained and is already operating into ROK. Action has occurred throughout the country, at the DMZ and in mountainous regions in the Northeast and Southwest of ROK. The latter two are supported by sea infiltration, which constitutes over 60 percent of the total. To date there have been vastly increased attempted penetrations, firefight incidents, and UNC casualties, all up about tenfold from last year.

Later plans of Kim Il Sung include severe disruption of our LOC, cowing the population by terror, and placing U.S. installations under siege. He then might open the option of conventional air strike and ground attack a la Israel, assuming we would not use nuclear weapons. This is expected to heat up considerably by next summer.

To counter this threat, General Bonesteel has organized a mixed line and mobile defense in depth along the DMZ and around the coasts. Although his resources are meager, he is strengthening anti-infiltration defenses at sea, along and behind the DMZ,2 and throwing the burden of interior defense, with increased training and support by the U.S., on the ROK forces. The United States still retains responsibility for defense of our air bases, depots, [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified].

He has submitted, through CINCPAC to JCS, a plan for modest inputs of added defensive equipment (cost, $40M) to augment his strength. This is designed not to detract from the Vietnam effort. He is confident he can turn back the attack, but believes he has barely enough resources to do so. We are skeptical that $40 million is enough even as a starter, but he is trying to keep his requirements minimal.

We discussed with him, and are examining, the various ways in which R&D might help. A counterinfiltration system design effort is already underway in ARPA and the Services.

John Foster, Jr.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 72 A 2468, Korea 370.64. Secret. The memorandum indicates that McNamara saw it.

2 Additional information concerning the barrier system along the DMZ is in airgram A–297 from Seoul, December 26. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 32 KOR N–KOR S)

139. Telegram From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State 139. Telegram From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State 1

Canberra, December 21, 1967, 3:05 p.m.

2337. Literally eyes only for Sec. Rusk and Sec. McNamara from Walt Rostow. At lunch, just completed, between President Park and President Johnson,2 President Johnson committed himself to: the most forthcoming response possible to Park's equipment requests, to be in Park's hands at the latest on January 1; and the most accelerated possible delivery dates for equipment.

The President wishes not only staff work completed but the greatest possible imagination in finding ways of accelerating equipment delivery; for example, even the possibility of switching a destroyer from U.S. to Korean command might be examined. In return, President Park said that he would do his utmost to get troops to Vietnam by March 1, his original earliest date being April.

At the close of a very good and frank session, Park said wryly, sometimes when we decide to do something, we can do it quicker than you. President Johnson accepted the challenge.

Park's problem is, as you know, that he must get promise from his Assembly; and, in the face of expected increased pressures at the 38th parallel in the spring, he must demonstrate to the Assembly that he will gain as much short run security in equipment as he is losing by sending the unit to South Vietnam.

Clark

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL KOR S-US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

2 Both were in Canberra to attend the funeral of former Prime Minister Holt; see Document 140.

140. Notes on Conversation Between President Johnson and President Pak 140. Notes on Conversation Between President Johnson and President Pak 1

Canberra, December 21, 1967.

The President began by putting a series of questions to President Park about the morale of his troops; whether the Vietnamese were improving; and the quality of American support and leadership for the Korean forces.

Park said his own troops were in good spirits; felt that progress was being made; judged that the South Vietnamese were in fact improving; and felt that U.S. support and leadership for his forces were admirable.

The President then turned to the critical issue; namely, his judgment that we need more men quickly in South Vietnam. He described the movement of 10,000 U.S. forces and 600 tons of equipment in 17 days, ending Dec. 18. He said that Westmoreland would have 102 of his 106 maneuver battalions by Christmas. We know that parts of 2 divisions are moving south. The President observed that he was glad Park was here today for the service for Harold Holt. Holt looked at things the way President Park and President Johnson did. There are now fewer of us and we must stick closer together.

Park thanked the President for sending extra food to help overcome the drought in South Korea. President said he was glad to do so and asked about the kimchi. The bureaucracy in Washington gave him more hell about the kimchi than it did about the war in Vietnam, but he managed to get it. Park said he was gratified the kimchi would arrive starting at the beginning of 1968. It would certainly lift the morale.

Mr. William Bundy explained that the problem of canning the kimchi had delayed arrival. It was being sent as fast as possible and the VC would never be able to hold the Koreans once it arrived.

President Park then asked President Johnson if he had received a report of Amb. Porter's talks about troops on the working level.2

The President said that he had read the report with great pleasure; but he had expected Korea to respond to the need for additional forces. It had been the staunchest and most forthcoming of the allies.

President Park understood that if the U.S. were to get out of Asia, the Asian countries could not stand alone and would then wish they had fought side by side with the U.S. If President Park hadn't done what he had in Vietnam, his job would have been unbearable.

President Park then explained his domestic situation with respect to the additional forces. Amb. Porter was working with his counterpart. He needed additional U.S. equipment because the pressure by the North Koreans had somewhat changed the attitude of South Koreans with respect to sending forces to South Vietnam. He had to be able to demonstrate to his Assembly that in sending additional forces to South Vietnam he was, simultaneously, getting equipment which would represent at least equivalent protection against North Korea. That is why the requests were focused on anti-infiltration and anti-espionage equipment. President Park repeated that he had to base his sending of additional forces to South Vietnam on the grounds that this would not detract and might increase South Korean security against North Korea.

The President said we were working on Korean request now. Our AID program has been cut by a third in the Congress. Korea, Australia, and other allies must understand that if they don't put enough now into South Vietnam, the President may not be able to hold the line and then they will face a much more serious situation. President went on to say he would give urgent attention with view to favorable action on the Korean request. But he wanted Gen. Westmoreland to have the troops soon; and Park should start moving them on faith in the U.S. response. He said that Porter's cable of his talks in Seoul3 had come in just as he was leaving. He hoped for a full additional division from Korea. He would instruct that we get one destroyer to Korea to help as soon as possible. He would have his staff look into the possibility of a second destroyer. We would get the counter-infiltration equipment request by Gen. Bonesteel there as fast as possible. Although MAP has been cut from $620 million to $400 million, President Johnson has ordered that the Korean level be maintained and cuts be taken elsewhere.

President Johnson repeated that he would look next week into Korean requirements and let Park know as soon as possible. In the meanwhile, Park should bear in mind that in the movement of the troops, speed is of the essence.

President Park said he shared wholeheartedly President Johnson's purpose, but, unlike President Johnson, he must get an explicit authorization from his National Assembly before he can move his forces. At the moment, the National Assembly is filibustering on the budget. He could deal with the National Assembly easier if the U.S. commitment was firm.

President then asked what information does Korea need on U.S. aid?

Park said that he needed the equipment to strengthen his security against North Korea before probes along the 38th parallel were revived next spring when the snow was off the ground. He will send Korean forces, if possible, next March—in any case, before May, if the requested material is in Korea.

President Johnson said that by January 1 Park will know the amounts and delivery dates of the equipment we can supply; but he wanted President Park to get his men there on March 1. President Park agreed to that deal.

President then went down the list: one destroyer in 10 months, but we shall try to do better than that. We shall also look into the matter of a second destroyer. Although MAP funds have been cut 30% there will be no cut in MAP. Counter-infiltration equipment will be sent. Park will have a response after the JCS review of his request in Seoul by January 1. But President Park will target March 1 as the date for putting in his additional forces. Park said he would ask his Defense Minister how soon he could get his forces in and he replied April was the earliest possible.

President Johnson then said: That's why you've got Presidents: to make Defense Ministers work harder. It is a President's job to do the impossible. The possible is easy. It is the impossible that Presidents must deal with. President Johnson recalled various examples of actions which were initially opposed by his ministers; for example, the kimchi; sending of patrol boats to Korea; and certain bombing operations in the North which he and President Park had discussed at Manila.

President Johnson said he would daresay that if President Park had listened to his Ministers, there would not now be Korean troops in South Vietnam.

Park said, finally, if I have a reply by January 1 I shall see what we can do.

President Johnson repeated that we have got to get additional 100,000 forces to Gen. Westmoreland from U.S., Korea, Thailand, and South Vietnam. And he promised that Amb. Porter would deliver our response by January 1.

President Park then said he would do his utmost to speed up the arrival of the troops. He said that sometimes Korea could move faster than the U.S. when it made up its mind; and he would try his utmost to meet the target date.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL KOR S-US. Secret. Prepared by Walt Rostow on December 26.

2 Not further identified.

3 See Document 137.

141. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 141. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, December 29, 1967.

SUBJECT

Follow-up to your Canberra meeting with Korea's President Park

You promised to give Park by January 1 our most forthcoming position in regard to his security needs. In return, Park promised to do his utmost to get additional ROK troops to Vietnam by March 1. Attached is a package which makes good on our commitment.2 It consists of: 1. A letter from you to President Park which Ambassador Porter would deliver personally on January 1.

2. Detailed instructions to Porter which he would present to Park after Park has read your letter.

3. Instructions to CINCPAC on how to pay for this package of additional assistance. Also attached are the pertinent messages which give the background for the package we are recommending.

I believe it is a good package.

1. They ask for two destroyers: we are giving them one out of the Fleet Reserve for spring delivery and are reactivating another and will deliver it as early as possible. (Cost—$6 million not counting the value of the ships.)

2. They ask for three helicopter companies: We are giving them one for delivery in 1968, and this is difficult in view of helicopter shortage in Southeast Asia. (Cost—$3 million. In addition we have delivered 18 helicopters to Korea in the last two months and all of these will be available for counter-infiltration service.)

3. With our military, the Koreans worked out a counter-infiltration counter-guerrilla plan which requires a great deal of new equipment. We are approving the plan and agreeing to provide the needed equipment. There may be some difficulty on delivery dates but we are undertaking to do our level best to deliver as much as possible by the spring. (Cost—$32 million.)

4. The Koreans want MAP support for 8 additional ROK battalions for use in counter-infiltration activities: We are agreeing to use Korean MAP to support these units.

5. They ask for additional artillery: We are agreeing to provide one battalion of self-propeller 8-inch Howitzers for 1968 delivery. This is less than they ask for, but probably as much as they expected to get. (Cost—$3 million.)

6. They ask to set up a 5,000-man civilian logistics corps in Vietnam at highly advantageous pay scales: We are agreeing to the creation of the 5,000-man corps and will negotiate the pay scale level. These civilians will replace Korean soldiers now on logistics duty. (Cost—an additional $5 to 20 million depending on the pay scale.)

7. They ask that we support their additional forces for Korea—a light division of 11,000 men along the same lines as their recent deployment: We are agreeing. (Cost—$62 million.)

We are not agreeing to: 1. Their request that we provide heavy equipment for the construction of a limited access divided multilane super highway from Seoul to Pusan.

2. Their request for one F 4C air squadron. We are agreeing to look into the possibility of using some Korean pilots in Vietnam.

I recommend that you:3

1. Approve the letter.

Approve

Disapprove

See me

2. Approve the instructions to Ambassador Porter.

Approve

Disapprove

See me

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Special Head of State Correspond- ence, Korea, April 1, 1967 to December 31, 1967. Secret; Nodis.

2 The package was approved by the Departments of State and Defense as well as by AID and sent to Rostow with an explanatory memorandum from Read, December 28. (Ibid., Head of State Correspondence, Korea, Park Correspondence, Vol. I) None of the attachments is printed.

3 The President approved both recommendations. The text of his letter to Pak as well as instructions to Porter and CINCPAC were forwarded in telegrams 91815 and 91816 to Seoul and telegram 91817 to CINCPAC, all December 31. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, DEF 19–8 US–KOR S) A copy of the signed letter from President Johnson to President Pak, December 31, is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Head of State Correspondence, Korea, Park Correspondence, Vol. I.

142. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 142. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 5, 1968.

SUBJECT

More Korean Troops for Vietnam

The Korean response to our New Years Day package is extremely good so far.2 There are, of course, some things still to be worked out, but as Ambassador Porter puts it “these do not present major problems in connection with the dispatch of troops.”3

They do, however, want some help with their domestic Parliamentary problems. The Prime Minister and the Defense Minister want to come to Washington to see you “for a few minutes,” preferably around the middle of January. The visit would be publicly described as further discussion of the Vietnam situation. They want no conversations with any other officials and no official greetings or ceremonies.

The purpose of this trip is to move the Prime Minister and Defense Minister in the front of this problem so that Park can take the position that they have convinced him of the need for more troops in Vietnam. Put another way, it takes the emphasis off your conversations with Park in Australia and reduces the ability of the Parliamentary opposition to argue that Park jumps when you say “frog.”

State is against the visit (draft cable at Tab A).4 State thinks it: —would stimulate worldwide speculation as to what had caused the urgent and mysterious trip;

—would involve the President too directly in Korean domestic political squabbles;

—would make the dispatch of additional troops too directly a response to the U.S. President's wishes rather than the result of Korean determination to do its full share. I do not agree with State's position. 11,000 men are important to us, and if a brief interview helps Park with his domestic hurdles, we should try to accommodate him.

I believe that such a visit would be put in a better light, however, if the Koreans went to Saigon first, “became convinced there of the need” and thereupon were asked by Park to consult with you.

Although State seems not to be confident that the visit is Park's idea, Porter (Tab B, last paragraph) comments: “There is no doubt that President Park sees this as a device to move the Prime Minister and the Minister of National Defense to the forefront in coming Assembly consideration, and to permit Park himself to adopt a position of having been convinced of the need for more troops by the Prime Minister and the Minister of National Defense as a result of their Washington consultation.”

I think we should have Ambassador Porter make certain that the visit is desired by President Park. If that is the case, I recommend that you squeeze his emissaries into your schedule even though I know that mid-January is a very bad time for you.

The options are set forth below for your decision.

Walt

If President Park wishes, I will see them.5

I agree with State's position. Discourage the visit.

See me.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 1967–1969, 5D(2), Allies, Troop Commitments and Other Aid. Top Secret.

2 In telegram 3214 from Seoul, January 3, Porter provided a detailed discussion of his meeting with the Prime Minister and the Minister of National Defense on January 3 and of their response to the U.S. proposals. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, DEF 19–8 US–KOR S)

3 Among the outstanding issues was the Korean proposal to replace 5,000 troops with civilian personnel. Documentation covering subsequent discussions of that issue is ibid., POL 27–3 VIET S.

4 None of the tabs is printed.

5 This option is checked; however neither minister made the trip.

143. Editorial Note 143. Editorial Note

On January 6, 19678, President Pak presided over an emergency conference on internal security at the Korean Army Headquarters at Wonju. In public statements President Pak announced that the conference would focus on combating an expected “tenfold increase in [North Korean] agent infiltration whose purpose is all out guerrilla warfare.” The President reportedly called the meeting to discuss counterinfiltration measures and to promote a new Civil Defense Bill scheduled for legislative consideration. Approximately 160 senior officials from the national and provincial governments, the military and police, and the Korean Central Intelligence Agency attended the well-publicized conference. (Telegram 3308 from Seoul, January 9, National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S) The Embassy later reported that the meeting was intended to generate a high level of publicity “to impress NK with readiness of ROKG to deal with infiltrators and other subversive activities, to alert Korean people to seriousness of NK infiltration threat this spring, and to dramatize to Korean people preparedness of Pres. Park and ROKG to protect security of ROK.” (Telegram 3447 from Seoul, January 17; ibid.)

In addition to furthering those objectives, the Embassy reported that the government intended to use the Wonju meeting to “create public climate in favor of controversial Civil Defense Bill.” (Ibid., and telegram 3308 from Seoul, January 9; ibid.) The Embassy advised that the pending bill was “almost unanimously condemned by press and academic groups for wide powers it gives govt. and consequent fears for individual rights.” The political opposition had voiced its intention to defeat the bill when it came before an upcoming special session of the National Assembly. (Telegram 3308 from Seoul, January 9; ibid.)

The conference produced a revised counterinfiltration plan establishing interagency control under the overall authority of provincial governors and the Prime Minister to meet specific threats. According to the Prime Minister, the program would advance Korean interests in “maintaining civilian control over counter-infiltration operations” and in “limiting use of troops and their contact with local population during operations.” (Telegram 3447 from Seoul, January 17; ibid.) In the days following the conference the Minister of National Defense outlined to the Korean press additional counterinfiltration measures, including creating new rapid-response teams and helicopter and patrol-boat units, installing new radar systems, as well as constructing a fence across and defoliating the DMZ. (Telegrams 3350 and 3476 from Seoul, January 11 and 18, respectively; both ibid.)

144. Editorial Note 144. Editorial Note

In the late evening hours of January 21, 1968, approximately 30 well-trained and well-armed North Korean infiltrators perpetrated an attack on the Blue House, killing several South Koreans civilians and members of the Korean National Police. At least five North Koreans were killed by defensive gunfire, and at least two were captured and taken into custody. (Telegram 3532 from Seoul, January 22; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S) According to an excerpt of the interrogation of one of the infiltrators, the mission was to enter the Blue House, to kill the security forces encountered, “to chop off President Pak Chung Hee's head and to shoot to death his key subordinates in that building.” (Telegram 3649 from Seoul, January 26; ibid.) The United Nations Command responded by immediately calling for a meeting of the Military Armistice Commission to protest the action. That meeting was scheduled for January 23. (Telegram 3532 from Seoul, January 22; ibid.) Hostile encounters between North Koreans and combined United Nations and Republic of Korea forces continued for several days after the incident at points along the Demilitarized Zone. Documentation concerning those encounters is ibid.

Less than 48 hours after the raid on the Blue House, North Korean forces seized the U.S. intelligence-gathering vessel USS Pueblo on January 23 and arrested its crew. The United States protested the incidents at the UN Security Council and met with North Korean representatives at the Military Armistice Commission in Panmunjom in an attempt to gain release of the ship and crew. Documentation focusing on the interaction between the United States and the Republic of Korea concerning involvement of the Security Council and the United Nations in the Korean situation and the role of North Korea in that forum is ibid., POL 27–14 KOR/UN; POL 23–7 KOR S/UN; and POL 33–6 KOR N–US. For documentation pertaining to the seizure of the Pueblo and the detainment of its crew, see Documents 212 ff.

In addition to bringing both incidents before the UN Security Council, the South Koreans requested that the United States and the 15 other military participants in the Korean War reaffirm their commitment to the defense of the Republic of Korea as set forth in the 1953 Armistice Declaration. Although the United States willingly declared its commitment to the Republic of Korea, it opposed pressing the other nations to do so. The United States believed, since the international situation had changed during the intervening years, that a unanimous declaration of support reaffirming the Declaration was unlikely, undesirable, and could only demonstrate to the North Koreans and other Communist countries a deficiency in international support for positions advanced by the United States and Republic of Korea within the United Nations. (Telegram 113543 to Seoul, February 10; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69,POL 27–14 KOR/UN) Subsequent discussions between the United States and the 15 countries demonstrated the general reluctance of those nations to reaffirm the Declaration. (Telegram 120026 to Seoul, February 23; ibid.) Although apprised of that situation, South Korean representatives continued to discuss their request with the countries in question. Although many were sympathetic to Korea's plight, few were prepared to satisfy South Korea's wish. Documentation detailing Korean efforts and U.S. responses to that request are ibid., POL 33–6 KOR N–US; POL 27–14 KOR/UN; POL 17 KOR S-US; and POL 27–3 KOR S.

145. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 145. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, January 24, 1968, 1031Z.

3598. For the Secretary. Ref: A. State 102967; B. Seoul 3571.2

1. President Park reacted strongly to representations made to Prime Minister to effect that ROK Government avoid reprisals against North Koreans. He asked me to call this afternoon and kept me for hour and half. He opened with request for statement of position as I knew it, with emphasis on Pueblo incident. I recounted facts as they have been transmitted to us as well as attitude we took in MAC meeting this morning. I also told him of naval movements and said he could rely on us to remain in contact with him as this affair developed.3

2. Park commented immediately on fact that we had asked North Korea for apology and immediate return of the ship. To this we should have added, he said, that we wanted assurance that there would be no more raiding of any kind into South Korean territory. I said UNC had asked for MAC meeting because we wanted to get at North Koreans on subject of the raid, and the ship affair had developed later. He could be sure that raid would figure prominently in exchange at Panmunjom though we had no precise indication from ROK Government prior to my conversation with him as to what it desired. Park said that the problem would become acute when North Koreans say first, that there was no raid, that attack on Blue House in Seoul was simply a peoples' uprising; and second, when they reject our request for apology and refuse to return the ship. If we try to minimize the affair from then on, American prestige will fall greatly as matter has gone too far on both sides.

3. I said the matter has to be considered very carefully and that we must think about rather than react immediately to the enemy's initiatives. The enemy had taken these actions at times and in places of his own choosing. He was not undoubtedly in an alert posture, and there were many reasons why we should not accommodate him. It was this which led us to make representations to the Prime Minister this morning on subject of reprisals.

4. Park said vehemently that we seemed to be more worried about reprisals by ROK Government than we are about getting satisfaction out of North Koreans. He said he respects the UN Command and the wishes of the American ally and he will not undertake unilateral reprisals at this point. He wanted to make it very clear, however, that retaliation will become inevitable if there are any more attacks by the North on South Korea. He said objective of the raid was to kill the President and his family and they had very nearly succeeded. He knows that there are 2400 additional men in North Korea with similar training and purpose. These men have been taken from North Korean Army and given special training. They are located in six centers and he would like to strike them and eliminate entire unit in one blow. He said he is convinced that this will have to be done sooner or later or they will come down here again and again, striking at many different targets.

5. Park said that if United States gets no satisfaction in matter of the Pueblo we should strike North Korean naval ships along east coast after first neutralizing North Korean air power. The South Korean Government would be glad to cooperate in such a venture.

6. When he paused I said his friend President Johnson would be pleased to have his assurance that there would be no unilateral action against the North by the ROK Government. I said we understand that he has been subjected to great provocation but that he would be measured in United States and everywhere else throughout the non-Communist world by restraint he shows in these difficult circumstances. He repeated again his view that we are going to have to do something because of the attitude we have taken in demanding apology and immediate return of the ship, and he wants added to that in any way we can get it across that there must also be assurance to the South Korean Government that there will be no more forays from the North. He is convinced that if we have to act against North Korea, Chinese internal troubles will keep them from moving provided they are given assurance that there will be no threat to their territorial integrity.

7. Meeting terminated on note of reiteration that ROK Government would engage in no unilateral reprisals in connection with this incident. I assured him that we would consult fully with him as developments occur.

8. Comment: I think we have what we want from him in the way of assurance, but if there is another incident all bets are off. I suggest you consider brief message from President Johnson to Park admiring his restraint and statesmanship and assuring him of close cooperation and consultation.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Exdis. President Johnson received a retyped copy of this telegram attached to a January 24 memorandum from Rostow stating, “This will give you the flavor of President Pak's reaction to recent events in Korea.” The memorandum indicates that President Johnson saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. V)

2 Telegram 102967 to Seoul, January 23, instructed Porter to inform the ROKG of U.S. intentions to act through the UNC and MAC as well as to enlist the assistance of the Soviet Union in urging the North Koreans to release the Pueblo and its crew. Porter was also told to advise the ROKG “in strongest terms against any attempt at action against North Korea in retaliation for Seoul raid,” particularly in light of the added tensions arising from the Pueblo seizure. In telegram 3571, January 24, Porter reported on his forceful conversation on those matters with the Korean Prime Minister, who, in turn, briefed Pak. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3 Documentation on the MAC meetings with the North Koreans and the movement of naval vessels into the region is in the compilation on the Pueblo crisis.

146. Telegram From the Commander in Chief of the United Nations Command and of United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 146. Telegram From the Commander in Chief of the United Nations Command and of United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Seoul, January 24, 1968, 1240Z.

241240Z/UK 50245. Specat Limdis for Admiral Sharp and Gen Wheeler. Subject: North Korean Posture (U).

1. (S) This is an attempt by me to draw some conclusions regarding North Korean posture from events of last few days.

2. (S) First conclusion is that these events, the strident outpourings of propaganda from Pyongyang echoed from Moscow, and North Korean statements at today's Armistice Commission meeting all tend to confirm previous reports from this headquarters that North Koreans intend to wage in earnest an advanced version of “porous warfare” combining unconventional warfare, continuously reiterated propaganda themes, psychological warfare and subversion and sabotage. The pattern seems clearly to indicate that Kim Il-Sung is a determined practitioner of the concepts advanced by Che Guevara in his article on “Many Vietnams” published 12 August 1967 in the Tricontinental, a publication of the Havana-based “Afro-Asia-Latin American People's Solidarity Organization.” There are also additional evidences that he still suffers from belief that U.S. military effort so extended in support of Vietnam that U.S. unable adequately assist ROKs, except perhaps by nuclear weapons which he seems to believe would not be used in current context of dissidence and antiwar feeling in U.S.

3. (S) The Blue House raid on night of 20–21 January confirmed in accurate detail the previous intelligence reported from here that North Koreans had trained and developed “30 man suicide teams.” Information obtained from the one agent captured indicates 2400 men in special units had been under arduous training for two years and that later raids may be undertaken by teams of company size. Credibility this sole captive not corroborated from other sources established but he has provided much information and retraced on the ground the infiltration route of his team with confirmatory external evidence.

4. (S) Current propaganda blasts adhere strictly to same basic themes reported from here over past year. Essentially the two themes are: (a) U.S. imperialists with Park Chung Hee puppets are aggressors vying to provoke new Korean War and (b) subversive and guerrilla raids south of DMZ are manifestations of revolutionary South Korean patriots and not conducted by North Koreans.

5. (S) Continuing evidence crop up in both North Korean actions and statements that Kim Il-Sung may be suffering from serious miscalculation as to U.S. capacity to react in Korea at same time war continues in Vietnam. This contains seeds of real danger if credibility of U.S. deterrent against overt action remains in doubt.

6. (S) Our estimate of North Korean capabilities and effectiveness of their “porous war” tactics is undergoing continuing reevaluation and we attribute even high capabilities now than previously given them. I am considering at the moment employing another battalion plus from the 7th U.S. division to reinforce local defense capabilities of Nike/Herc sites and special weapons storage areas. There have been today numerous fire fights and sightings of smaller agent groups in I Corp area north of Seoul, probably remnants of the original Blue House raiding team. A number of casualties have been suffered by both sides. We anticipate increasing team infiltrations in near future to include agent boat landings. In this connection, in my discussion with ROK MND this morning I found him seriously concerned at what he called his “underestimation” of numbers and effectiveness of well-trained North Korean teams. He wishes to present to UNC/USFK in near future plan for rotating mobilizations within rear area security divisions to provide 16,000 men for coast watching and associated counter- landing operations. Will report later on this when concept clearer.

7. (S) In summary, I believe North Korean pattern of operations is proceeding along lines previously predicted in numerous messages from here and as briefed in Washington at army commander's conference, USIB, etc. My concern, however, is that while some of our predictions have seemed “far out” the North Korean actions have exceeded them and at higher tempo.

8. (S) The original North Korean objectives of: (a) diverting efforts from Vietnam, (b) harassing ROK economic development, and (c) the underlying theme regularly stated by Kim Il-Sung of encouraging South Korean revolutionaries and achieving unification—on Communist terms—before or in early 70's seem to be making headway, at least with respect to the first two objectives.

9. (S) In light of above, recommend expeditious decision regarding some augmentation U.S. Eighth Army, particularly for local security reinforcements. We are also reviewing sea infiltration threat and may soon recommend that to extent feasible ROK Navy and Air Force resources involved be further supported by additional U.S. Navy sea surveillance flights and possibly assistance of two U.S. destroyers.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Events Leading up to; … . Secret; Immediate; Limdis; Specat; Exclusive. Also sent to CINCPAC.

147. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 147. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, January 25, 1968, 0325Z.

104293. Eyes Only for the Ambassador from the Secretary. In addition to UN matter for you to discuss with President Pak described in separate telegram,2 you should tell President Pak that President Johnson feels complete solidarity with the Republic of Korea in this tense situation and wishes to be sure that we both are prepared for all contingencies. You should also inform Pak that his agreement to exercise restraint while we are sorting things out is greatly appreciated here.

The President is considering an immediate decision to send promptly a large number of US land-based and carrier-based aircraft (perhaps 250–300) to Korea and immediately adjacent areas. Please ask President Pak under condition of the greatest secrecy whether this deployment would create any problems for him. Naturally, the accommodation of additional aircraft in the Republic of Korea would be worked out through established channels. The immediate question is whether President Pak sees any major political problems in such a deployment. You may also tell him that this augmentation would represent no diversion whatever from Viet-Nam and would be promptly replenished in the US itself. You must underscore with him the secrecy of this possibility and treat it with the utmost discretion in your own Mission.

Request reply Nodis ASAP.3

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–14 KOR/UN. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Rusk; cleared by Berger, Rostow, and McNamara; and approved by Rusk.

2 In telegram 104283, January 25, Porter received instructions to discuss with Pak the U.S. view “that it desirable and advantageous for US to call for early meeting of UNSC to consider North Korean seizure of USS Pueblo and its crew and recent North Korean terrorist attacks in Seoul.” Porter was also to give Pak the draft text of the letter Goldberg would submit when requesting the meeting. (Ibid., POL 33–6 KOR N–US) In reply Porter reported that Pak agreed with the potential advantages of bringing the matter before the Security Council and expressed satisfaction that not only the Pueblo incident, but also the Blue House raid would be brought before the United Nations. (Telegram 3626 from Seoul, January 25; ibid.) The text of Goldberg's January 26 letter is in Department of State Bulletin, February 12, 1968, p. 199.

3 In telegram 3623 from Seoul, January 25, Porter relayed Park's appreciation for the President's support and his willingness to accept the additional aircraft. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–14 KOR/UN) Rostow forwarded the telegram to President Johnson, noting that sending the planes to Korea “could have a calming effect there—at least.” Rostow's memorandum indicates the President saw the telegram. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. I, Part A [through January])

148. Telegram From the Commander in Chief of the United Nations Command and of United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 148. Telegram From the Commander in Chief of the United Nations Command and of United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Seoul, January 27, 1968, 1025Z.

271025Z UK 56313. 1. General Bonesteel sends.

2. I met with the ROK JCS this morning (270200Z). I started out by saying now it more important than ever that ROK and US military work closely together with mutual trust and confidence. One objective Communist actions is to disrupt excellent US/ROK relations. I then updated them, on broad basis, of US actions within bounds of cautions contained in numerous incoming action messages. I had not received guidance regarding informing them on drone flight2 by time of meeting so excluded same.

3. Important points made by ROKs were as follows: First, need for them to be adequately and timely informed on US intentions because they affect their mobilization planning, national emergency planning, martial law plans and numerous other vital plans conducted by ROK Government.

4. Second point was expression of strong feeling at all levels of the republic, that US at our governmental level had taken no adequately drastic action following attempt attack on President and Blue House. However, seizure Pueblo we had reacted drastically. They all expressed views along this line, making plain their object was not obstructive but that they were speaking as real friends of the US in whom they have great faith and trust. They reiterated nevertheless that actions taken by US in and from Korea should stress point that we view attack on Blue House—“The national symbol of the republic”—equally as important as Pueblo. They said mere oral protestation to this effect would not correct Korean opinion but that we should take immediate, tangible steps such as “air lifting immediately into Korea increments of CIGCOREP equipment,” make firm announcement of commitment to deliver destroyers and other actions which can be taken within days.

5. The third point was expressed by all in one way or another. This is importance of taking clear, punitive action to teach Kim Il-Sung a lesson. Defensive action only within ROK alone would, they said, insure continuation and increase in North Korean infiltration and raids up to 10 or 100 times current levels. Several expressed concern that US would mount massive effort until Pueblo and crew returned but then would not continue to press to insure the stop of North Korean subversive war, they feared build-up and carrier task force would be retracted from Korea and vicinity when Pueblo incident settled. This, they said, would have grave effect of ROK/US relations and only encourage Communists. I attempted allay their fears and pointed out none of resources which might be directed to Korea were being supplied from Vietnam.

6. All the chiefs seemed deeply to appreciate the meeting and their expressions above were obviously sincere and well-meaning. They unquestionably need more information on basic US intentions with regard both Pueblo incident and Kim Il-Sung's subversive war activities. None seemed alarmed over imminence North Korea would take overt large-scale aggressive action unless these develop as result continuing actions.

7. I would like to operate on basis of informing ROK JCS on close-hold basis of all intended moves we plan to make except those in which message traffic explicitly prohibits discussion with ROKs. I will proceed on this basis unless I hear to contrary.

8. I wish to emphasize, from other sources as well as ROK JCS, that concern lest US reaction is only in regard to Pueblo is widespread and serious in many circles of ROK Government and public. I concur in ROK statement at end para 4 above and recommend feasible action to this end.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Military Cables, Vol. I, January 1968. Secret; Immediate. Also sent to CINCPAC.

2 Flights over North Korea were authorized to gather information on the whereabouts of the Pueblo and its crew.

149. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis (Enthoven) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 149. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis (Enthoven) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, January 31, 1968.

SUBJECT

Service Proposals to Increase U.S. Army Strength in Korea (U)

There are three Service requests now pending which deal with increasing U.S. Army strength in Korea: 1. General Bonesteel has asked CINCUSARPAC for an increase of 5161 in the U.S. Army Korea ceiling. His message of January 212 cites two reasons: a. “To improve our capability to cope with the expected increase this spring in enemy infiltration and sabotage tactics”;

b. “To improve and maintain a credible deterrent posture to cope with the enemy's increasing improvement in conventional war capability.”

2. On January 25 the JCS 3 recommended that you increase Army strength in Korea by 8,500 to raise operating strength from 79 percent to 90 percent of TO/TD. (The 11,000 KATUSA are not counted.)

Note: Their calculations are wrong, as will be made clear below.

3. On January 29 the Secretary of the Army4 presented four alternatives to you for increasing strength in Korea, ranging from 5,200 to 18,500. The first coincides with General Bonesteel's request. The others are based on the JCS “manning level increase” concept. The Secretary of the Army recommended that any increase approved for Korea be matched by an increase in Army end-strength.

Comments

1. “Manning Level” Increases. (Please see the attached chart.)5 Keying a Korean augmentation to an increase in manning level of the aggregated TO/TD structure spaces is not sound. Last year we thought we had about 65,000 TO/TD in Korea. As the result of the Army's efforts to account for all of its TO/TD structure, about 6,000 more TO/TD structure spaces have been found in Korea. (This did not result in an increase in the total structure for which we are buying equipment. Compensating reductions were made elsewhere to assure consistency with our division force planning factor and the DPM control figures.) The Army commander in Korea is probably not even aware of the total TO/TD strength which he has. He simply uses the people he has and makes adjustments in his force structure to maintain his principal combat units at a reasonable manning level. Some low priority structure is undoubtedly “deactivated” or kept at very low manning, perhaps even cadre status.

The sensible questions to ask here are: (1) What are the jobs that the Army in Korea must do that it's not doing now? and (2) How many more people (if any) does it take to do them? To answer these questions requires a careful audit of the status of each unit and a description of its job. Manning level increases might be justified on an individual unit basis, but certainly not across the board.

2. Army End-Strength Increases. There are several points to be noted. a. We don't know how much the transient population can be reduced from current Army projections through control of leave taken during PCS moves. There are different levels possible, depending on the degree of national emergency and the inconvenience to which we are willing to subject personnel.

b. We believe that the training establishment is larger than necessary, but we don't know how much.

c. An increase in end strength would not help to provide an immediate augmentation in Korea, owing to the lead time in generating trained strength. However, steps that could be taken are: (1) an arbitrary contraction of the transient population; (2) extension of tours in Korea (4,000 men leave there each month); and (3) diversion of planned SEA deployments temporarily to Korea.

3. Whether to Increase Korea. General Bonesteel says that the enemy is getting stronger and is planning to step-up infiltration and sabotage. He says nothing about how much the ROK Army has improved. It seems inconceivable that the ROKs can't take care of themselves, at least against the North Koreans. It also seems inconceivable that 52,000 U.S. troops can't protect themselves and their equipment.

Recommendations

There are two courses of action: (1) deny the JCS request on the assumption that the U.S. and ROK forces now in Korea should be able to handle the situation; (2) defer the JCS request pending their analysis of the force structure and presentation of a unit-by-unit justification of increases.6 Enclosed are alternative memoranda for you to send to the JCS and the Army.

You asked about the possibility of earmarking a specific group of forces in CONUS for quick deployment to Korea, but holding them here until the need was clear to send them. I believe this solution would not meet General Bonesteel's request head on. He characterizes his need (or at least the part that deals with sabotage and infiltration) as a gradually increasing one, rather than one which would develop suddenly. Nevertheless, such a force certainly could be organized and quick-deployment plans developed.

Alain Enthoven

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 370. Secret.

2 Not further identified but summarized below.

3 Reference is to JCSM-53–68 to McNamara. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 370)

4 Not further identified.

5 None of the attachments is printed.

6  McNamara supported the second option and notified the appropriate military officials of his decision in a February 1 memorandum. The JCS submitted their analysis of the requested increases to McNamara on February 21. The request was repeated in November, but on November 30 Nitze informed the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the decision would be deferred because of on-going studies of the issue. (All in Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSA/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 370)

150. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 150. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 3, 1968, 0245Z.

3901. Ref: State 106085.2

1. Principal item discussed by President Park during my call on him (at his request) yesterday evening was along lines previously conveyed to you, i.e. their pessimistic view of likelihood that they, and perhaps U.S. as well, will get no satisfaction from North Koreans. This time, however, something new was added: He said that if ROKG does not get guarantee that NKs will desist from their aggressive activities, and there is another incident, ROKG will take retaliatory measures.

2. Park said he knew that the Communist side is hoping to bring about a split between US–ROKG cooperation, and that uncoordinated measures would make American Congress and people unhappy, but basic fact of matter is that unless and until North Koreans are hit sharply they will continue to create disturbed conditions and kill his people.

3. I said he knows my government is taking many steps to strengthen the position here. Whatever circumstances may prevail, and regardless of very real provocation to which ROKG has been and may yet be subjected, we are counting on full and complete consultation with him and his government prior to any action they might be considering. This was what we had been careful to do with them in the present crisis and we expect no less from them. The seriousness of uncoordinated action lay in fact that it would undermine mutual confidence and its bad effects could outlast that of any particular incident. (President Johnson's statement on Park to press yesterday just received. It is most useful at this point and is being taken to Park immediately.)3

4. Park said he did not mean to impart doubt of his closest ally in any way, but he does have worries as to the position ROKG will be in, particularly if Pueblo and crew returned and North Koreans continue their raids on the South. I reminded him of statement I had made to him (which was based on para six of reftel), NKs will clearly understand that Pueblo and crew are not end of problem and that we will remain equally concerned about gravity of armistice violations. I said I hoped his army had been instructed to avoid incidents along DMZ. He said that army has strict instructions in that sense and that we have his assurance that there will be no ROK unilateral action in present circumstances. The remarks he had just made apply to the future position, I said I had made our position as clear as I possibly could.

5. Comment: This exchange was very firm, but without heat. He was telling me and I was telling him. His remarks reflect hard line of many of his ministers, party elements and the generals. We are the counterweight to the type of pressure they are exerting. I expect our views will continue to prevail unless there is another severe raid though there is always danger that ROK unit will make unauthorized thrust across DMZ. There may be a certain amount of bad humor and discontent here later, but that should pass as we implement MAP and other programs already under way.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2  Document 237.

3 These comments were made during a news conference on February 2. (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1968–69, Book I, pp. 155–163.)

151. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 151. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, February 4, 1968, 0006Z.

109821. Please deliver following message dated February 3, 1968, from President Johnson to President Park:

Begin text:

Dear Mr. President: The attempt to assassinate you and your family and our Ambassador is the latest and most shocking act against your country by the North Korean communists. I thank God that this unspeakable attempt has failed.

That the leaders in Pyongyang would order such a desperate measure shows their awareness of what your courageous leadership has meant to your country. I doubt that their failure will bring any respite in their efforts to introduce armed agents into your Republic, and to cause as much trouble as possible.

These attacks on your country have greatly increased during the past year, and you and I have done a lot to improve your ability to deal with them. I know you have given much thought to new ways in which this infiltration can best be met, and I, too, have been thinking of more ways to help you. Several of my top advisors have been working on this matter with even greater urgency than before, and I hope to be able to share our specific ideas with you at an early date.

I want you to know that we are urgently considering how to strengthen the equipment of your forces to meet this increased campaign from the North. I am giving this my personal attention and expect to be in touch with you soon about this matter.

You have been kept fully informed of the details of the recent seizure by the North Koreans of our naval ship, the Pueblo, and its crew. I know you share our concern. We shall continue to press hard for the earliest possible release of these men and their vessel. If progress toward this end is not soon forthcoming, we shall have to consider what additional measures will be necessary and appropriate.

I have no doubt that the increased incidents along the Demilitarized Zone, the seizure of our ship and the recent effort to attack you, are part of North Korea's program to create maximum tension in the area. They may hope, thereby, to help their friends in Hanoi. They may think that by raising tension in Korea they can force us to divert our attention from the campaign of aggression against South Viet-Nam. They will not succeed in that effort. The movements of planes and ships to the Republic of Korea in these last days have been from our active forces in the United States and in the Pacific. None has been taken from Viet-Nam.

The events of this past week in Viet-Nam have demonstrated anew how important it is for us all to remain strong there and to stand fast. I have no doubt we shall continue to do so. And we shall continue to stand strong and together in your country against any efforts, however desperate, by the regime in the North.

Our mutual objectives of peace, security and progress in Asia require us to make it entirely clear to the men in Pyongyang and in Hanoi that terror and lawlessness will not succeed and that their diversionary tactics will have no effect.

I am particularly grateful that we have been able to keep in such close contact through Ambassador Porter, who has been able to keep me current with your views. In these difficult days for both our countries, it is good to be able to share one's thoughts with a trusted friend and ally. Sincerely, Lyndon B. Johnson

End text.

Rusk

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Head of State Correspondence, Park Correspondence, Vol. I. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by the Korean Task Force, cleared by Read and Rostow, and approved by Rusk.

152. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 152. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 4, 1968, 1344Z.

3935. Ref: State 109821.2

1. President Park was clearly moved by message contained reftel. I have not seen him affected in this way before now and he made no effort to hide his feelings as he heard President Johnson's solicitude for him and his family, lengthy discussion of mutual problems and finally the warm reference to him as trusted friend and ally. One may occasionally make him smile and even laugh, but it is a very rare thing to see his emotions stirred as they were by the President's message.

2. He kept me for almost two hours, during which I took occasion to brief him on the US/NK meeting this morning.3 He was greatly interested in fact that NK rep put questions to US concerning augmentation of our air and naval forces, and troop alert. He said this another indication of their preoccupation with strength and their need to ascertain whether it might be used against them. He feels they will probe to determine our intentions and if and when they believe we have additional measures in mind, they will meet our demands for return of Pueblo and crew. They will not alter their policy of deliberate humiliation of US, he said, if they do not sense determination on our side.

3. He asked me what I thought. I said it looked to me as though the NKs may be approaching something like the North Vietnamese “you-stop-the-bombing-and-we'll-talk” ploy. In their case the NKs may tell us “you-withdraw-your-naval-and-air-strength-from-ROK- and-we'll-talk-about-your-ship-and-crew.” In neither case, of course, was there much prospect of anything substantial. I said this was my off-the-cuff reaction and was not an official estimate, as I had not yet heard from you on the subject.

4. Park said we must be careful, that they had proved time and again that they cannot be trusted. Humiliation of the US is their goal, he said, and “your prestige is ROK prestige.”

5. He then took up matter of public opinion, and the National Assembly view of the situation, all of this along lines known to you, but with certain ideas added. He remarked that the NK/US private meetings are stirring up adverse comment here and expressed a preference (I would not say it was stronger than that) for future meetings in public, or, if closed meetings continue to be necessary, a ROK representative should be present. Public meetings, or closed meetings with a ROK officer present, would do much to reassure the public. Fact of matter, he said, is that ROK side of problem, i.e. DMZ violations and raids by NK, not being discussed in any forum at present.

6. I said that he knew we deeply appreciated his patience in all these matters, and his concurrence in meetings we found it desirable to have. He can see key position occupied by men of Pueblo in this problem and his understanding of that enabled us to sound out the adversary when other channels had failed. It is sometimes necessary, I went on, for Presidents to withhold information temporarily in the public interest, to face press and public criticism while they are doing so, and this seemed to be one such case. I would of course transmit his comments and, as he knew, they would command attention at our highest levels.

7. I said I would comment now, however, on the matter of a public MAC meeting. These usually turn into propaganda displays and as such cause important matters to be drawn out for weeks and months longer than might be necessary were they dealt with in closed session. True, as he said, the correspondents could be present and could at least publicize our statements. Trouble is, they usually give as much time and space to the propaganda of the adversary and we end up no better off. I would sound out my people on this general subject and would come back to him. (See comment below on advisability of trying to set up open MAC meeting to discuss DMZ violations only.)

8. I did not comment on suggestion that ROK might be present at closed meetings. We are likely to make more progress with NKs if there is no ROK presence at these meetings.

9. Comment: Please give me your views on desirability of another open MAC meeting on DMZ violations only. It is possible that such a meeting would evoke NK riposte with Pueblo statement, but also possible, if we made no mention of Pueblo, that they would take that as indication we wish continue private talks with them on that subject. What I am trying to do is find device which will meet Park's public opinion (Assembly, party, intellectuals, military) problem here without interfering with our NK contact on Pueblo.

10. It would also help us greatly if you could arrange early delivery to Kimpo Airport by largest airplanes available of substantial amount of counterinsurgency items already promised ROK, if they are presently available. We would take care to have adequate presence of elements mentioned above, as well as all elements of local and foreign press. This kind of thing, if properly handled, might also aid us in our palaver with the NKs. Please comment soonest on this possibility.

11. The excellent support you have given me has made all the difference at this end.

Porter

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus II, Cactus Seoul Cables, January 29 to February 9, 1968. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Cactus. Attached to a February 4 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson, that indicates the President saw it.

2  Document 151.

3 Admiral Smith, representing the UN Command, and General Pak, head of the North Korean delegation, met in closed meetings at the Military Armistice Commission to discuss issues relative to the Pueblo and the release of its crew.

153. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis (Enthoven) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 153. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis (Enthoven) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, February 5, 1968.

SUBJECT

Deployments to Korea (U)

This morning the Joint Staff requested my staff to coordinate on the movement of a Tactical Air Control Center (197 personnel) from CONUS to Korea. Thus far you have only approved deployment of 1622 Air Force tactical aircraft and 13 search and rescue aircraft or about 4600 personnel. To support these forces, CINCPAC and PACAF are deploying substantial numbers of TDY support personnel. In total, the Air Staff estimates that approximately 9000 Air Force personnel have been ordered to Korea. Neither the Air Staff nor the Joint Staff know how accurate this figure is or what support units are included.

It is possible that CINCPAC is also deploying Army and Navy units and personnel that we are unaware of. It is unlikely that the numbers involved are large, but they may be difficult to withdraw when the Pueblo crisis is resolved.

I believe we should keep close rein on any additional deployments. The enclosed memorandum for the Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff states that no more personnel or units are to be deployed to Korea without your prior approval.3 This memorandum may cause some delays in deploying support units, but it is unlikely to have a serious impact on readiness. It will permit us to control the size of the buildup, preventing any unwarranted increase in deployed forces.

I recommend signature. OASD/ISA Mr. Steadman concurs.

Alain Enthoven

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSA/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 370. Secret.

2 A handwritten note on the memorandum reads: “Excluding 14 recce and 6 ECW aircraft.”

3 Attached but not printed; McNamara signed the memorandum.

154. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson 154. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson 1

Washington, February 5, 1968.

SUBJECT

Airlift of Counterinsurgency Equipment

General Bonesteel requested that certain priority items contained in the “counter-infiltration package” developed by his command in coordination with the ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff be airlifted to Korea. Ambassador Porter endorsed this recommendation, and Secretary McNamara has authorized this air delivery on a priority basis equal to that of shipments to Viet-Nam. The Services are working on this requirement on a priority basis. The majority of this equipment will arrive in Korea by February 15, or by the date on which later delivery was requested.

In addition, procurement and delivery actions are underway for the following items of equipment for ROK forces. (These items were discussed with President Pak and MND Kim in relation to discussions regarding additional ROK deployments to Viet-Nam.)2

1. A $32.3 million “counter-infiltration package.” General Bone- steel requested, and Secretary McNamara authorized, air shipment of certain items in this package on a priority equal to that of equipment going to Viet-Nam. The Services are working on this requirement on a priority basis. The majority of this equipment will arrive in Korea by 15 February or by the date on which delivery was requested.

2. Two destroyers for the ROK Navy. One destroyer from the Naval Reserve Fleet is being readied for delivery to the ROKs by 30 April. A second destroyer from the “mothball fleet” will be delivered to the ROKs in not more than 12 months.

3. An 8mm Howitzer battalion, to be delivered this spring.

4. Equipment and ongoing support for the “CI” battalion the ROKs intend to activate.

In addition, consideration is being given to the following actions to strengthen the military posture of allied forces in Korea: 1. Provide the ROK Army with full authorized equipment and ammunition (probably full cost of $200 million of which roughly $130 million might be a MAP supplemental).

2. Increase the effectiveness of the land barrier across the demilitarized zone in Korea and its seaward extension (could cost up to $150 million depending on the extent, density, and sophistication of the barrier).

3. Improve roads, railroads and other lines of communication, and munitions and material depots in South Korea ($50 million could be usefully spent).

4. Reduce vulnerability of aircraft and airbases in Korea (shelter 180 U.S. and 180 Korean aircraft for $50 million).

5. Give South Korea 25–50 F–4 fighters for air defense at a cost of $75–150 million.

6. Deploy 5,000 U.S. soldiers in addition to the approximately 520,000 Korean and 50,000 U.S. soldiers there now.

7. Increase ammunition immediately available to land and air forces in Korea (about $250 million).

Nicholas deB Katzenbach

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part. A. Secret. Attached to a February 5 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson, transmitting this memorandum as well as a February 5 letter from Warnke to Rostow on the same topic. Rostow's memorandum indicates the President saw it.

2 This and the following paragraphs are virtually identical to the text of the February 5 letter from Warnke to Rostow cited in footnote 1.

155. Letter From President Pak to President Johnson 155. Letter From President Pak to President Johnson 1

Seoul, February 5, 1968.

Dear Mr. President:

I received an advance copy of your letter of February 32 through Ambassador Porter yesterday and I thank you sincerely for your keeping me informed of your views through your Ambassador here.

The recent seizure by the north Korea of the USS Pueblo and the infiltration of the armed Communist raiders into Seoul have demonstrated to the world anew the aggressiveness and lawlessness of the Communists. These acts have also arisen a serious problem to our prestige and a grave threat to our security.

I would like to take this opportunity to extend once again my expressions of sincere sympathy to Your Excellency, the people of the United States and the families of the crew of the Pueblo.

Also, I would like to express my great admiration and deep respect for your perseverance shown in seeking diplomatic solution to the problem and for your resolute determination as evident in your outright action taken in the movements of the United States forces.

I am very grateful that you are urgently considering measures to strengthen the defense capabilities of the Republic of Korea.

Mr. President,

In the wake of these incidents, we have made our views known to each other through Ambassador Porter.

And I quite agree with you that our two countries, at these difficult hours, should stand in closer unity and deal with the situation with concerted might. The traditional friendship between our two countries and the unchangeable, particular relations between our two peoples should bid us to do so.

What we should do first will be to have the vessel and the crew back and to seek a guarantee that the north Koreans cease their aggressive acts against the Republic of Korea.

These, if devoid of one of the two, will not be complete in attaining our common goal.

How long our efforts for peaceful and diplomatic settlement should be kept going will, as you have pointed out, be our problem.

However, I sincerely hope that you understand my conviction that the problems should be solved by all means before the public opinions of the world which have stood with us may cool down.

It has been fifteen years since the Armistice Agreement was concluded and during this span of time, the north Koreans have constantly threatened us, their violation of the Agreement totalling some 5,000 cases. The threat has become even more serious during the past sixteen months, culminating in the aggressive intrusion into Seoul on January 21.

I should mention that in dealing with the Communists, indefinite efforts for peaceful solution will only bring advantages to them rather than to us. I can say through our own experiences that the Communists should be taught a lesson that any aggressive action cannot escape due punitive action.

If we had taken any punitive action whenever the north Koreans violated the Armistice Agreement in the past, we could have forestalled the situation which has ensued on these breaches.

In other words, I think the situation which we are facing today has resulted from our inaction to meet effectively the violation of the Agreement by the north Koreans.

To the north Koreans, therefore, we should show our resolute stand and determination that they cannot commit an aggressive act free of punishment. It should be remembered this alone will provide a corrective measure for the habitual aggressiveness of the north Koreans.

I have already made my views known to you on the secret negotiations between the United States and north Korea through Ambassador Porter and I am not repeating them here.

Please accept, Your Excellency, my best wishes for a full measure of success in your endeavors.

With my kindest personal regards,

Sincerely,

Park Chung Hee 3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Head of State Correspondence, Korea, Park Correspondence, Vol. I. Secret. The source text, which is on Pak's letterhead, is a translation. Porter acquired an advance copy of this letter, which he transmitted to the Department in telegram 3976 from Seoul, February 5. Rostow forwarded the telegram to the President with a note commenting on the “great courtesy” contained in Pak's reply and pointing out that the letter made “a strong plea for retaliatory action against North Korean incursions into South Korea.” (Ibid., Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus II, Cactus Seoul Cables, January 29 to February 9, 1968)

2 See Document 151.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Pak signed the original.

156. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 156. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 6, 1968, 0850Z.

4008. 1. Bonesteel and I were called to meet with Prime Minister, Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Defense, Information and Chief of JCS this morning. Meeting lasted approximately one hour twenty minutes.

2. PriMin opened by saying he wanted to make clear the attitude of ROK Government, that this was the time to think calmly and consider all the facts. At present time feelings of population quite different from periods of normalization of relations with Japan or when troops for Vietnam matter being considered. The government had adopted a cautious attitude to avoid helping the enemy or exciting the people. They had let no one know meeting with US being held. (When we arrived there were at least 100 correspondents in anteroom outside PriMin's office.)

3. PriMin said closed or secret meetings at Panmunjom have been taking place. He is aware that Ambassador has been reporting to President Park on all these matters. Public understanding, however, was lacking. People believed that United Nations would continue to protect sovereignty and security of ROK. NK had sent raiders trying to overthrow ROK Government. Nevertheless meetings were going on between United States and North Korea at Panmunjom which is ROK territory. Is it reasonable that talks should be held in such a place between US and NK? Parties must abide by agreements where international law is nonexistent.

4. There had been innumerable violations by NK and only ROK is abiding by international agreements, as all the world knows. But ROK has no means of retaliation because UN Command ties ROK Government's hands and ROK troops cannot retaliate. This is far from ideal situation, PriMin said.

5. Meetings between US and NK create public suspicion. Public feels that ROK sovereignty is being discussed without ROK's presence. So far the government has been quiet in order not to arouse public on this score. If Cuba raided Washington and attacked White House and ROK then began separate talks with Cuba, what would be the US attitude in such circumstances?

6. Ambassador Porter got permission of President Park for the talks and has reported regularly to the President on them. President's agreement was only in principle for humanitarian purposes, and even though President consented in principle, close cooperation is necessary. PriMin would like to make recommendations.

7. Chong then said that if one or two more closed meetings are necessary US should try to include ROK representatives, even though ROK is not signatory to Armistice Agreement. There should at least be consultation with ROK representative after which US representative should act accordingly. If secret meetings continue and suspicion continues that matters pertaining to ROK sovereignty are discussed, there will be complications in our relationships. Ambassador and General Bonesteel should be reporting in strongest possible terms of real feelings of ROK public. Any Korean questioned about meetings at Panmunjom will give one answer only and it will be against such negotiations. Instead of closed or secret meetings ROK Government feels open meeting should be held. It is true that both sides would be militant in such meetings but people would know what was happening. They support their government in this most critical problem since the armistice. Even if closed meetings succeed in bringing about return of Pueblo and crew, there may be bad after effect. Much ill feeling had been created by division of the country years ago and current US talks with NK touching on sovereignty of the country make it impossible to predict how ROK people will react. PriMin wanted to be frank about all this. If US is forced to bow to North Korea to save our soldiers, NK would continue to try to decrease US influence and prestige.

8. United Nations has condemned NK, PriMin continued, and UN forces are here to act as police men, but if they fail to do job, what will be result? PriMin was not saying that there should be closed or open meetings or that joint meetings should not go on. The government's preference was for open meeting but if it essential to have closed meetings they should be in cooperation with ROK representatives. Topics of discussion should not be limited to Pueblo but also to raid on Blue House which happened prior to Pueblo and should be given priority in discussion. President Park has asked about guarantees for the future. Americans should know that if President had not given order against it, ROK forces would have retaliated on limited basis. If North Koreans had succeeded in hitting Blue House there would have been all-out war. UN operational control is for purpose of protecting ROK security. If UN remains passive, PriMin asked, is this the wisest course? All ROK Ministers present had strong impulse after raid to bomb Kim Il-Sung where he stood. Without guarantee of security should the ROKs simply try to prolong their existence or face up to a showdown? They have considered this more seriously than anyone else. If there is another incident should they stand still?

9. Considering relationships between US [and ROK?] basic policy remained unchanged. If there is another incident, however, ROK will have to act. They are preparing limited retaliation measures.

10. I then replied by saying that we will discuss carefully with our people ideas which PriMin put forth concerning meetings at Panmunjom and I would hope to come back to him with some comment on them in near future. He was entirely correct in saying that I have reported fully both in advance and after the fact on the meetings. I recognize that because of unusual aspects of this problem the ministers are having a difficult time with Assembly and the press, and we are searching for ways to help them. However, it was not within my authority to carry on ordinary type discussions, though I wish to be of help and do everything I could to ease the ministers' situation. With regard to feeling that only Pueblo has been discussed at the meetings, this is not correct. As recently as yesterday we had mentioned first aggressive North Korean actions against the Republic of Korea as being responsible for situation that had been created.

11. Finally, in my comment, I said that we recognize that they are under great provocation. We have expressed complete solidarity with them in current situation. Regardless of nature of any provocation which they may yet experience, I wanted to make it clear that we expect complete consultation in advance of any action they may contemplate. This is what we had given and this is what we expect. The adverse effect of uncoordinated action could far outlast that of any incident and it is absolutely necessary for us to remain in full consultation regardless of type of provocation to which they might be subjected.

12. PriMin then said that two weeks have passed since raid on Seoul. Because of their dependence and trust he would request General Bonesteel to take up protection of the country. However, it looked to PriMin that US is so involved with Pueblo as not to be concerned with ROK security.

13. Gen Bonesteel recounted at length (see Bonesteel's message KRA 0451 to Sharp and Wheeler)2 measures taken by UNC in cooperation with Ministry of Defense against infiltration and to protect country. There are many matters under consideration he said which would reassure them although it is still premature to get into detail until they fully considered. Bonesteel also laid great emphasis on requirement for complete consultation with us on their plans and intentions.

14. Foreign Minister then made brief statement to effect problem is to avoid public suspicion of what is going on, that open meetings at Panmunjom were the answer. Until now he did not know that there was any discussion of NK violations of Armistice and public believes there is none. I commented that in addition to assurance I had just given him that matter was mentioned yesterday at Panmunjom by US, there was substantial history of our statements giving proper emphasis to raid on Seoul and NK violation of DMZ, which if properly used in dealing with public and Assembly would do much to correct impressions and allay suspicions he mentioned. I cited statements in US, President Johnson's statement on television on this subject, and said there was much additional material if they would but use it.

15. PriMin then said they would say to press and Assembly only that meeting had been held and that they had made their viewpoint clear to us. We then adjourned from this “secret meeting” and departed through most disorderly press gathering I have seen here, which is saying a lot.

16. Comment: Meeting was of course stated in part to show Assembly, press and military that government telling us the score. Despite threats of unilateral retaliatory action it does not change my opinion that at this point Park and closest advisors, despite their natural inclination, recognize need to restrain hotheads, among whom I include MND. They have permitted, and probably encouraged, some turbulence in Assembly and among public, however, which may sweep them along toward retaliatory action if another incident occurs. Underlying fact that they have not used material we have provided to save their face in connection with Panmunjom meetings is, we believe, deep down feeling that this may be moment to reunify the country and that if opportunity is lost, it may not come again. President Park's personal regard for President Johnson, restraints we have built into system of command control here, as well as those we are exerting currently, have thus far paid off, but at this point ROKs need carefully watching.

17. Within day or two, or sooner, depending on how matters develop, I may give you some comment concerning desirability of special envoy.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis.

2 In KRA 0451, February 6, Bonesteel reported that the “UNC would maintain mission and operational control to stop, the highest extent feasible, infiltration through front line divisions or through sea frontier,” and would to the greatest extent possible maintain the ROK's internal security plans by providing all possible support and equipment. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Military Cables, Vol. II, February 1968 to March 1968)

157. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 157. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, February 6, 1968, 2151Z.

110828. Personal and Eyes Only for the Ambassador from the Secretary. As one who has been intimately involved with Korea since the drafting of Japanese surrender terms, I am deeply disturbed by the present atmosphere of our relations. I know that we are dealing with an especially sensitive people, sometimes called the “Irish of the Far East.” I also am aware of other moments of tension even worse than the one we have today, particularly when I think back to the Syngman Rhee period. I think I understand fully the genuine concerns of the South Koreans even though I get impatient about their super sensitivity.

The one thing which is not tolerable back here is their suspicion about our basic motives and purposes. We have invested over 33,000 battle deaths, 20,000 non-battle deaths, and over 100,000 wounded in the security of an independent Republic of Korea. We have maintained large forces in that country for 17 years. We have invested over six billion dollars (almost half the total Marshall Plan) in economic and military assistance. We have recently massively reinforced our air power in Korea and the immediate adjoining areas. We have carried the banner for Korea in the UN over and over again. You should find ways to make it clear that Korean suspicion against this record is simply incomprehensible to the American people. The danger is that it will be deeply resented back here with potentially disastrous results for both countries.2

We do not expect the Republic of Korea to be a satellite of the United States nor do we expect the United States to be a satellite of Korea. We have elementary and basic common interests and the United States has done its full share in supporting these common interests. We expect no less from the Koreans.

I assume that the South Korean press has had its attention called to everything I have said about Korea in my “Meet the Press” interview.3 If they got mad because I could not swear in blood what happened to the Pueblo during a ten-day period of radio silence, they must not be angry because I cannot pledge in advance to be a liar. I have no doubt that they have been misled by some of the excessive speculation by some American reporters on that particular point. But I thought I hit hard on those subjects of direct interest to the Republic of Korea, including the infiltration and other threats by North Korea, during recent weeks and months.

By separate cables we are sending you another letter from the President to Park and answers to other specific questions you have raised.4

I would appreciate any further suggestions you have as to what can be done to clarify these matters with key Korean leaders.5 I have just seen tickers of a backgrounder someone out there apparently held which was helpful. Keep giving us your best judgment and we will give you our best from this end. With warm regards.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis. Drafted by Rusk, cleared by Read, and approved by Rusk.

2 On March 7 Rusk reiterated this message to Ambassador Kim when responding to Korean efforts to amend the U.S.-ROK Mutual Security Treaty. (Telegram 4596 from Seoul, February 29, airgram A–431 from Seoul, March 7, and memorandum of conversation, March 7; all ibid., DEF 4 KOR S-US)

3 On February 4 Rusk and McNamara appeared on the television news program “Meet the Press.” A transcript of the broadcast is in Department of State Bulletin, February 26, 1968, pp. 261–272.

4 See Documents 158 and 159.

5  Porter responded by stating that the Embassy continued “to hammer home thoughts you expressed,” but was handicapped because South Korean “leaders do not yet display much political sophistication and allow themselves to be whipsawed even by elements in their own party and of course by the press.” Porter further noted that distorted or erroneous press reports coming from the United States merely compounded the problem. (Telegram 4034 from Seoul, February 7; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

158. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 158. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, February 7, 1968, 0603Z.

111263. Joint State-Defense Message. Ref: A. Seoul 3976;2 B. Seoul 3971.3

1. Ref. B and similar messages from General Bonesteel leave little room for doubt that prompt and effective measures must be taken to allay public and official ROK suspicions that US engaged in double dealing with North Korea.

2. We must convince ROKG officials that Pueblo seizure and North Korean raids against ROK, while part of one overall problem, must be dealt with by different measures. Possibility that immediate problem of release of Pueblo and crew can be obtained through private negotiations must be exhaustively explored. On the other hand, we cannot reasonably expect North Korean acts of aggression against ROK to be deterred either by private negotiations or by public harangues in MAC. The appropriate measures for this purpose are those which will visibly strengthen ROK military posture and ability to repel and punish infiltrators.

3. To get this distinction across to Park we are transmitting septel text of another personal letter from President Johnson. This letter, in addition to summarizing previous offers of additional military equipment made in connection with the possible deployment of additional ROK forces to Vietnam, informs Park of President Johnson's decision on the general magnitude of MAP augmentation.

4. FYI. We want this new $100 million package to consist of items which will have the greatest psychological and political impact on ROKG and its public (as well as on North Koreans). General Bonesteel is requested to consider whether a squadron of eighteen F–4's would be an effective way to accomplish this objective. Such squadron, with ground equipment, spares and pilot training, would cost about $60 million. Other items we have in mind include additional F–5's, SAM missile equipment, patrol and swift craft naval vessels, combat and other vehicles and self-propelled artillery. The availability of equipment should be kept in mind in the preparation of this list. We do not propose to divert any significant amounts from Viet-Nam. This submission should be coordinated with the Embassy. [End FYI.]

5. In presenting text of letter to Park you should also say that if he wishes you and General Bonesteel will be glad to discuss with key ROK officials, employing general line of argument set forth in para. two above, and stressing significance of additional military assistance offered in President Johnson's letter.

6. It seems from here that for maximum political benefit this info should be announced in ROK. The announcement could be made by Park himself in a statement, or jointly by USG and ROKG in Seoul. We leave this to you to work out, but we would like to clear text of any joint announcement here and in any event arrange coordinated release times.

7. New subject. Enterprise task group has been ordered and is moving southward through Korea Straits to area only 12 hours sailing time from former position. USSR will presumably report this movement to Pyongyang. Timing of this movement is calculated to give impression to North Korea that US prepared to ease off some pressure even while talks in progress. You should inform Park of this negotiating gambit.

8. Final Caveat: You should convey to Park in whatever words you find appropriate that loose talk in Korea about pulling back some forces from Vietnam has not been well received here. We cannot believe that any serious consideration is being given to such a move by responsible officials, especially in the face of this new grant of aid and our augmented presence in Korea, and we want Park's reassurance that there will be no such move.4

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Also sent to CINCPAC and repeated to COMUS/K. Drafted by Doherty, cleared by Warnke and Bromley Smith, and approved by Walsh. Smith submitted drafts of this telegram and Document 159 to the President, who approved both drafts. Smith recorded the President's reservation to this telegram: “President asked that Porter make clear to Park that arms package et al. is linked to keeping Korean contribution to South Vietnam effort unchanged. Berger informed and will revise second cable—i.e., instructions to Porter. With this change, both cables cleared. BKS” (Memorandum from Smith to Johnson, February 6; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Miscellaneous, Vol. I. Secret)

2 See footnote 1, Document 155.

3 In telegram 3971 from Seoul, February 5, Porter discussed the apprehension in Korea about the U.S. approach to North Korea in an attempt to gain the release of the Pueblo crew and the fear that the United States would withdraw the augmented forces once that issue was resolved. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

4  This paragraph was added to satisfy the President's instructions. Porter broached the subject during a meeting with Pak on February 8, but failed to receive reassurances from him that talk of a troop withdrawal would be rebutted by high ROK officials. The Prime Minister later informed Porter of his statement to the National Assembly that such a step was not government policy and assured Porter that the government had no intention of taking such action. (Telegram 4088 from Seoul, February 8; Ibid.)

Printed from an unsigned copy.

159. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 159. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, February 7, 1968, 0619Z.

111264. You are authorized convey following message from President Johnson to President Park: “Dear Mr. President:

Ambassador Porter has transmitted to me the text of your thoughtful letter of February 5.2

He has also given me your views, expressed orally to him, on the conduct of the negotiations between the United Nations Command and the North Korean Senior Members of the Military Armistice Commission.

I am keenly aware of your desire that the Pueblo seizure and ROK complaints against North Korea not be treated as unrelated matters. I agree fully that a solution of the one without a solution of the other would be incomplete. I would like, therefore, to give you my further views as to how the two problems should be related. I believe that we can separate the short question of negotiating tactics from the longer run and continuing problem of ensuring the security of the Republic of Korea against attack from the north.

First, let me refer to the negotiating problem. Delicate negotiations of this kind cannot hope to succeed if conducted in public; they would degenerate to the level of propaganda exchanges characteristic of Military Armistice Commission meetings in the past.

We do not object in principle to your other suggestion, that the UNC Senior Member be joined by a ROK member in future meetings with the North Korean Senior Member; however, we doubt very much that the North Korean side would agree, and we do not wish to risk a breakdown in these discussions.

At the same time, I realize that the method of private discussions between the UNC and the North Korean Senior Members has created a political and public relations problem for you. The Korean public, the press, government officials, military officers and even members of your cabinet, have concluded that the US is engaging in those private discussions in order to reach an agreement on the problem of the Pueblo seizure separately and to neglect the broader range of problems posed for the Republic of Korea by North Korean violations of the Armistice Agreement.

Our reasons for wanting private discussions, moreover, are not easy to explain to the Korean public, and they do not suffice to allay the suspicions that are mounting and that threaten to impair our usually close and friendly cooperation. It is clearly not enough for your government and mine to explain that the success of the current negotiations for the release of the Pueblo and crew will depend on secrecy. It is important that the immediate problem of the Pueblo seizure and the longer-run problem of ensuring the security of the Republic of Korea against attack from the north be presented in somewhat different perspectives.

The seizure of the Pueblo presents an immediate challenge to the United States which must be dealt with promptly and decisively. The measures to deal with this problem are not necessarily the same as the measures to deal with North Korean aggressive actions against the Republic of Korea. The United States will not, I assure you, humiliate itself or the ROKG to obtain redress. But we cannot leave unexplored the possibility that secret negotiations, against the backdrop of increased military strength in the area, will achieve our immediate goal.

Unlike the Pueblo problem, for which we must have an immediate solution, the security of the Republic of Korea against attack is a continuing problem. It will still exist after the Pueblo and its crew have been released. It will not be solved by angry words uttered in the Military Armistice Commission, or by negotiations. It will require tangible and continuing measures to strengthen the Republic of Korea militarily. And if the Republic of Korea, as a result of North Korean threats against it, is visibly strengthened in its military stance, by the kind of measures I have already indicated to you, and which I shall outline in detail below, the North Koreans will have suffered a moral and psychological defeat in the current crisis.

If we succeed both in obtaining redress in the Pueblo seizure and in strengthening the security of the Republic of Korea, then we will indeed, in your words, have completely attained our common goal.

I am confident that you will see that the long run interest of your country in strengthening itself against possible attack is more important to you than the immediate problems of negotiating tactics and propaganda. I therefore want to give you more complete information on the measures I am proposing for the permanent strengthening of your military posture.

Ambassador Porter already has discussed with you our willingness to provide certain equipment to ROK forces in Korea in conjunction with the deployment to Viet-Nam of additional ROK forces. The equipment includes.

1. A $32 million counterinfiltration ‘package' which was jointly devised by your Chiefs of Staff and General Bonesteel. Certain key items in this counterinfiltration package have been authorized for air delivery and many of these items will arrive in Korea within the next 15 days.

2. Two additional destroyers for the ROK Navy, one of which will come from the active US Navy fleet. This destroyer is now undergoing overhaul, and will be delivered to the ROK Navy no later than April 30. The other is being activated from the US Navy reserve fleet and will be delivered after overhaul in 12 months or less.

3. A self-propelled 8 in. Howitzer artillery battalion.

4. A company of 12 UH–1–D helicopters.

In order to provide new programs of help, I have decided to increase military assistance to your forces in the current fiscal year by an additional $100 million.3 This further amount will fund other items of equipment which should leave no doubt either in the minds of your people or in those of the North Koreans of our determination to see that you are in an even stronger position to withstand and repel further aggressive acts they might contemplate.

I trust, Mr. President, that the foregoing will amplify and support my previous assurances to you that my government's vital concern for the security of your country is undiminished. I hope that with this tangible evidence of support you will redouble your efforts to allay the suspicions of some of your countrymen that in the current crisis the United States is selfishly pursuing its own ends and neglecting its long standing commitments to the people and the government of the Republic of Korea.

Ambassador Porter and General Bonesteel stand ready, I am sure, to assist in this effort through their normal channels to the appropriate officials of your government.

With my warmest personal regards,

Sincerely,

Lyndon B. Johnson 4

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Text received from the White House, cleared by Smith and approved by Walsh.

2  Document 155.

3 On February 8 President Johnson requested Congress approve the additional funds as part of his foreign aid program for FY 1969; see Department of State Bulletin, March 4, 1968, pp. 322–329.

4 Printed from an unsigned copy.

160. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 160. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Seoul, February 7, 1968, 0945Z.

KRA 474. Further to my report on ROK attitudes by KRA 0452,2 following is gist of private meeting requested by Gen Chang, CS, ROK- AF with Gen Friedman. As expressed by Gen Chang he fears that speculation in press leading ROK people to demand punitive action against NK for recent transgressions. USG silence on actions and intentions causing unrest and loss of confidence on part of Korean people. ROK people harbor no anti-American sentiment; however, Chang fears that public pressures may cause “certain persons in high positions” to accede to popular demand. Chang concedes that punitive action taken unilaterally could spell military disaster for ROK. He told Friedman he has made this point with higher authorities on many occasions but was not sure that he could continue to hold the line too much longer. He fears he may be directed to direct airstrikes against NK unilaterally. He urgently requested Friedman make known his concern with view to urging USG to clearly establish its position versus further NK Armistice violations and thereby relieve unrest. Friedman commended Chang on position taken and assured his concern would be voiced through proper channels.

Comment: Above appears to be sincere expression Gen Chang's views but should be read in overall context of some ROKG stage-managing of incitement of ROK “public opinion.” However there is some danger that original impetus from ROKG will to a degree get out of hand just as did the election-rigging before National Assembly elections last year.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Military Cables, Vol. II, February 1968 to March 1968. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Repeated to Wheeler who forwarded it to Rostow, Rusk, and to each of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

2 In telegram KRA 0452, February 6, Bonesteel warned against keeping Korean officials, other than Pak, unaware of U.S. intentions toward the crises in Korea. He also reported having obliquely reminded the South Koreans that the U.S. was not obligated to defend the ROK, should the latter deliberately provoke war. Bonesteel described the atmosphere in South Korea as an “orgy of emotionalism,” in part deliberately incited by the government. He noted that a situation was rapidly developing “which NK commies could exploit with explosive results. If they should make one or two big raids with some success, it is highly probable ROKs would retaliate instantly and that would really put the fat in the fire.” (Ibid.)

161. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 161. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 8, 1968, 0905Z.

4083. Ref: A. State 111264; B. State 111263.2

1. I conveyed message contained Ref A to President Park this morning. He expressed appreciation for the increased military aid which he said would be useful in present situation. He is convinced that military buildup alone, however, is useless when dealing with person like Kim Il-Sung. He said American policy seemed to consist of efforts to extract Pueblo and crew and buildup on ROK side, which means ROKs must remain passive here in face of continual provocation. So far the anger of the ROK people has been contained because his government does not want war, but it will be impossible to remain passive when another incident occurs and he feels this is most likely.3 That will start a war in Korea again.

2. He had examined closely military posture and readiness of ROK and UN forces and they are certainly not ready for war as compared to North Koreans. This means they would perhaps suffer heavy damage initially but they would suffer even more if they await attack and do not take preventive measures. He has given US assurance that he would not take unilateral action and he wants prior consultation with the United States. He also has faith in competence and authority of UN Command, but lack of combat readiness disturbs him. He realizes that General Bonesteel has not been given a war mission but fact remains that entire position on our side now is such as to encourage Kim Il-Sung.4 He said an example of our unpreparedness is that approximately 200 US military aircraft had come into country and cannot be accommodated. There is even a problem of takeoff, and ROKAF planes were inferior to NK planes. A MIG–21 needs only to have a button pushed to take off, whereas the F–5 cannot start without auxiliary assistance. It is bad thing to have to sit and await attack. What would United States have done if he and his family had been assassinated? Would we have proceeded to negotiate?

3. Foregoing indicates pent-up emotions of ROK President at this point and he gave me two-and-a-half hours of it. I replied to his various points, emphasizing as I had done twice before that we depended on his leadership, restraint of hotheads and undertaking consultations in advance with us regardless of circumstances. On question on Kim Il-Sung I gave him report of recent developments to be reported separately.5

4. Before I got to subject he launched into strong denunciation of our move of Enterprise southward. Enterprise should have been moved northward, he said, with other carriers and placed off port of Wonsan. We should have announced port was closed until we got men and ship back. If this brought no action we should go in and take ship, and neither Russians nor ChiComs would interfere.

5. When he finished this aspect of his statement I gave him para seven of Ref B. He brushed this aside, saying that ROK closest ally of United States but our recent negotiating tactics are only encouraging Kim Il-Sung and creating distress among Korean people. Kim Il-Sung is a pirate and a thief, and he took a ship and raided Seoul in a criminal manner, and now the US expects to get results by talking to him. What makes US think such tactics will work?

6. I said I know he understands that our commitment in ROK is to protect the integrity and security of South Korea. That we are intent on doing, as he could see from the very generous measures being taken, but we are not going to give up possibility of achieving settlement of Pueblo incident through peaceful means. If population here is disturbed it is, as I told Prime Minister and other ministers, because proper use had not been made of all of the statements of solidarity and support and all of the evidence of it provided by United States since this crisis developed.

7. There was a great deal of repetitive material of similar nature in his remarks, and he made a special point of asking that they be transmitted to President Johnson. I said the President had made it clear in public announcements that President Park's views are heard and considered and acted upon on a daily basis. And he could rest assured that this would continue to be the case. However we do expect him to understand, as the message said, that the two matters of DMZ violations and the Pueblo have to be handled separately. We are convinced that this is only rational way to go about it.

8. Interview terminated and I left President's office to find that Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs had been sitting outside with rather obvious ill humor for an hour. Shortly thereafter I received phone call from confidential interpreter Cho who stated that President, after rereading President Johnson's letter, wished to make it clear that he is against closed meetings at Panmunjom. I said I took note of this.

9. He had made no mention of this except in general terms of meetings at Panmunjom and did not voice to me his opposition to closed meetings. I did say to him at beginning of our interview that there would be mention of Panmunjom in message from President but, as he knew, I would be discussing this matter as necessary with Prime Minister and did not intend to get into it unless he wished to do so himself. Of course during message itself and subsequent conversation dealing with our general negotiating tactics he made frequent reference to Panmunjom and, as he put it, the distrust aroused locally by our tactics.

10. I am seeing Prime Minister shortly, who will probably reiterate their opposition to closed meetings. I intend to make it clear that we cannot see our only line of contact cut on this subject. Comment: We have had suggestions from various quarters that if we could accept ROK officer at Panmunjom, not to participate but for show purposes, this would do much to allay their suspicions and would help with public. I am not certain of value of this argument because underlying all the heaving about is something else which we have described to you, which is their hungering desire, which Park shares, to close with the North Koreans. However, if you feel you can authorize this on an absolutely non-veto, non-delay basis, I would like to offer it to them.

11. Your Ref B suggests meeting be set up tomorrow. We can do this but I would like your comments on this message if possible before proceeding because it is quite possible that we may be approaching showdown stage with ROKs on issue of closed meetings at Panmunjom.

12. On most important matter of restraining ROKs, we may well be at point where we should repeat injunction to Syngman Rhee who at one time also felt need to go north. There is enough danger now without more provocation from NKs but situation will become very much worse if that happens.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Nodis; Cactus. President Johnson was given a typed copy of this telegram along with a February 8 memorandum from Rostow, who noted that the message “indicates the depth of our problem with the South Koreans.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus II, Cactus Seoul Cables, January 29 to February 9, 1968)

2  Documents 159 and 158.

3 General Bonesteel reported on his seemingly effective efforts to persuade the ROK Joint Chiefs of the “unwisdom of a unilateral, uncoordinated, rash action taken in anger by ROKs alone,” but added that he remained unconvinced that the “emotional reaction from top ROKs can entirely be controlled.” (Telegram KRA 0490 from Seoul, February 8; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Military Cables, Vol. II, February 1968 to March 1968)

4  Bonesteel recommended that U.S. and ROK military forces begin considering ways to improve vulnerabilities, such as constructing additional airfields in more secure locations, and examining ways “to insure North Korea cannot continue to enjoy complete sanctuary in its territory if it engages further in suicide-team raids against ROK.” He commented that “if we can develop a ROK ‘porous war' totally black method of insuring no sanctuary for NK held under joint US/ROK control, this would really face up to gut problem remaining between U.S. and ROK has many things to recommend it.” (Ibid.)

5 Not further identified.

162. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 162. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 8, 1968, 1114Z.

4087. Ref: Seoul 4083.2

1. Prime Minister requested me to call this afternoon. Foreign Minister and PriMin's Principal Secretary Hong also present. This meeting revolved almost entirely around their pleas to save their face through some kind of arrangement assuring ROK presence at Panmunjom private meetings. I told them that we cannot risk having this channel cut off, and we felt quite certain that NK's would refuse to participate if we insisted on ROK presence. Instead of urging something of this kind they should be taking lead with all the material we had furnished to face their Assembly and form press opinion. It seemed incredible that fact that we wished to use only channel available to us to try to get release of crew and Pueblo should cause such a stir in ROK and I told Chong we looking directly to him and his colleagues to get matters back in hand. We would all find ourselves in much worse condition if we tried to introduce ROK representative into closed meetings there and encountered as a result NK refusal to meet.3

2. They inquired about Secretaries meetings and I said these are called as they seem necessary. Could we call one? I said I would look into it. They apparently draw some comfort from fact that ROK representative is present at such meetings.

3. Prime Minister said that we could really turn heat off of this issue here if we would consider distinguished special envoy coming directly from President Johnson. I knew they were thinking in this vein, which was reason I mentioned subject in my 4008 (not Cactus).4 I said I did not like the atmosphere here at this point and there would be little purpose in having such a visitor encounter demonstrations, hostile press comment and the like. Chong was most vehement in his assurance that there would be no problem of this nature, he and Foreign Minister reiterating time and again that a high-level visitor would solve the problem.

4. These ministers displayed none of the tough attitude I encountered in President Park earlier in day. They did not touch on any aspect of need for military measures against the North, being solely concerned with drubbing they are receiving from Assembly and press.

5. It is true that announcement of high-level visitor would preoccupy Assembly and press as we proceed with our closed meetings at Panmunjom during next few days. I am unable to assess at this point what lasting value it might have. If things worsen here, it could very well be of great assistance to us to have President Park and his friends told what consequences of any uncoordinated action against the north would be. On balance I favor such a visit provided a prestigious public figure would be available to make it.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2  Document 161.

3 The evening of February 8 the Presidential Secretary phoned the Embassy and “indicated reluctant recognition of fact that closed meetings at Panmunjom must go on.” Porter thought the call, coupled with his meetings, indicated that the Koreans were ready to accept the situation. (Telegram 4090 from Seoul, February 8; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

4  Document 156.

163. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 163. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Washington, February 8, 1968.

[Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1304, Korea 471.61. Top Secret. 1 page of source text not declassified.]

164. Editorial Note 164. Editorial Note

On February 8, 1968, Ambassador Porter received instructions from the Department of State to “inform President Pak in confidence that we are giving urgent consideration to sending an envoy to talk with him.” (Telegram 112452 to Seoul, February 8; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IIa, Cactus Seoul Cables, February 10 to February 28, 1968) The action was in response to a request made by Korean Foreign Minister Choi through Ambassador Kim to Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Berger on January 31. The Foreign Minister believed that by sending a special presidential envoy to Korea to address the crises brought on by the Blue House raid and the seizure of the USS Pueblo the United States would demonstrate its commitment to South Korea and affirm the strength of the bilateral relationship. (Memorandum of conversation, January 31; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US) When informing the United States Embassy in Seoul of this conversation, Deputy Assistant Secretary Berger noted the Department of State's initial reluctance to send an envoy out of concern that the move “would arouse wide speculation as to why he was sent and why normal channels were to be reinforced, and even rumors that we contemplating military action.” (Telegram 109068 to Seoul, February 2; ibid., POL 7 US) Ambassador Porter also expressed reservations, noting that sending an envoy to Korea presented no clear advantage to the United States. (Telegram 3902 from Seoul, February 3; ibid., POL 7 US)

Although the South Korean request initially received a cool reception, the Department of State and the White House continued to consider the request as events unfolded within Korea. In telegram 120315 to Tokyo, February 24, briefing the Ambassador on a possible mission, the Department noted that the raid on the Blue House followed by the Pueblo incident had “caused consternation within the ROK and emotional fury on the part of the ROKG leadership, particularly President Park, who became increasingly obsessed with the desire to strike back across the DMZ.” U.S. diplomatic efforts to address the crises in the United Nations and through the Military Armistice Commission caused the South Korean leaders to view U.S. intentions with increasing suspicion. Within a short period of time relations between the United States and the Republic of Korea had seriously deteriorated. In light of those developments, President Johnson decided to send a special envoy to South Korea. (Ibid., POL 7 US/VANCE)

On February 9 President Johnson wrote to President Pak confirming the appointment of Cyrus R. Vance as special envoy. Vance's instructions from the President were to discuss “current common problems, to inform himself on the current critical situation, and to report back to me his findings and recommendations.” (Letter from President Johnson to President Pak, February 9; Johnson Library, National Security File, Head of State Correspondence, Korea, Park Correspondence, Vol. I) Immediately after release of a White House announcement of the appointment, Vance left for Korea. He was accompanied by Colonel Abbott C. Greenleaf, Military Assistant to the Deputy Secretary of Defense, and by John P. Walsh, Deputy Executive Secretary, Daniel A. O'Donohue, Foreign Affairs Officer, and Maria E. Gardosik, Secretariat Assistant from the Department of State. The Vance mission arrived in Seoul on February 11 and departed on February 15. (Vance Mission to Korea, Chronology, February 8–15; ibid., Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vance Mission to Korea (A), February 9 to 15, 1968)

The importance of and the delicacy surrounding the Vance mission's objectives of easing tensions and buttressing U.S. relations with the Republic of Korea was underscored by the Department of State's rejection of the request by the Embassy in Japan for Vance to return to the United States via Tokyo to brief the Japanese on his findings in Korea. (Telegrams 5513 from Tokyo, February 10, and 113554 to Seoul and Tokyo, February 11; both National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US/VANCE) In addition, Ambassador Porter, General Bonesteel, and Vance agreed that the latter should travel directly from Seoul to Washington, rather than proceeding to Saigon as President Johnson wished, so that the purpose of the mission was not diluted by other stops and issues. Because of the “depth of emotions in Seoul” and to eliminate any risk of affronting President Pak and other Korean leaders, Vance was to report the findings of his mission personally to President Johnson immediately upon his return to the United States. (Message from Rostow to Vance, February 13; ibid.; and telegram from Vance to Rostow, February 14; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Miscellaneous, Vol. I)

165. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 165. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Honolulu, February 9, 1968, 0405Z.

090405Z/RUHKA 1165. Joint ROK-US UW Group.

A. COMUSKOREA 010655Z Feb 68 (PASEP).2 1. With regard to the development of a joint ROK-US UW Group, as recommended in ref A, I asked Gen Beach for his comments. He has submitted the following analysis in which I concur.

2. The growing impatience of the South Koreans with lack of US direct action and our declining prestige as a result thereof are recognized. The question to be addressed is whether a combined ROK-US unconventional warfare (UW) planning staff and the conduct of black operations will effectively stem this criticism without engendering more serious problems for the United States. This question must be reviewed in light of other significant measures being undertaken, including the major increase in MAP, the air movement of CIGCOREP equipment, and the permanent stationing of additional US forces in the ROK.

3. Is the US willing to collaborate in deliberate violations of the Armistice Agreement of 1953, and if so, will UW operations against North Korea (NK) have any reasonable prospects for success? The advantages-disadvantages of the establishment of a ROK-US UW planning group are as follows:

Advantages: A. The ROKs have a capability in UW already developed and may employ it unilaterally. A combined UW planning staff may bring operations more under US control.

B. UW operations are less expensive in personnel, equipment, and funds (gold flow) than purely defensive measures. They are, however, no substitute for such defensive measures.

C. North Koreans understand retaliation and may slow down their incursions if successful UW operations can be conducted.

D. The establishment of a combined planning group may help convince the ROK top level that the US will not tolerate NK provocations and it may raise US prestige with ROK leaders. It may temporarily pacify them.

E. If the ROK leaders are convinced, some controlled and favorable public reaction in the ROK is possible.

F. Controlled black raids are not likely to provoke initiation of hostilities and they might forestall ill-conceived ROK retaliation efforts.

G. Possible training advantages could accrue for US UW personnel.

H. If successful, UW operations may increase our intelligence holdings on NK.

I. The probability of success, although low, would be improved with US participation in planning.

Disadvantages: A. Establishment of a combined UW planning group effectively commits the US to eventual conduct of UW operations. To plan but never implement such operations would further lower ROK leaders' opinion of US resolve. It would convince the ROKs that unilateral action is the only answer.

B. Conduct of black operations would violate the Armistice and, if exposed, would subject the US and ROKs to violent NK propaganda attacks in international media and forums.

C. Types of UW operations of most impact would require deep penetrations. The NK security environment, unlike that in the ROK, makes prospects for success very remote. (1) Experience with pure intelligence operations, which run less risk of exposure than UW, has demonstrated the difficulty of penetration and travel in NK. In 1963 all US intelligence penetration operations and support to ROK operations were cancelled because agent loss rates exceeded 50 pct. Resumption of combined-intelligence operations in late 1964 reduced the loss rate but only one successful deep penetration has been conducted in past three years.

(2) Results of six known retaliatory piston-type operations conducted unilaterally by ROK agencies since October 1966 are not known but they have failed to dissuade NK from its aggressive infiltration program. D. Because of necessary close hold on UW planning and operations, the ROK public would not be influenced favorably toward the US. Unsuccessful operations would be exposed publicly by NK and ROK public opinion would be adversely affected. Overt strengthening of US–ROK defense forces would better serve to influence ROK public opinion.

E. US operations are unlikely to dissuade NK from its program of aggressive infiltration. Agents have been trained, plans and reconnaissance have been made and the NK leadership is callous toward its losses and lack of success in 1967–68. NK will continue and possibly step up its activities. ROK-US UW operations essentially would become revenge motivated.

F. UW forays across the DMZ would cause a tightening of NK security efforts to the detriment of US–ROK intelligence operations.

G. UW operations are counter to US policy and to the current JCS and CINCPAC policy of the “iron hand in the velvet glove.”

H. ROK-US UW operations that are compromised and exposed would have very adverse political repercussions in the United States and the free world.

I. Guerrilla, subversive and their counter-type training have been in progress in Communist countries for more than a decade. Under the current situation in NK, it is unlikely that ROK-US efforts in this field could achieve any measurable success.

J. US collaboration in planning joint UW operations but without implementation would strengthen the ROKs present conviction that their dissatisfaction with the US is justified.

K. Exposure of UW operations will further adversely affect relations with the USSR and will prejudice relations with our allies and neutral nations.

L. UW operations will divert ROK-US efforts to an area which even if successful has very little prospects of calming situation. In fact, such operations may well aggravate the tension which now exists.

4. Conclusions: A. The benefits to be derived from US participation in a combined ROK-US UW planning group are likely to be of limited value in satisfying ROK leadership and public of [1 or more lines of text missing on the source text].

[B.] tion of other overt measures being taken to enhance the ROK- US defense posture will be more effective in restoring confidence in US determination.

C. There is very little prospect that meaningful UW operations can be successfully conducted in the tight security environment of North Korea.

D. Participation by US in the planning and conduct of UW operations against NK entails a major reversal of US policy without the promise of commensurate returns.

E. Our US–ROK policy, patience and steadfast determination over the past 15 years have been instrumental in preventing the reopening of hostilities in Korea and reducing the possibility of WW III. Emotional retaliatory actions will risk deterioration of present US discussions and may negate the gains achieved in the ROK over this long period.

5. Continued emphasis should be placed on keeping key military leaders advised of measures that the US is taking to strengthen the US–ROK defense posture.

6. Concurrently, ROK leaders should be warned of where the ROK stands without US backing. It should be made clear that the US will not start WW III on the basis of NK provocations of the present scale. They should be reminded that the ROK itself has much to suffer if hostilities are renewed.

7. Efforts must be continued to convince the ROKs of the benefits of enlisting world opinion against the illegal aggressive actions of the Kim Il Sung regime. ROK-US launched UW operations would risk forfeiture of the advantageous reputation that the ROK now enjoys.

8. CINCPAC recommends that development of a joint US–ROK unconventional warfare group to conduct operations in and against North Korea be held in abeyance and not approved at this time.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vance Mission to Korea (B), February 9 to 15, 1968. Top Secret; Priority; Noforn; Specat Exclusive. Repeated to COMUSKOREA, CINCUSARPAC, CINCPACFLT, and CINCPACAF.

2 Not found.

166. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 166. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 9, 1968, 0955Z.

4121. Ref: State 112452.2

1. I called on PriMin this morning to discuss with him our plans for open and closed meetings. Foreign Minister also present.

2. Chong was obviously pleased at thought we would have open meeting, which might provide photographs and new comment sufficient to obscure in part at least fact of closed meeting. Foreign Minister again declared ROKG opposition to closed meetings which I countered with statement of our need keep this channel open.

3. They pressed me hard on question of envoy, saying his early arrival crucial in present situation. For first time they seemed as much concerned about President Park's state of mind as with Assembly and public opinion. I told them that matter of envoy being considered and I might have something to say to them in near future. They then went off to see the President.

4. After their interview with him, Foreign Minister asked me to come very urgently to his office. He was alone and obviously in very agitated state of mind. He was still concerned about closed meetings and read me statement which he said he had written down at President's request and which expressed ROK insistence that we hold only open sessions of MAC at Panmunjom. If open sessions are inconvenient in our effort for regaining wounded and crew of Pueblo and U.S. Government needs to continue closed meetings, ROK Government insists that ROK officer should accompany UNC representative to closed meeting. Their position has not changed on this. The Foreign Minister said he did his best but President used “very strong words” and position remained unchanged.

5. I said it was incomprehensible to us how ROK friends could insist on a move which would close the only channel available to us. Their alternative to this, as he knew, was to face their public opinion in Assembly, announce the full consultation we had had on this subject and state their agreement with us. He pleaded that at least we postpone the next closed meeting until after the envoy's arrival. (Comment: On this last point I need to know your wishes soonest for we are withholding request for both open and closed meetings until hearing from you.)3

6. Choi then made lengthy statement on very frustrating position that ROK Government finds itself in. “We have six hundred thousand men and we are not doing anything,” he declared, obviously reciting President's line. (This was new for him. Hitherto he has been concerned only about Panmunjom meetings.) He declared President's position is intolerable and that President does not know what United States will do if another NK raid takes place. Choi declared that we should quickly “negotiate pieces of paper” which will state exactly what would happen in way of retaliation in such circumstance. He said there should also be a direct joint public warning to NK stating clearly what would happen if there is another incident. This man was so distraught after his visit with President that I merely commented mildly that if we did what he said we would be signaling our intentions in a way which could benefit only the adversary. He said he could resign but that would not solve anything and he wanted to impress upon me that the things he was saying to me might be a “last warning.”

7. Here I recalled to him my statement to the President, to the Prime Minister and to the Foreign Minister earlier that in any circumstances regardless of provocation we expect full advance consultation on any measures they might envisage. He said that President Park kept repeating that every time he mentions need for retaliation I talk about advance consultation and the President feels very frustrated. I said that might be true but we have obligations to each other which we must not forget.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2 See Document 164.

3 The Department of State rejected the request, emphasizing that it was imperative that the United States “proceed with private seniors meeting as often as necessary to keep heat on North Koreans.” (Telegram 112650 to Seoul, February 9; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

167. Paper Prepared in the Department of State 167. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1

Washington, undated.

MISSION OF CYRUS R. VANCE

Special Instruction

You should arrange for a secret conversation with President Park with only his interpreter and/or personal assistant, Yi Hu-rak present. You should decide who should accompany you. You are to convey the following in any manner and with any elaboration you deem desirable.

1. The immediate release of the USS Pueblo and its crew is required to reduce quickly the tension in the area and the danger of war. This is of transcendent importance. But there is another aspect that is extremely important to President Johnson.

2. The country and the Congress have welcomed the President's restraint in the face of this great provocation, just as it has welcomed President Park's restraint in the face of the Blue House raid. If the crew and the vessel are not returned quickly, this will not only become a very serious matter between the U.S. and the North Koreans, but it can become a very serious matter on the American political scene. President Park knows the problem of free elections. This is an election year in the U.S., and the issue could become a major one in the campaign in such a way as to affect U.S.-ROK relations and our position in Southeast Asia. This is the second reason why the U.S. must do its utmost and use every possible means to obtain the immediate release of the crew and the vessel. The private meetings channel is at present the only one which offers any prospect of obtaining release and we must give it every opportunity to show whether it will produce results. We cannot throw this matter into open meetings of the Military Armistice Commission, or insist on a Republic of Korea representative attending the public meetings, which would certainly produce a breakdown of these talks.

3. The President is deeply appreciative of the closeness of the exchanges which have been taking place in this very grave situation. It reminds him of the close and continuing contacts between President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill during World War II and he wants to keep it that way. The President understands President Park's domestic problems and he wants President Park to understand his. There is no substitute for this personal trust and confidence at a time like this.

4. We are not going to abandon the Republic of Korea when the USS Pueblo and its crew are returned, but we will remain in Korea in even stronger force than before. President Johnson urges President Park to be calm and patient, not to permit any of his officers to engage in rash acts which might lead to fighting on the DMZ, which would create a wholly new set of problems and dangers and strains on our alliance, as well as interrupt the great progress that the Republic of Korea has been making under President Park.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vance Mission to Korea (B), February 9 to 15, 1968. Top Secret. Attached to a February 9 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson. Rostow's memorandum indicates that the President approved the instructions for Vance, which had also been approved by Rusk.

168. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 168. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Seoul, February 9, 1968, 1337Z.

KRA 0513. 1. I have been deeply disturbed over last several days at growing irrationality in certain areas ROKG, most especially in President Park himself. Inputs in last day have confirmed that Park is almost irrationally obsessed with need to strike now at North Koreans, with sort of “apres moi le deluge” philosophy accentuated by our secret talks with NK at Panmunjom. You will see, I trust, AmEmb's and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] reports on today's developments2 but these are confirmed to some degree by inputs from MI sources indicating directives for planning for immediate retaliation in event NK raids, and info from CS/ROKAF that he fears he may receive orders from Blue House for unilateral air strikes, which he knows would be suicidal. We are taking all feasible preventive measures, which cannot be 100 percent, and I feel, or at least hope,ROK Chiefs of Staff would disobey such orders, due to numerous talks with them, except after violent NK provocation.

2. However unreasonable Pres. Park's obsessive drive may appear to Washington, I wish to state frankly that we have given him no real idea of what we intend to do or alternative courses, and so I believe we have brought large part of it on ourselves. It is absolutely essential, to my mind, that we give certain ROKs, including chiefs of services, some concept or strategy as to what we intend to do. They know we are making contingency plans, but they do not know what, where, when or why and in meantime our actions are highly confusing to them. Responsible ROKs, and I include military chiefs among these, are scared at recent turn of emotions in Pres. Park's and a few others' minds. They know full well that ROK cannot survive without genuine US support.

But they have no clear idea what we mean to do, and suspect we do not either, on next phases of action. This is not fear only of US compromise but equally that we might take some militarily provocative action that would precipitate war without their having taken even most elemental steps to safeguard their population or to mobilize their military strength. The only plan that we advance to ROKs is first a peaceful try to get back Pueblo crew (which does not impress anyone here as moving very fast especially since we seem to be withdrawing military power) while we build military power, then second, if Pueblo crew not returned some sort of action.

3. One Korean wag characterizes our concept of “the steel fist in the velvet glove,” as “the silken fist in silken glove.”3

4. Our inscrutable policy combined with Kim Il-Song's speech last night on 20th anniversary of Korean Peoples Army (reported by FBIS and on news service broadcasts) in which he says, among other things, that “situation shows war can be touched off by US imperialists any moment”—these two factors do not help ROK sanity at moment. (We can see effective psywar of nerves in Kim's speech, but not all ROKs are so “sophisticated.”)

5. UNC/USFK have studied CINCPAC TS Noforn message 030154Z Feb 684 and believe US military contingency planning is fine but can find in it no inkling of strategic concept we could express to ROKs which would enable them to know what mobilization or civil defense planning or implementation steps to take [garble] when to take care of their 30 million people, their homes or their industry. Only guidance I have is State message saying do not let them mobilize their reserve divisions at this time. I fully agree with guidance, but would like to be able to give ROKs some rationale.

6. Noforn messages we get do not seem to appreciate there are at least three, not one, unknowns in situation here. Most seem oriented primarily on what would happen if NKs took certain overt initiatives. We in USFK are not flapping here, but we would like some greater consideration of, first, what if ROKs take unilateral initiatives. Second, what if NKs deliberately provoke ROK unilateral initiative, and third, what if US actions, which we have not conveyed to ROKs in sufficiently timely fashion, provoke unexpected NK reaction. ROKs are most scared of possible NK unconventional guerrilla raid offensive and believe this inevitable if US does not take strong stand soon.

7. I have tried for some days now to express in more formal language the Mad Hatter's tea party atmosphere among high-level ROKs here. Forgive my reverting to the vernacular, but most seriously it will be very important that Cy Vance come here prepared to answer in some way the questions of what the US is prepared to do, particularly re stopping NK infiltration threat by threat of force if necessary, and the what, when, where and why type of questions including some of ROK mobilization and civil defense. He should also be prepared, if necessary, to talk turkey re unilateral ROK retaliation at this time. Finally, if we could turn the visit into a sort of a minor session like Roosevelt-Churchill strategy talks at Argentina early in WWII some constructive results may be obtained. What is happening in Saigon is not making Pres. Park any more calm.

8. I have not shown this message to Amb Porter tonight but will show him first thing tomorrow.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vance Mission to Korea (B), February 9 to 15, 1968. Top Secret; Noforn; Eyes Only. Repeated to Wheeler who passed it to Rostow, Rusk, Helms, and each of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Attached to a February 9 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson.

2 See Documents 166 and 170.

3 Reference is to the U.S. policy adopted toward the North Koreans in the wake of the seizure of the Pueblo; see Document 237.

4 Not found.

169. Memorandum Prepared by the Department of State 169. Memorandum Prepared by the Department of State1

Washington, February 9, 1968.

SUBJECT

Themes for the Mission of Cyrus Vance

1. To persuade President Park that we attach as much importance to the North Korean provocations against South Korea as we do to the return of the USS Pueblo and crew.

2. To make Park understand we do not see the issue in Korea as a double problem, one involving the U.S. in its attempts to obtain the release of the USS Pueblo and its crew, and one involving the Republic of Korea in the face of North Korean provocations. The provocations against the Republic of Korea are a problem for both countries, not just the Republic of Korea, and the USS Pueblo is not just our problem but requires South Korean cooperation to be resolved.

3. To explain to Park that we are committed to using peaceful means to resolve both sets of problems and until we have clearly abandoned hope for a peaceful settlement we must reserve judgment as to further courses of action.

4. To ask Park publicly and privately to associate himself with our view that he too seeks a peaceful solution.

5. To obtain a reaffirmation that the authority of General Bonesteel and the chain of command will be absolutely observed.

6. To impress on Park that just as we will not take unilateral reprisal actions against the North Koreans in the present, tense situation without full advance consultation with him, we expect that no unilateral reprisal actions will be taken by the Republic of Korea, organized or spontaneous, without full advance consultation with us, and to inform him that such ROK actions could well alienate American and world opinion and destroy the very foundation of both the ROK case and our case and endanger support for our alliance.

7. To convince Park that we must pursue private meetings with the North Koreans to obtain release of crew and vessel, until we are convinced that further talks of this kind are fruitless and we must look to other courses of action.

8. To make Park understand that the attachment of a South Korean to the private meetings is impossible because the North Koreans will not accept it and if we make an issue of this it will terminate the private meetings.

9. To make Park understand that open meetings of the Military Armistice Commission will not solve either the provocation problem or the Pueblo. It is a propaganda forum.

10. To make Park understand that when the Pueblo Case is settled we will not return to the status quo but by our actions in providing additional military and counter-infiltration assistance and by keeping augmented forces in and around South Korea we will display our determination to stand with the ROKs.

11. To stress to President Park that the continuing public evidence of differences between us, any threat to return units from Viet-Nam, any indication of unilateral action by South Korea against the North will only play into the hands of the North Koreans.

12. To show Park that we have played the game with him in full trust and confidence and we expect full trust and confidence from him.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret. A handwritten note on the memorandum reads: “Pres. approved & added points directly to Vance 2/10. BHR [Read] from WWR [Rostow]” A typed note on the memorandum indicates it was approved by Rusk.

170. Message From the Central Intelligence Agency 170. Message From the Central Intelligence Agency

Seoul, February 9, 1968.

[Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 91–0017, Korea 092 (Sensitive). Secret; Eyes Only. 3 pages of source text not declassified.]

171. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 171. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 10, 1968, 0350Z.

4129. Ref: State 111264.2

1. I went to Blue House this morning to receive letter which President Park proposed to send to President Johnson in reply to message contained reftel. After reading text I said that as friend I wanted to make some comments to him and particularly with regard to phrases demanding immediate retaliatory action and warning of punitive action by UN forces if NKs do not acknowledge their aggression, apologize and give guarantees for future. I said such phraseology was not well designed to meet problems of my President and I had suggestions to offer. (These suggestions of course involved considerable toning down and elimination of phraseology, and after hour and half of wrangling I finally induced him to hold letter and reconsider entire approach.)

2. He burst out on several occasions declaring that I was emasculating all of his ideas. I said all of his ideas expressed orally had been transmitted and were receiving attention highest levels in Washington, but I had to emphasize to him that it was a mistake to put these things in writing. To mention but one complication reference to the UNC automatically involved many friendly nations and this had to be considered very carefully. I left them (President and SecGen) with understanding they would redraft letter but I am not sure that Park will not reinsert phraseology which he personally inserted in first place. It may be that they will hold the letter until after Vance visit or may even try to hand it to Vance to carry to the President.

3. He expressed appreciation President Johnson sending Mr. Vance here but made it clear that he is hoping for some indications of decisive course of action.

4. We will transmit text of draft letter separately for your information. I repeat it was to be redrafted and was not signed when I was at Blue House.

5. To enable CINCPAC to properly estimate atmosphere suggest, if you perceive no objection, that it be re-transmitted to him.3

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Nodis; Cactus.

2  Document 159.

3 Transmitted in telegram 113573 to CINCPAC, February 10. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

172. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Commander of United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) 172. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Commander of United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel)1

Honolulu, February 10, 1968, 0400Z.

100400Z. A. COMUSKOREA KRA 0513/091337Z Feb 68;/2 B. CINCPAC 030154Z Feb 68 (Genser).3

1. In various dispatches, the latest of which is Ref A, you have expressed a need to inform the ROKs of our strategy in the present situation. In paragraph 5 of Ref A you indicate that you believe US military contingency planning as expressed by CINCPAC in Ref B is fine but can find in it no inkling of a strategic concept you could express to ROKs.

2. In the wealth of dispatches regarding the current situation, which are too numerous to tabulate, it would seem to me that our strategy is clear. I will give it to you briefly as I see it. The United States intends to accomplish the return of the Pueblo crew by diplomatic means without becoming embroiled in a second front war in Korea. We also hope to have the Pueblo itself returned through diplomatic means, although return of the ship is less important than return of the crew. We do not intend to take any military course of action for return of the Pueblo crew because we know of no action that offers any promise of getting the Pueblo crew back alive. The buildup of air and naval units is designed to support our diplomatic efforts while at the same time increasing our readiness.

3. You have not been permitted to discuss our strategy with the ROKs because such discussion would run the risk of upsetting our careful and deliberate course of action. When the United States decides to use its military force, if it does, you will be notified in time that you may further notify the ROKs. Until that time you will need to keep higher levels of the ROK Government calmed down to the best of your ability.

4. The United States does not want any unilateral action by the ROKs which would upset negotiations for return of the Pueblo crew or involve the United States in armed action in Korea. It should be further apparent that United States Armed Forces are fully employed in Vietnam and that people of the United States are not prepared to see their country involved in a second war.

5. I am sure you realize as I do that we have no intention of allowing the ROKs to get us involved in a war of their choosing, and we expect to control the situation to insure that they don't. Our participation in any armed action that they start is not automatic. One of your greatest chores at the moment is to keep things calmed down and under control and I realize perfectly that you are not able to convey much information to the ROKs that will assist you in satisfying them.

6. US strategy as I have outlined it to you in the paragraphs above is not the result of any specific guidance from the JCS but rather my own estimate.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Military Cables, Vol. II, February 1968 to March 1968. Top Secret; Noforn; Eyes Only. Repeated to Wheeler who passed it to Rostow, Rusk, Helms, and to each of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

2  Document 168.

3 Not found.

173. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 173. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 10, 1968, 0410Z.

4131. Refs: A) State 111264 B) Seoul 4129.2

1. Following is text of letter which President Park proposed to send President Johnson in response to latter's letter (reftel). Ambassador's comments on letter and his meeting with President contained Ref B. Following text is provided on FYI basis only. Letter was not signed by Park and although Yi Hu-rak may anticipate that we will transmit it, it has no official standing.3

2. Begin text. Dear Mr. President:

Yesterday, I received your kind letter which has given details of your views again through Ambassador Porter.

I understand your view that the Pueblo incident, a question of immediate concern to you, should be dealt with separately “in somewhat different perspectives” and with differing tactics from the longer run question of ensuring the security of the Republic of Korea as you have termed.

However, the North Korean commandos' intrusion into Seoul has given such a particular and serious impact upon my people that an alien would find it hard to grasp it fully and the indignant feelings of my people against the North Korean Communists seem to have reached the apex.

Although it is understandable to me that you are seeking an earliest possible solution to the question of the Pueblo, you will no doubt know that my personal understanding cannot be equated with that of my fellow countrymen as you may have experienced yourself in dealing with various problems such as the Vietnam war. If Your Excellency considers it absolutely necessary to have further closed meetings with the North Koreans in order to have the crew of the Pueblo back, it is likewise necessary for us to have your assurances on the following points: 1. The problem of the North Korean raiders' incursion on Seoul, as separate from the question of the Pueblo, will be brought before the Military Armistice Commission meetings in the immediately near future.

2. And we lodge a protest with the North Koreans; press them to admit the aggressive act, apologize for it and pledge that such an act will not be repeated in the future.

3. In case the North Koreans refuse to accept this:4 A. The United Nations forces take an immediate retaliatory action;5

B. And at the same time, issue a formal warning to them that the United Nations forces will take immediate punitive action should they continue to make resort to such actions in the future.6

These, I believe, are the minimum measures7 for ensuring the security of the Republic of Korea.

I know Your Excellency is concerned with the security of our country more greatly than anyone else and are taking measures8 to strengthen our national defense. This I appreciate always.

But a fact remains that the infiltrations by the North Koreans into the South have increased, not decreased, since the Armistice although we have done our utmost to strengthen our defense capability. Therefore, I want you to understand the increasingly keener awareness among my people that increased defense capability alone will not9 be complete in solving the problem of our security.

If we are to dissuade the North Koreans from their aggressive acts, simultaneously assuaging the wrath of my people, we should make the North Koreans fully recognize our resolute determination that we will not allow them to commit an aggressive act without subjecting themselves to10 immediate punitive action.

What I have so far outlined above is related to the measures for ensuring the security of my country, for which you have shown such a great concern, and I do not think that there may be any point of disagreement with you.

In summation, I am sure, that the security of the Republic of Korea rests on: 1. Strengthening11 our defense capability to such an extent where we maintain an absolute supremacy over the North, and

2. Driving it home to the North Koreans that an aggressive act will be met with immediate, stern punitive action.

If the North Koreans feel free that they can act on a premise that aggression against the South can be committed with impunity, no increase in our defense capability will give complete solution to our cardinal problem, an effective guarantee against any re-invasion by the North.12

With my warmest good wishes,

Sincerely, /s/Park Chung Hee. End text.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Nodis; Cactus. A retyped copy of this telegram was given to President Johnson under a February 10 covering memorandum from Rostow that indicates the President saw the telegram. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968)

2  Documents 159 and 171.

3 The letter, February 9, sent to President Johnson contained minor differences from this text. A translation of the official, signed letter is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Head of State Correspondence, Korea, Park Correspondence, Vol. I.

4 The final version contained the added phrase “and change their attitude.”

5 This paragraph was changed to read: “The Republic of Korea and the United States Forces take an immediate retaliatory action in accordance with the provisions of the Mutual Defense Treaty between the two countries.”

6 This paragraph was revised to read: “And at the same time, issue a formal warning to them that the Republic of Korea and the United States Forces will take immediate punitive action, if the North Koreans make resort to such actions again in the future.”

7 In the final version the word “required” was inserted here.

8 This phrase was changed to read “and have taken measures.”

9 This section was modified to read “that strengthened defense alone will not.”

10 In the final letter the word “our” was inserted at this point.

11 At this point in the final letter the word “of” was inserted.

12 President Johnson responded to this letter on February 28 in the aftermath of the Vance visit to Seoul. The President wrote that Vance had thoroughly discussed the issues contained in this letter while in Seoul and immediately upon his return had made recommendations for the President to consider. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Head of State Correspondence, Korea, Park Correspondence, Vol. I)

174. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 174. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 10, 1968, 1110Z.

4142. Subject: ROKG Plans for Vance Visit.

1. Stating he acting on instructions from FonMin, MOFA International Affairs Bureau Director called Pol Counselor to his office to discuss subjects ROKs will wish to raise with Vance.

2. He led into this subject by stating that ROKG is placing great expectations on Vance's visit, which could be real turning point in ROK/US relations. He said ROKG and entire Korean people hoped that Vance, a special emissary of President Johnson, would not let ROK down, and in this context he referred to “failure” of 1953 visit under similar tense circumstances by Asst Secty Walter Robertson.

3. He then alluded to the fact that MOFA had been instructed by Blue House to prepare position paper for Vance and general outline of joint Park/Vance communique and USG/ROK joint declaration. He said that latter two should deal with three major points: A. The question of Operational Control: He said that ROKs understood need to have CINCUNC retain operational control of ROK forces but that there should be some change in rules of game. It seemed strange, he said, to ROK that when intruders penetrated deep into ROK territory,ROK military commanders should have to seek CINC's permission to use ROK combat troops to destroy intruding forces. System should be changed to permit ROK commanders immediately to deploy against intruders, perhaps notifying CINCUNC that ROK forces had been withdrawn from his operational control for such purposes. Furthermore, when intruders ventured into ROK territory and were engaged by ROK and US forces, rules of game should permit application of principle of hot pursuit; ROKs should not have to stop south of MDL.

B. Punitive Measures: US and ROK should make it clear to enemy and to rest of world that they will not permit North Korea conduct aggressive acts against ROK without fear of retaliation. US and ROK should announce that if intrusions continue, they will physically punish NK by striking at root source of NK aggression. Not only should this warning be made unequivocally clear in words of the governments, but some punitive action must be taken next time North Koreans strike. He suggested that NK guerrilla training camps might make suitable targets and said that if they were wiped out it would not mean local much less general war.

C. US Commitment: He said that most sophisticated Koreans are aware that President Johnson has authority to order US forces into combat without explicit Congressional approval and that ROK and RVN would not exist today were this not so. ROK populace, however, suffers from trauma from Korean War which has been reopened by US unwillingness to take military action following Blue House raid and Pueblo incident. People doubt that US will actually commit its forces to defend them in case NK aggression continues and are especially concerned over language in Mutual Defense Treaty which says that each party will act in “accordance to its constitutional process.” What is needed, he said, is some flat statement in document to which USG is party which spells out fact that President Johnson can commit US forces without time-consuming Congressional debate and approval.2

4. Pol Counselor led him carefully through all the difficulties which surround each of propositions. Director agreed that ROKG was aiming high, but held firmly to position that something dramatic of nature he had described must come out of Vance's visit.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. A typed copy of this telegram was given to President Johnson under a February 10 covering memorandum from Rostow that indicates that the President saw the telegram. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968)

2 In a later discussion with Porter the Foreign Minister referred to a 1953 secret agreement between the United States and Korea of which Porter had no knowledge. (Telegram 4177 from Seoul, February 12; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US) Other ROKG officials and the Korean media made reference to a U.S. arrangement with the Philippines as well as to the NATO agreement, both of which committed the United States to respond automatically to any acts of aggression against those partners. The Koreans wanted the same type of unequivocal statement in their defense agreement with the United States. (Telegram 4159 from Seoul, February 12; ibid.) The Department of State responded that the U.S. Government had “made no secret defense commitments to either Korea or Philippines” quoting official statements that an armed attack against the Philippines would be considered an armed attack against the United States, which it believed the Koreans may have had in mind when making their demands. (Telegram 113906 to Seoul, February 12; ibid.) The issue continued to be raised by Korean officials. (Telegram 4596 from Seoul, February 29, and airgram A–431 from Seoul, March 7; both ibid., DEF 4 KOR S-US)

175. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 175. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, February 11, 1968, 2335Z.

113671. TOVAN 12. Eyes only for Vance from Rusk.

1. Please ask Ambassador Porter to show you my Nodis 1108282 as background for your talk with President Park.

2. The views contained therein are a fair reflection of the problems of public and Congressional opinion toward Korea which we would have here if the Koreans themselves are not careful. This type of material should not be used by you as a direct threat from one President to another but it should be used with great force to expose the kinds of problems which our President will face in trying to maintain our support for the Republic of Korea. On that basis, you can be very tough indeed because the problems are real.

3. If the matter of reduced ROK participation in Viet-Nam comes up, you should not hesitate to point out that that would require a reduced US participation in Korea. A ROK division in Viet-Nam can only be replaced by a US division now in Korea. Further, Viet-Nam is where the battle is, and from a military point of view the problem of infiltration can be handled by the large forces present in South Korea. Of course, if North Korea launches an all-out invasion, that is another ballgame. But it is not in our interest, or in the interest of the Republic of Korea, to have another all-out war in Korea. Hence, it is folly for the South Koreans to take steps which would translate an infiltration problem into general hostilities. It's easy to get into such hostilities but very hard to bring them to a successful conclusion.3

4. If President Park attempts to extract commitments which go beyond the terms of our Treaty of Alliance, you should state quite simply that no alteration of that treaty lies within the constitutional power of our President. The treaty stands as agreed and is the primary source of the Republic of Korea's ability to maintain itself as a secure and independent nation. It is elementary, for example, that our President cannot remove the phrase “in accordance with its constitutional processes” from a Treaty of Alliance. We cannot entertain suspicions about the loyalty of the United States to its alliances at a time when we have just lost 900 killed in a ten-day period in Viet-Nam in the course of demonstrating our fidelity.

5. Your object is to combine an assurance to President Park of our steadiness and seriousness of purpose with an understanding on his side that we, too, have national interests engaged in the safety of his country and in peace in Northeast Asia. We expect from him the same degree of cooperation that he expects from us. If we each have internal public problems, which differ somewhat, the point is that our two Presidents should in consultation decide how to proceed in a way to deal with both sets of problems. We cannot give overriding priority to his problems if, by doing so, we undermine the very basis of US support to the Republic of Korea.

6. All this means (a) we must maintain our war effort in Viet-Nam (b) we must use available channels at Panmunjom to free Pueblo and crew (c) we must act together to insure security of Korea (d) we must not take action on our side to convert infiltration problem into a major war if it can be avoided and (e) we must each give leadership in our own countries to press and public opinion in the interest of our common purposes.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Rusk, cleared by Rostow and Houdek (S/S), and approved by Rusk. The TOVAN and VANTO designator was used to identify cable traffic to and from Vance in Seoul.

2  Document 157.

3 President Johnson also wanted to instruct Vance to “request Korean permission for Westy [Westmoreland] to redeploy Korean forces if necessary; and indicate urgency of requirement for extra Korean division in Viet Nam.” (Memoranda from Rostow to President Johnson, February 12; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vance Mission to Korea(B), February 9 to 15, 1968) Rusk opposed adding the issue to those already to be raised by Vance. The President agreed “most reluctantly” to send this cable without an instruction to raise the question of the additional division. (Memoranda and draft telegram, February 12; ibid., State Department Cables, Vol. II, February 1968)

176. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 176. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 12, 1968, 1147Z.

4176. VANTO 5. Cyrus Vance, accompanied by Ambassador Porter, General Bonesteel, and John Walsh, conferred with President Park for 5–1/2 hours today. Prime Minister, Foreign Minister, Defense Minister and CIA Director also participated.2

Lengthy session provided useful relief value for ROK emotions. Tensions gradually eased as dialogue was established. Park reiterated at length themes made familiar by reports of Ambassador Porter and General Bonesteel in fatalistic and simplistic terms. While the President's sincerity was not in doubt it was evident that his specific proposals were the product of emotion rather than finished staff work.

Park charged with deep conviction that Kim Il-Sung is on path of war. The rate of violation of the Armistice Agreement has increased markedly. The attack on the Blue House designed to kill him and his family and the seizure of the Pueblo were acts of war. The North Koreans have thousands of trained infiltrators and further serious penetrations are inevitable in the spring. They intend to harass the South Korean people, disrupt the economy and, when the country is sufficiently weakened, resort to all out war. They will only respect counterforce. They should be warned of the consequences of further violations, asked to apologize for past actions, and requested to promise not to violate the armistice agreement in the future. In addition we should publicly state that any future violations will be met by immediate retaliation. All courses of action in the present situation are dangerous but Park did not believe that retaliation would provoke the DRNK to war. Firmness and resolution are imperative in the present situation. The US world position depends upon firmness in face of Communist pressure. If we are weak here we will pay for it in the form of Communist aggression elsewhere.

On the Panmunjom issue, Park feared Kim Il-Sung would delay and stall the negotiations in order to humiliate the US and therefore ROK. He wished to know what the US would do under those circumstances in order to calm his people. He was worried and displeased by the indications by high officials that the Pueblo could have been in North Korean territorial waters and by Senator Mansfield's recommendations that the issue be submitted to the ICJ. These statements and the absence of ROK participation at Panmunjom aroused ROK suspicions about the negotiations. Nevertheless, he would not oppose the continuation of secret talks providing he had an assurance that infiltration would stop.

Throughout the lengthy discussion Vance calmly and sympathetically strove for a dialogue with the President, probed for specificity, pointed out the weakness and dangers of Park's options, explained US policy, reiterated the commonality of US–ROK interests, warned of the dangers of precipitate and unilateral action, and sought for a common, satisfactory course of action.

While the jury remained out at the end of the session, the atmosphere was friendly and the ROKs appeared to recognize that we would not agree to a policy of retaliation. Despite press reports to the contrary, the ROKs did not raise issue of revision of Mutual Defense Treaty or of seeking to disengage from the operational control of CINCUNC. Clearly, however, we have much serious talk ahead of us before we will know the outcome of this mission. We will submit a draft communique tonight.3 Tomorrow morning we will meet with the Foreign and other Ministers and probably in the late afternoon with the President.

Porter

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IIa, Cactus Seoul Cables, February 10 to February 28, 1968. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Cactus. Attached to a February 12 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson, that indicates the President saw the telegram. Telegram 4178 from Seoul, February 12, also attached to Rostow's memorandum is discussed below.

2 Telegram 117405 to Seoul, February 18, and telegrams 117522, 117523, and 117531 to Seoul, all February 19, contain a detailed, five-part report of this meeting. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US/VANCE)

3 Telegram 4178 (VANTO 7) from Seoul, February 12, stated that the draft communique “will fall far short of ROK ambitions and a substantial wrangle is in the offing.” In telegram 114006 to Seoul (TOVAN 20), February 12, the Department of State forwarded cleared language for use in the communique. (Ibid., POL 33–6 KOR N–US) The Embassy later reported that “ten hours of exhausting exchanges were required” to agree on the wording of the communique, with which neither side was fully satisfied. (Telegram 4242 from Seoul, February 15, also telegram 4229 from Seoul, February 14; both ibid., POL 7 US/VANCE) The joint communique issued on February 15 is in Department of State Bulletin, March 11, 1968, pp. 344–345.

177. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 177. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, February 12, 1968, 2029Z.

113833. TOVAN 19.

1. We assume that major North Korean purposes in stepping up DMZ incidents, infiltration and sabotage, and staging Blue House raid were to unnerve South Koreans, get them to return their forces, or some of them, from Viet-Nam or inhibit them from sending additional forces.

2. If these assumptions correct, North Koreans would crow with victory if South Koreans fell into this trap. North Koreans would propa gandize that rising popular dissension in South Korea forced the Pak government to give up plans to send more troops to Viet-Nam and even forced them to bring back South Korean forces to put down a popular uprising.

3. It follows from this thread of argument that when things settle down in South Korea, Pak could win a moral and psychological victory over Kim Il-Sung, show his contempt for Kim, and confidence in himself and his country, if he could announce that additional forces will be sent to Viet-Nam. If Pak stands firm in Viet-Nam, and avoids precipitate action in Korea all that North Koreans will have achieved will be greatly heightened worldwide understanding of North Korean harassment of ROK, large increase in US military assistance to ROK with resultant strengthening of ROK military and anti-infiltration forces, and augmentation of US deterrent forces in South Korea.

4. A second purpose of Kim Il-Sung in stepping up violence against North [South] Korea was to interrupt its social and economic progress. Since South Korean people support Park and are active in informing police and military of presence of strangers, the North Koreans have no chance of successfully establishing guerrilla units in the south. Raiders are nasty business, but no real threat to the stability of South Korea, since most of them are killed or captured.

5. The temptation to strike back in reprisal is understandable,2 but it will produce no decisive outcome. The danger in retaliatory or punitive air attacks against North Korea is that they could invite air attacks against the South. If Pyongyang or other NK site is hit, what is to prevent an attack against Seoul or some other site? Action and counter-action could lead to resumed fighting along the DMZ, but both sides are too strong to move successfully against each other in this area. The end result would be to call off the reprisal policy, after physical damage had been done to both sides and a period of fighting in the DMZ with no decisive result (it would not end infiltration), or move to full scale war. None of these outcomes is in the South Korean or our interest.

6. We may in the end be forced to take reprisal actions, but they should be deliberate not hasty, and South Korea's defenses and cities should be prepared for the possible consequences.

7. South Korea has made magnificent economic, social and political progress in these last years. All this would be interrupted and endangered by an escalation of violence due to reprisals or limited war. Private American investors are already hesitating to move into South Korea until the situation clarifies. Is not the best course, therefore, to return to the uneasy situation that existed prior to the seizure of the Pueblo and the Blue House raid, strengthen further the ROK capacity to deal with raiders, and make it even more costly to the North, strengthen the military arm of the ROK, keep a stronger US force in the area if tension persists as an additional warning and deterrent, send the new Korean forces into Viet-Nam, and continue with South Korea's economic and social progress.

8. Assume you are thinking along the same lines, but we pass them to you for your consideration.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US/VANCE. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Berger, cleared by Read and Steadman, and approved by Katzenbach.

2 During a February 12 meeting the Prime Minister told Vance that “the real issue is to determine what lies behind these two North Korean actions” and raised the question of “whether the ROKG should delay making an appropriate response or whether it should ‘strike now at the source of the problem.'” (Telegram 4170 from Seoul, February 12; ibid.) Similarly, the Foreign Minister stated that the two incidents were of such seriousness as to be “tantamount to invoking the Mutual Defense Treaty.'” (Telegram 4171 from Seoul, February 12; ibid.) Vance made no direct response to those comments.

178. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 178. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 13, 1968, 1316Z.

4207. VANTO 8. Cyrus Vance, accompanied by Ambassador Porter, General Bonesteel, John Walsh and Colonel Greenleaf met for 2 and 1/2 hours this morning with the Prime Minister, Foreign Minister, Defense Minister, Information Minister,CIA Director, and Chief JCS. Session was intense, frank, spirited, and we believe helpful to both sides. Under existing circumstances each side felt constrained to get certain issues out on the table. This was done without excessive rancor.

The discussion, which was identified by the Ministers as consultations under our joint mutual security treaty, ranged widely over varied aspects of US commitments and performance in the postwar world, the origins of the Korean War, US-Korean relations, US assistance to Korea, Korean participation in the Vietnam struggle, problems of Korean public opinion, Panmunjom Communist objectives, overt and covert Communist threats to Korea, and the tactics of dealing with indirect North Korean aggression. After several hours of give-and-take, the ROKs expressed full confidence that the US would respond in the event of overt aggression and that further discussions would be limited to the problem of indirect aggression and the method of dealing with it.

Vance at this point said the next question to be addressed was whether it was possible to define in advance what degree of indirect aggression required counter reaction which of course carries with it the risk of war. Vance said he had long reflected on this problem and had concluded that it was impossible to do so. He had therefore concluded that the best course to pursue in the event of further incidents of indirect aggression is to consult and then jointly determine what action should be taken in light of all existing circumstances. Furthermore, he said, in our democracy we must operate under the Mutual Defense Treaty ratified by Congress. President can only take action under this treaty. For the moment, at least, the Koreans seemed to agree.

At the end of the meeting the Foreign Minister presented two documents to Vance, an “agreed minutes” and a “joint defense declaration.” These documents which are transmitted in septel raise most serious legal and funding issues.2 After pointing out the serious legal problems embodied in these documents, Vance agreed to study them and discuss them in a meeting scheduled for tomorrow. We intend reject these documents for the reasons cited and endeavor reach agreement on the draft communique contained State's 114006—VANTO 7.3 We would like your views by 0900 local tomorrow whether, if necessary for reaching agreement on our communique, we could agree to an annual defense meeting at the ministerial level with first meeting beginning 1969.4

A detailed report on this meeting will be submitted separately.5

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US/VANCE. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus.

2 The texts of the documents were transmitted in telegram 4208 from Seoul, February 13. (Ibid.)

3 See footnote 3, Document 176.

4 The Department of State rejected the proposed Joint Defense Declaration and approved the inclusion in the joint communique of references to consultations between the Secretary of Defense and the Minister of National Defense. The response also noted that the communique “might usefully include” a bilateral reaffirmation of both countries' commitment to Vietnam. (Telegram 114713, February 13; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

5 Telegrams 116984, 117381, and 117382 to Seoul, all February 17, transmitted a detailed, three-part report of Vance's meeting with the Korean Cabinet. (Ibid., POL 7 US/VANCE) On February 13 Vance also met briefly with majority and minority leaders of the National Assembly. (Telegram 4209 from Seoul, February 13; ibid.)

179. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 179. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 14, 1968, 0603Z.

4215. VANTO 12. Ref: Seoul 42072 and 4208,3 VANTO 8 and 9. Subject: Vance Meeting with Korean Cabinet: 1000, February 14, 1968.

Cyrus Vance, accompanied by Ambassador Porter, General Bone- steel, John Walsh, and Colonel Greenleaf met this morning for 1–1/2 hours with Prime Minister Chung, Foreign Minister Choi, Defense Minister Kim, Information Minister Hong, Principal Presidential Secretary Yi Hu-rak, Director ROK CIA Kim, General Im, CJCS, and several of their staff assistants. The meeting, which was again frank and candid, seemed to result in tacit agreement by the Koreans that the “joint defense statement” and “agreed minutes” which they tabled yesterday were not negotiable (see Seoul 4208). Although their reaction was subdued when Vance tabled our draft communique (State 114006),4 they did not take issue with its substance in part because the Prime Minister clearly intends to submit it to President Park.

The most significant exchanges took place in a short private session between Vance, Porter, Prime Minister and principal Presidential Secretary Yi Hu-rak. At this session, Prime Minister recommended that Vance meet alone with President Park and explain to him that President Johnson has grave domestic problems, similar to Park's and two President's should stand together at this time. Yi Hu-rak and Chung urged Vance to make clear to Park that he must not take unilateral action against North Korea. Such action would only destroy the economy and hopes of Korea. Furthermore, Vance should emphasize to Park that unilateral action would seriously endanger continuing US support.

When Chung stated that National Assembly pressure might force his government to withdraw their troops from Vietnam, Vance told him flatly we would reciprocate by withdrawing our troops from Korea. He gasped, sputtered and immediately went out and brought Yi Hu-rak into the meeting. Vance also made it quite clear to the Prime Minister that, if we fail to reach agreement on the issues before us, there would be serious US domestic reactions in respect to Korea.

After returning to the full session, it was agreed that the Foreign Minister would convey this afternoon to the Mission the Cabinet's reaction to the communique. It was also agreed that Vance, accompanied by Porter, would meet with President Park tomorrow morning, hopefully at 1000 hours.

A detailed report follows septel.5

Porter

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IIa, Cactus Seoul Cables, February 10 to February 28, 1968. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus. Attached to a February 14 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson, that indicates the President saw the telegram.

2  Document 178.

3 See footnote 2, Document 178.

4 See footnote 3, Document 176.

5 See footnote 5, Document 178.

180. Notes of the President's Meeting With Cyrus R. Vance 180. Notes of the President's Meeting With Cyrus R. Vance 1

Washington, February 15, 1968, 6:06–7 p.m.

The President: All of us are deeply grateful to you, Cy, for all you have done.

Mr. Vance: The Joint Communique was issued at 1 o'clock today Seoul time. In the meeting this morning, I had difficulty with President Pak about issuing a joint communique. He was against a communique.

Meeting with President Pak, the Prime Minister and others this morning2 was in dramatic contrast with the meeting I had with Pak and the Cabinet when I arrived in Seoul. Tensions were high when I arrived. When I left, Pak put his arm around me and thanked me for coming. In terms of the basic objectives of easing tension and getting a friendly relationship re-established, the mission was a success. This was in evidence even with the press at the airport when I left.

In the long run, however, the picture is very dangerous.

The President: Before we get any further, what did we do to provoke the anger and hostility?

Mr. Vance: Because we did not permit any retaliatory action on the attack on Blue House. The depth of feeling over that is very deep. It was considered a personal affront and a loss of face. They considered it very serious that the raiders got within 300 yards of Blue House bent upon killing the President and his family.

The President: Does Pak blame us for that?

Mr. Vance: Yes, to some extent, because they got through the guards.

Pak wanted to react violently against North Korea. Ambassador Porter prevented this.

Blue House is now covered with guards and there are strict orders that any plane, no matter what its designation, will be shot down if it flies anywhere over or around Blue House.

They are also angry about the Pueblo. They wanted us to take out Wonsan and not doing so was in their opinion a loss of face.

One of their guys, the Defense Minister, is an absolute menace. He has organized a very elite anti-infiltration unit under his command which has been conducting raids across the border against North Korea.

So there is blame on all sides.

There is a very strong danger of unilateral action by Pak.

Pak controls the whole country. Nobody will tell him what he does not want to hear. He is moody, volatile and has been drinking heavily. He is a danger and rather unsafe.

The Prime Minister is a force for restraint. General Bonesteel called in the ROK Joint Chiefs and made it completely clear to them that if any unilateral action is taken that it would necessitate him recommending that U.S. troops be withdrawn.3 The Chiefs took this very calmly. The Prime Minister told me to make it clear to President Pak that he can't take unilateral action. There are a few men at the top who are aware of this danger.

Pak presents us with some problems. I do not know whether he will stand still. We went into some gut issues in our meeting with Porter and Pak. We got some commitments: 1. That they will take action to quiet their people.

2. They will stand by during the closed door sessions with North Korea as long as it doesn't go on for a long period of time.

3. There will be no reprisals for the Blue House or Pueblo.

4. There will be no reprisals in the future without consulting us if they are significant.

5. The most serious thing was this. They said they will go through the formality if another serious act occurs, but the consultations will be only formalities. They will act if another serious act occurs.

There was an understanding that they would keep their troops in South Vietnam. I did not raise the question of the committed troops since General Westmoreland's cable did not reach me until after my meeting had ended.4

I made it very clear to Pak that were they even to consider removing troops from South Vietnam we would pull ours out of Korea.

In summary, the prospects for the future are not good.

—North Korea may try to get South Korea to take some unilateral action against the North to further divide us.

—There is an unstable political situation with Pak's mood and attitude as it is.

—There could be a serious problem raised with the possibility of unilateral action.

—I do not know if Pak will last. In the past, South Korea has been a showcase for the United States, but we must look at the cold hard facts. There is no longer a perfect showcase.

I would recommend that a good, small group be put together to determine how we proceed in the days ahead.

That is my report in capsule form.

The President: Is Pak's drinking irrationally something new?

Mr. Vance: No, this has been going on for some time. He hit his wife with an ash tray. He has thrown ash trays at several of his assistants and I was fully prepared for that.

The President: What does he want us to give him?

Mr. Vance: He has a large shopping list. He wants: —Six squadrons of F–4s.

—One million dollars to augment his anti-guerrilla forces.

—Four new air fields.

—Expansion of existing air bases.

—A large increase in the amount of aid.

—A promise to remove none of the air craft now in South Korea until the new ones he has requested are in place.

I told him I would pass this on to you.5 The amount comes to about $1–1/2 billion.

The President: What do you think the consequences are of the 600 raids that have taken place this year? Have they hurt the South Koreans much?

Mr. Vance: No, not except for the Blue House raid.

The President: Was the Blue House raid intended for our Ambassador too?

Mr. Vance: No. The one infiltrator who was captured was told to say that he was after Ambassador Porter. But he really wasn't. He was told that before CIA and our interrogators got to him in order to put a little more political pressure on us to act.

The President: Did the South Koreans say what brought the Pueblo attack on?

Mr. Vance: Nothing more than they thought this was part of a North Korean political plan to destroy morale and to harm us and the South Koreans.

The President: Have they asked for any more U.S. troops?

Mr. Vance: No.

The President: Did they say anything about Vietnam?

Mr. Vance: No, they did not.

The President: Was there any criticism about Vietnam?

Mr. Vance: No, they said their resolve was the same as it had always been.

Secretary Rusk: Did Ambassador Porter say we would pull out our troops in South Korea if they pull out their troops from Vietnam?

Mr. Vance: No, I do not know if Porter said that. I made it clear to Pak that he should not persist in that attitude. I told him that any talk of that would have grave impact on the future of relations of our two countries.

Secretary Rusk: If we had started this consultation earlier, would we have had all these problems? Or were they inherent in Pak before this happened?

Mr. Vance: They were inherent in the situation with Pak.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: Do they continue to think we should take Wonsan?

Mr. Vance: Yes, they went through a list of things with me that they would do if certain events were to happen.

The President: Doesn't Pak worry about what the Soviets or the Chinese might do?

Mr. Vance: Pak thinks the Soviets and the Chinese will stand aside. I told him that our judgment and his judgment on this matter were vastly different.

Pak is convinced that the North Koreans are going to try to take over South Korea by 1970. He said that if they tried to attack Blue House again that he would retaliate and that much blood would be shed and that there would be much pain and suffering.

Secretary McNamara: How about our [their?] raids into the North?

Mr. Vance: They are conducting about two a month.

The President: Do we have a clear idea of what they have done?

Mr. Vance: They have been operating two a month raids recently. The anti-infiltration units are under the command of the Defense Minister. They took out a division headquarters in recent attacks. An attack no later than March is planned across the DMZ again.

There is much talk in military circles about this.

The numbers are not clear. They have about 200 anti-infiltration troops trained with each division upon the DMZ and have an additional group being trained by these men now.

On the other side, there are some highly trained guerrilla units. They estimate there are 2400 of these in 30 man teams. They are well trained and tough, but they have been chopped up in the past. 80 to 90% of them have been eliminated, since the South Koreans turned them in quickly.

They have excellent cooperation from the people in turning these guerrillas in. The exact number of South Koreans trained is a very closely held secret.

The President: Is there any connection in your mind between the Pueblo and the attacks in Vietnam? Is there one man calling the dance?

Mr. Vance: I am not clear as to the case.

Secretary Rusk: Now that we have made a case of the 570 raids across the DMZ aren't we in a difficult position if any of this information comes to light about South Korean raids into the North?

Secretary McNamara: We do not have adequate knowledge of this.

Mr. Vance: Here is a list of items right here. There have been eleven raids between 26 October and December.

The Vice President: When did they start?

Mr. Vance: I do not know, although I think it has been at least a year.

General Wheeler: General Bonesteel had rumors of this from his advisors who are with the Korean units. Hard information is difficult to get.

The President: What is the purpose of these raids?

General Wheeler: They are punitive.

The President: Are any of our soldiers doing any of this?

General Wheeler: No, sir. It is routine that battalions go into the DMZ and behind the DMZ under the Armistice Agreement. General Bonesteel has talked to the Senior ROK Commanders about the dangers of this action.

We could not even prove these raids have taken place.

The President: I would just as soon not prove it.

Mr. Vance: There are going to be some problems. Only recently a unit took an M–79 grenade launcher with them. If the North Koreans have it, they may make some propaganda out of it.

The President: Have there been any complaints from the North Koreans?

Secretary Rusk: There have been some on the radio and at the meetings at Panmunjom.

General Wheeler: What about the public unrest?

Mr. Vance: The unrest is deep and real.

The people are personally offended. In the South Korean General Assembly, there is talk that we do not have as strong a mutual security pact with South Korea as we do with the Philippines. This particularly relates to incident response. They wanted a commitment from me on that. They feel like they have a second class arrangement. The ROKs also feel their hands are tied since they are under the UN Command.

I met with the Speaker and the leaders of their Congress. They brought this up. There is some feeling in the populace about this issue.

The President: Is there any estimate of what you would recommend in the additional assistance?

Mr. Vance: For next year, I would think about $200 million would be required. They need to increase their capability to take care of guerrilla-type raids in order to contain things rapidly.

General Bonesteel believes more can be done. In addition, we have to give them some F–4s. They must have this for public consumption.

But I made it clear that there was nothing in the woods beyond the $100 million this year.

They do need strengthening in a number of areas. The dilemma we face is how much we build them up, how much we build up their strike capacity.

Secretary Rusk: We had the same problem with Syngman Rhee 20 years ago. How much do we give him when he is having to strike the North?

Clark Clifford: I am most distressed about President Pak's instability. Does he have power to start major action on his own?

Mr. Vance: The generals would let us know and would drag their feet. But if he said go, they would have to go.

One general told General Bonesteel that he was terrified of the possibility of unilateral action, but he said that if he is given the order, they will have to respond.

Clark Clifford: This is a weak reed we are leaning on. We must watch this with the greatest care. We have got to find a means to disengage ourselves from any possibility of unilateral action.

Mr. Vance: President Pak will issue all sorts of orders when he begins drinking. His generals will delay any action on them until the next morning. If he says nothing about those orders the following morning then they just forget what he had told them the night before.

The President: Where do we get this information from?

Mr. Vance: General Bonesteel gets it. The military have the greatest amount of respect for the UN Commander and for his position.

Clark Clifford: Is there any quarrel between Pak and his Congress?

Mr. Vance: Not that I know of.

Mr. Clifford: Are the South Koreans developing their own teams?

Mr. Vance: They are called AIUs (anti-infiltration units). They have 2400 men. Beyond that, they have one airborne battalion with jump capability. They could be dropped in for guerrilla activity. If a war starts, they would be parachuted in to harass the movement of supplies and munitions.

They have teams for each Province.

Clark Clifford: Did you get any threat at all, even a veiled threat, about withdrawing troops from South Vietnam?

Mr. Vance: The Prime Minister mentioned that the legislature might ask for that. I told him very bluntly that we would remove our troops from South Korea if that happened. The Prime Minister turned ashen. It really shook him.

Clark Clifford: Then you think they are clear on that?

Mr. Vance: Yes.

The President: Walt, do you have anything?

Walt Rostow: No.

The Vice President: What is the status of their Naval craft?

Mr. Vance: They need more to impede infiltration. Most of the infiltration comes in from the sea.

The Vice President: Did you detect any political rivalry between Pak and the Defense Minister?

Mr. Vance: No.

The President: Who is watching the situation on our behalf?

Mr. Vance: Ambassador Porter is watching the President. General Bonesteel will step in at any time.

General Wheeler: As I understand it, General Bonesteel focuses on the Defense Minister and the ROK Joint Chiefs.

General Taylor: It goes back 20 years when the military was a restraining force against Syngman Rhee. The senior military will talk frankly.

Mr. Vance: That is why we meet with them.

Secretary Rusk: I got a reassuring feeling from your meeting this morning.

Mr. Vance: They did say what I consider a very serious thing. If there is a serious incident, they will consult but they will go ahead and take action.

The President: Then you feel pretty well about it all?

Mr. Vance: Except for the last point.

The President: Do our people feel that they are pretty well prepared out there?

General Wheeler: Yes, sir, but we will be doing several things to improve our situation. But, with our Air Force out there, with their ground troops, and with the improvements in the ammunition supplies, the troops in South Korea could do quite well.

[Here follows discussion of Vietnam.]

Secretary Rusk: I think all of us are grateful to Cy for the job he has done.

The President: We do appreciate what you have done, Cy. Thank you very much for an excellent report.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson Meeting Notes, Cyrus Vance Meeting. Top Secret. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room at the White House.

2 Telegram 4315 from Seoul, February 17, contains a detailed report of that meeting. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69,POL 7 US/VANCE)

3  Bonesteel's report of the meeting is in telegram KRA 0596 from Seoul, February 15. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Military Cables, Vol. II, February 1968 to March 1968)

4 In telegram 114293 to Seoul, February 13, the Department instructed Vance to ask Pak to permit the redeployment of Korean troops in Vietnam. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US/VANCE) Vance raised several questions that the Department referred to Westmoreland for response. Vance met with Pak prior to receiving answers from Westmoreland and therefore did not discuss the redeployment of Korean troops in Vietnam while he was in Seoul. (Telegrams 4210 from Seoul, February 13, and 114980 to Seoul, February 14; both ibid.)

5 Although Pak had insisted on official recognition of these requests, Vance and the Foreign Minister agreed merely to exchange letters noting the requests had been made. (Telegram 4243 from Seoul, February 15; ibid.)

181. Memorandum From Cyrus R. Vance to President Johnson 181. Memorandum From Cyrus R. Vance to President Johnson 1

Washington, February 20, 1968.

The Objectives of My Mission

Under the broad delegation of authority given me, I formulated the specific objectives of my Mission in the following terms: “The objective of my Mission is to persuade President Park, and through him the Korean Government, that we intend to stand firmly with them in the current crisis and that our policy for handling the developing situation is soundly based. It is necessary to establish a sufficient level of Korean confidence in the United States to permit the ROKG to provide the Mission with adequate assurances that (1) the ROKG will take no independent military actions against North Korea; (2) the ROKG will dampen down public agitation for retaliatory actions; and (3) the ROKG will consent to our private bilateral discussions with the North Koreans of the Pueblo issue in order that the crew and ship will be promptly released.

I believe that these objectives were essentially realized. I have no illusions, however, of the necessity of wise and painstaking follow-up action by our able representatives in Seoul, working in closest coordination with Washington. We must not permit the Communists to separate us from President Park and his Government—that is the publicly stated objective of Pyongyang. The situation in Korea remains acutely dangerous to our national interest and to peace in that area.

The Situation in Seoul

When I arrived in Seoul on 11 February, I found a fragile and serious political situation, pockmarked with tension, suspicion, and distrust.

President Park was in a highly emotional state. He was incensed over the North Korean raid on 21 January against the Presidential Mansion (the Blue House) and the seizure of the USS Pueblo on 23 January. He held the United States partially to blame for the Blue House raid since the North Korean strike team had infiltrated across the DMZ in an area defended by U.S. forces. He considered the seizure of the Pueblo as an affront to the ROK since, to him, it demonstrated the impotence of the U.S. and South Korea to thwart such actions.

Park doubted both the resolve of the United States and her commitment in Korea, partially because of U.S. involvement in SEA and partially because of alleged delays in providing military equipment to ROK military forces and in modernizing those forces. He objected to the bilateral discussions at Panmunjom between U.S. and North Korean representatives since he considered them demeaning to the U.S. and therefore to the ROKG. He also felt that the discussions infringed on ROK sovereignty.

Park is a distinctive leader who has wrought much good for his people. However, the raid on the Blue House had unfortunate psychologic effects on him. He felt that both he and his country had lost face and his fears for his own safety and that of his family were markedly increased. Compounding this problem has been his heavy drinking. This is not a new development but it may be having cumulative effects. Highly emotional, volatile, frustrated and introspective, Park wanted to obtain from me a pledge for the United States to join his Government in instant, punitive, and retaliatory actions against North Korea in the event of another Blue House raid or comparable attack on some other important South Korean economic, governmental, or military facility. He wanted my assurance of an “automatic” U.S. response in the event of another serious raid against the ROK. I refused to give any such assurances. Park's views were mirrored by almost every member of his Cabinet, who, while now civilians, are mostly retired colonels and generals.

Meetings with Koreans

In my meetings with the Koreans, I included Ambassador Porter and General Bonesteel as members of my Mission not only in recognition of their high competence but also in hope of emphasizing the importance of their positions and their stature as your representatives.

In subsequent days, I had two meetings with President Park (which took about seven hours); two meetings with the Prime Minister and other key members of the Government (Foreign Minister, Minister of National Defense, Minister of Public Information, Director of the ROK CIA, Chairman of the ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff, and their principal staff assistants); and two meetings with the Foreign Minister and members of his staff, including a ten-hour meeting over the wording and contents of the final Joint Communique, a copy of which is attached.2 In all of our meetings with the Koreans, we listened attentively to everything they had to say and endeavored to draw out of them the totality of their views, opinions, and concerns.

With one significant exception, we placed the onus on them to raise topics for discussion. The exception concerned South Korean forays across the DMZ into the North. This information was news to most members of the Cabinet since the South Korean infiltration units are under the personal control of Minister of National Defense Kim and their activities are closely held secrets within the ROKG. We emphasized the provocative nature of these attacks, which, over the past several months, have averaged two per month. We suggested that some of the more serious North Korean incursions into the South may have been launched in retaliation for South Korean raids, in particular the November 1967 raid against a North Korean Peoples Army Divisional Headquarters. The Headquarters was apparently blown up and the twelve-man South Korean strike team exfiltrated without sustaining any casualties. We pointed out that there was no evidence that the South Korean forays had had a chastening effect on Kim Il-Sung.

Just prior to my departure President Park, the Prime Minister, and the Foreign Minister were most pleasant and friendly. The Foreign Minister, his principal staff assistants, the Secretary General of the Office of the President, and the Chief of Protocol also came to bid me goodbye at Kimpo in a complete reversal of the cool reception which greeted me on my arrival.

Observations and Results

I believe that the limited objectives of my mission were realized. President Park will not retaliate for the Blue House raid. The bilateral discussions between the U.S. and North Korea at Panmunjom will not be impeded by the ROKG, providing they do not drag on for months. Korean press agitation against the U.S. will be dampened. No request was made for removing ROK forces in Korea from under the operational control of General Bonesteel as Commander in Chief of the United Nations Command. The ROKG has been assured that we intend to help South Korea in modernizing its counter-insurgency and counter-infiltration forces and facilities.

I believe that a necessary measure of confidence and trust has been re-established. The immediate threat of a serious dispute between the United States and the Republic of Korea has been eased. The prospects of the South Koreans initiating in the near future unilateral retaliatory actions against North Korea in response to infiltration of suicide or strike teams by boat and across the DMZ into South Korea have diminished. Yet, in the longer term, the prospects of the ROKG initiating a unilateral attack against North Korea are troublesome, ominous, and dangerous.

While President Park assured me that he would first consult with the United States before taking any action if North Korea again mounts an attack on the Presidential Mansion, or against some equally important South Korean facility, he would not guarantee to heed our counsel if we recommended against retaliation. If counter-actions by the Republic of Korea resulted in the outbreak of war with North Korea, the lives of some 12,000 American civilians (most of whom are located in the vicinity of Seoul) would be immediately endangered. Similarly, since U.S. aircraft are parked wing to wing on the six ROK airfields and American military forces are deployed along a key portion of the DMZ—to the West and North of Seoul and across two of the most likely attack routes into South Korea—the prospects of American troops becoming immediately involved in combat with North Korean forces are extremely high.

The outbreak of war in Korea could thus be ignited either by a serious North Korean incursion into the South or by a South Korean foray into the North.

ROKG officials are preoccupied with the North Korean threat as they see it. Some of them believe that the situation today is very similar to that which existed in June 1950. While the ROK has emphasized economic development over the last few years, the North Koreans have emphasized military preparedness. The North Koreans have taken a number of steps to improve their offensive and defensive military capabilities. Underground facilities have been built for munitions storage and ammunition production. North Korean airfields have been expanded and revetments constructed for the protection of aircraft. Civil defense exercises are regularly held and a well-trained Red Guard has been formed. Food stocks have been augmented. With the help of the Soviets, military equipment has been modernized and new armored vehicles, aircraft, SAMs and artillery weapons introduced into the operational inventory.

But perhaps more important to understanding the current attitudes of ROKG officials, North Korean Premier Kim Il-Sung has intensified his propaganda campaign against the ROK and has publicly declared that by 1970 he will reunite Korea by force.

As a companion effort to his anti-ROK propaganda campaign, Kim Il-Sung has established an infiltration force of some 20,000 men, including 2400 specially trained soldiers who operate in small reconnaissance/stroke teams of seven to thirty-one men each. Last year a number of these teams were landed along the East and West coasts of the ROK by high speed (35 to 40 knots) infiltration boats which can carry up to 40 equipped men each. North Korea presently has 25 to 40 of these boats.

The ROKG, in turn, is organizing and training its own infiltration force, and, as noted earlier, has made a number of forays across the DMZ into North Korea. In this connection we were impressed with the thought that ethnic Koreans comprise the populations of both Koreas and that there are few “doves” or “hawks” among them; most appear to be “tigers”. It also appears true that a substantial percentage of Koreans, north and south, share a latent and compulsive desire to reunite their country.

The ROKG is controlled by one man—Park. With the possible exception of Secretary General Yi Hu Rak, no governmental official seems willing to challenge Park or offer him tempered advice. Minister of National Defense Kim is impulsive and has little capacity to think through the possible political and military consequences of his policies and actions.

Throughout our meetings with the Koreans we often heard them comment on their inability to contain North Korean infiltration teams. The South Koreans are fearful that a North Korean strike/reconnaissance team will destroy some major economic facility, e.g., a refinery or a dam. It seemed to us that the Koreans lack confidence in their own political, economic and military achievements. Whatever the cause, be it their short history as a nation or their relative inexperience with economic development, the Koreans time and time again demonstrated their insecurity and lack of self-confidence.

We should consider what steps we could take to bolster their confidence in themselves. For example, we should strive to maintain the private investment momentum generated by the Ball Mission. We should push ahead with the task of strengthening their anti-infiltration system by expediting the flow of equipment, making available to General Bonesteel our most competent military personnel and techniques in the anti-infiltration field, continue modernization of the ROK armed forces, and call an early meeting of the Defense Ministries as provided for in the Joint Communique.

The appetite of the ROKG for additional U.S. military assistance is very large as evidenced by my attached letter to Foreign Minister Choi which notes the requirements for MAP as Park and his ministers see them. My specific recommendations in respect to these Korean requests are also attached.3

A major possible restraining force in the ROK today is the military whose chiefs understand the dangers inherent in the ROKG initiating unilateral action against North Korea. Yet, these same chiefs, while willing to keep General Bonesteel apprised of the orders received from Park, would probably comply with President Park's orders.

By agreeing to the issuance of a Joint Communique, after initial resistance, President Park is now committed to consult with us whenever he considers his country has been threatened. His freedom of action has therefore been somewhat reduced. However, his position on retaliation remains unsatisfactory. While he has been clearly warned of the grave consequences of taking retaliatory action, he has not accepted the full significance of this warning, nor does he, in my judgment, attach adequate importance to the Mutual Defense Treaties which North Korea has with Communist China and the Soviet Union.

I must also add that Park and his ministers made a number of demands which I rejected. I refused to commit the United States to an “agreed retaliation policy” involving “instant, punitive, retaliatory action” against future North Korean violations of the Armistice Agreement. I also refused to extend or modify the terms of the US/ROK Mutual Defense Treaty, and I refused to agree to a suggested secret minute that would have committed the U.S. to an “automatic retaliatory response,” as the Koreans repeatedly asserted Secretary Dulles had promised the Philippines in 1958.

Further, I refused to endorse the ROK request that U.S. military assistance program to Korea should be greatly expanded. I insisted on reserving the responsibility of determining what recommendations I would submit to you. I made it clear that I attached a far higher priority to improving the counter-infiltration capabilities of the ROK military forces than purchasing six squadrons of F–4s or other high performance aircraft. Furthermore, I warned the President, the Cabinet and the Chairman of the JCS of the severe financial consequences and the disruptive effect on balanced force structures of the introduction of this magnitude of advanced aircraft into their inventory.

While I did not raise the issue of dispatching additional ROK forces to Vietnam, I made it clear that we expected the ROK forces to remain in the RNV. President Park personally assured me that he would not withdraw any ROK forces. I in turn reassured the Koreans that the obligation of the United States under the Mutual Security Treaty would be met.

In my discussions with Ambassador Porter and General Bonesteel concerning the Pueblo negotiations, I was told of the great problems involved in passing messages between the Embassy, General Bone- steel's headquarters and the U.S. element at Panmunjom. Instructions to our Panmunjom delegation received at the Embassy must be immedi ately translated into Korean so that Admiral Smith's interpreter can read them into the official record. When weather permits the use of a helicopter from Seoul to Panmunjom, the total time from receipt of the message at the Embassy to delivery to Admiral Smith averages 2–1/2 hours. Again, with good flying weather, it normally takes about 3 hours from the end of a negotiation session until a message can be dispatched to Washington. When bad weather prevents helicopter flight, another two or three hours must be added to the processing of both incoming and outgoing messages.

In addition, I found a highly unsatisfactory communication system in Seoul and between Seoul and Washington. With the approval of Secretary McNamara and Under Secretary Katzenbach, we have now installed full teleconferencing and secure telephone facilities between the two capitals and within Seoul.

Before closing this report, I have certain recommendations I would like to make.

First, I believe that a small State/Defense/CIA/White House study group should be established to undertake an independent assessment of our current policy toward the ROK and to identify what our political, economic and military objectives in Korea should be over the next several years. This study effort should also assess the current and future policies of North Korea vis-e-vis the ROK. I consider it extremely important that this study group should be formed at a level in Government where its recommendations can be reviewed first-hand by our most senior policy-makers.

Second, I believe that serious consideration should be given to apprising the Soviets of the dangerous political situation that exists in Korea on both sides of the DMZ and the pitfalls it offers for our two countries should North or South Korea sponsor a major raid which could result in war.

Third, I believe that consideration should be given to exposing at the UN and through bilateral exchanges the full dimensions of Kim Il-Sung's actions against South Korea and their implications for area and world peace. I must point out, however, that this course of action is not without danger because of the ROK guerrilla raids on North Korea which could well be surfaced.

Fourth, I believe that beginning in FY-1969 the basic military assistance program to Korea should be increased from $160 to $200 or $210 million per year. Approximately 85 per cent of the Korean MAP program is expended for the maintenance of existing Korean forces and these costs are rising. The amount of MAP funding available for investment or force modernization is therefore but a fraction of the total program. A sizeable portion of these additional funds, as well as of the $100 million supplemental assistance you have requested of the Congress for FY-1968, should be used for improving the counter-insurgency and counter-infiltration capabilities of ROK military forces.

Fifth, I believe that consideration should be given to the problem of providing additional protection for our [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] weapons sites.

Sixth, I believe that consistent with the Joint Communique, Ministerial meetings between the ROK Ministry of National Defense and the Department of Defense should be promptly arranged. Similarly, Ambassador Porter should be given standby authority to extend an invitation to Prime Minister Chung to visit the United States later this year if, in his judgment, such a visit would be useful.

Seventh, I believe that consideration should be given to improving the Korean DMZ barrier.

Eighth, I strongly recommend that arrangements should be instituted which would permit General Bonesteel to apprise Ambassador Porter monthly of all approved U.S. reconnaissance activities scheduled for the vicinity of Korea. Ambassador Porter did not know of the Pueblo mission.

My final comments concern Ambassador Porter, General Bone- steel, and the members of my mission, Mr. John P. Walsh, Colonel Abbott C. Greenleaf and Mr. Daniel O'Donohue.

Both Ambassador Porter and General Bonesteel are outstanding public servants. They are highly competent and are working very hard and courageously in a very difficult political situation which could turn sour overnight. They are entitled to commendation and our full support.

As for the members of my Mission, I cannot praise too highly the truly outstanding performance of Mr. John Walsh and Colonel Abbott Greenleaf under very difficult conditions. Their ever wise counsel and tireless efforts were indispensable. I also wish to commend the performance of Mr. Daniel O'Donohue and Miss Maria Gardosik.

Respectfully,

Cyrus Vance

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vance Mission to Korea (B), February 9 to 15, 1968. Top Secret. Forwarded to the President under a February 21 covering memorandum from Rostow that indicates that the President saw the report. Vance prepared a second version of this report, virtually identical to the first, except it was written in the third person and included numerous supporting documents, for dissemination to Rusk, McNamara, Clifford, Katzenbach, Nitze, Wheeler, and a select group of staff members working on Korea. A copy of that report with attachments was requested by and given to President Johnson. (Ibid., Vance Mission to Korea (A), February 9 to 15, 1968) a precis of the report was prepared for Senator J. William Fulbright, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, in response to his request for information about the Vance mission. (Letter from William B. Macomber, Jr., to Fulbright, March 4, 1968; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US/VANCE)

2 Attached but not printed.

3  Vance's letter and recommendations are attached but not printed.

182. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Porter) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) 182. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Porter) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)1

Seoul, February 27, 1968.

Dear Bill:

1. I think there are several lessons we should draw from events of the past month. We have tended to be pleased about economic progress in South Korea over the past few years, and our satisfaction at this has to some degree obscured the fact that we have concurrently been nourishing a tiger, which is becoming difficult to restrain and confine: It looks to me now as though Park's desire to go north is not much less acute than his adversary's intention, some day, to move south. As you know we had a difficulty with Syngman Rhee, too, at one point, back about 1954, when he thought the moment had come; but since that year we have gradually allowed ourselves to ignore the implications of our military aid policy in this country.

2. It is as clear as day that both sides are now preparing to have quite a slapping match during the coming Spring and Summer. Let's hope we can keep it at that level, though the effect of a major humiliation for one or the other in the form of a successful assassination or demolition will be hard to contain. In such event, we here know whom we will go for and, while we do not have from you yet any comment on useful restraints to impose on our friends, you may be sure that we will use everything that seems necessary in the circumstances.

3. The moment of danger in these matters comes, not a week or ten days later, but during the twenty-four to forty-eight hours immediately following the incident, when the elements of humiliation, face, criticism and anger prevail. One may ask for a special envoy later, but the immediate problem is to apply and maintain restraint. The purpose of the envoy, as I saw it, was to get across to Park, from President Johnson himself, that there was no likelihood of our following them into blind, emotion-packed reprisals, and of course, I wanted to subject someone with ready access to our President to the kind of gut reaction that I was encountering. It was not difficult for Vance to evoke from Park, who was only too cooperative in this sense, all that was needed to enable him to carry home a clear personal account of the danger. Vance is a cool, practical person, and it was a pleasure for both Bonesteel and me to work with him.

4. The immediate aftermath of the Vance visit has been a lessening of tension. The President vented his spleen, a special envoy was sent by President Johnson, $100 million more were in the kitty, and Park feels secure in the knowledge that he is probably right—the NK's will try again, perhaps even while they diddle us with the Pueblo affair. The President is not churning up press or public the way he was a couple of weeks ago, but he is not letting them forget, either, that he has warned the United States that our policies will encourage Kim Il Sung to believe that more activity can be safely carried on. While he and the Government have allowed things to simmer down, please understand that there is no fundamental change in their outlook or their intentions. The military chiefs closely imitate the President's attitude, but there is much muttering and rumbling at the middle levels. The exercise now for the Bureau, if I may say so, is to think out ways and means of transforming the tiger from one which would take over the northern jungle, to one which would defend his own den, and I would begin with fuel and ammunition supplies while giving special attention to the type of hardware flowing into this country.2 One of the remarkable things about Korea, something closely connected with American sentimentality, is that it is almost impossible to control, or even be consulted about, great quantities of aid that flow into the country.

5. Then there is the Pueblo palaver, which causes as much disquiet among allies for its ineffectiveness, as it does in our consciences for its humiliating character. It is a curious thing that while we permit ourselves to be the victims of a policy of provocation-short-of-war, we do not use the same tactics against those who strike the first blow. It is becoming clear that the short-of-war formula is a masterful one, which can slowly but surely erode such prestige as we have. In the modern world, we are caught between the power of nuclear weapons, which world opinion forbids us to use, and the art of guerrilla warfare in which we are uninstructed. Our conventional arms cannot, as I think many now see somewhat more clearly, prevail over the latter. And where conventional air-sea (as distinct from land) arms could be used in limited, appropriate fashion to discourage those who harass us, this is ruled out by the belief at home that our people, lulled by creature comforts, will prefer no-reaction-at-any-cost. And our people will prefer that, I think, until events make clear that it is their children who will pay the piper. No sensible person would advocate general war in retaliation for a Pueblo, but it is clear that measures short of war could evoke, if not immediate satisfaction in this specific case, some caution on the part of our adversaries that in future might spare us similar experience.

6. I hope the Bureau was better informed about the location of Pueblo than I was. Certainly, even I, with my limited technical knowledge and perhaps limited political understanding, would have promptly moved such a vessel out of waters contiguous to NK after the Blue House raid. I will go so far as to say that technical knowledge of the field in which they were working would have led me vehemently to question the need for putting them into such waters in the first place. The moral here is quite clear: We should be told what is floating around, or over, or through, our areas of responsibility. We just might have something to contribute which could save us a deal of trouble. I went over this rather thoroughly with Cy Vance, and I think the message has been delivered.

7. I will spare you lengthy comment on Viet-Nam this month. There is no pleasure at all in assessing correctly that melancholy situation. But brace yourself, because more is coming. Too few seem to grasp that, to an enemy whose environment is the night, more men mean more compounds and therefore more big targets to hit. Sam's appointment as D.A.3 is something Saigon needs in its present state of mind. He will be wrestling with a many-headed hydra, but it is an all-absorbing task, like none other in the Service. Undoubtedly he will be there during a very trying period, and I and all the others wish him Godspeed and success.

8. I hope to begin traveling toward the end of March, as I want to look over the anti-infiltration measures being taken along the coastline. As you may know, the problem is always to see what one wants to see, rather than what our friends want to show. But I think we'll manage.

9. As I consider the problem of restraining the ROKG, I wonder whether I should invoke the assistance of Moon Myung, Founder and High Reverend of the Unification Church, into which he intends to absorb all other Christian churches, under his own spiritual guidance. (I hope he gives the Pope a job.)

The other day, Moon organized a mass wedding of members of his congregation—247 couples—at Citizen's Hall. Announcing from the stage that they should all consider themselves married, he then forbade them to engage in “love acts” for 40 days! When asked by reporters the reason for this “inhuman restraint,” Moon declared that it was necessary “because Christ prayed in the desert for 40 days and that's THAT!”

If I could only determine whether Moon's edict was obeyed (I have some doubts about it, myself) we might find a government post where he could exercise his ability to restrain their desire to go north—a much easier task than the one he set himself on the wedding day, I think!

Sincerely,

Bill

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Ambassadors' Private Correspondence, 1967–1968. Secret. Attached to a March 4 memorandum from Bundy to Rusk, indicating Bundy sent a copy to Katzenbach, Berger, Brown, and the Korea Country Director.

2 In a March 4 memorandum transmitting this letter to Rusk, Bundy doubted the United States could control such deliveries “to exert any leverage on South Korean retaliatory impulses,” but added that he would discuss the matter with the Department of Defense and others. (Ibid.) In late March the Department of State considered transferring ground ammunition worth as much as $100 million to Korean forces, but Porter opposed that action and advocated periodically supplying the Koreans with limited amounts of ammunition. (Telegram 138433 to Seoul, March 29, and telegram 5410 from Seoul, April 1; both in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, DEF 19–8 US–KOR

3  Samuel D. Berger was appointed Deputy Ambassador to Vietnam.

183. Telegram From the Commander of United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 183. Telegram From the Commander of United States Forces, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Seoul, February 29, 1968, 1028Z.

KRA 745. Subject: ROK Concepts for Home Defense Militia.

1. The rapid development over the past week or ten days of the emphasis being placed on the homeland reserve by President Park is both interesting and significant.2

2. Beginnings of this emphasis appear to stem from events and discussions during Vance visit. Park's and ROKG total emphasis then was on retaliation and on need for vastly increased MAP, costing over a billion dollars. At that time we repeatedly pointed out there was a third area which needed attention and this was ROK self-help and immediate improvement, using what they had now, of counter-infiltration resources (military and police) and internal security organization, augmented as feasible by incoming CIGCOREP and USOM aid. I pounded this theme also with ROK JCS, MND and PM. We pointed out that ROK with population of 30 million, very large armed forces and rapidly expanding national police was not exactly helpless in face of NK subversive threat. At same time ROKs got some clear warnings that US was not going to be dragged into war precipitated by unilateral ROK “retaliation.”

3. For a long time ROKs have been greatly interested in Israel's defense organization, reserve forces, kibbutz, etc.3 In last several weeks Israeli MA and several other Israelis have been seeing a lot of senior ROKs.

4. Whatever is genesis of emphasis on using reserves or militia for internal security, President Park began to use the theme in speeches and press pronouncements beginning about ten days ago.4 Precise theme has varied in details but generally stresses need for ROKs to build more self-reliant defenses, need for moral or “spiritual” reorientation of all citizens to realize defense of ROK, particularly against subversive and terrorist operations, is responsibility of all citizens and that they cannot ask allies to take care for them of this most elemental aspect of national existence. He has used “need for a more independent national defense” in some speeches, but at least for now, we do not interpret this to mean disengagement from UNC OPCON or any less dependence on US for help in defense of Korea against overt, large scale Communist aggression.

5. In terms of potential NK threats against ROK both from overt and from unconventional forces, I believe Park's approach makes sense. He is not, we think, derogating from US/ROK alliance and clearly hopes for continued MAP support for modernization at about current levels to face overt threat, which he does not believe to be so imminent as subversive threat. At same time, however, he is now plugging to fight the subversive threat on maximum ROK self-help. He seems to be trying to tighten the internal defenses and give them a greater and more cohesive capability to handle the many thousands of trained raiders and guerrilla teams which NK has built up. He obviously does not want to risk NK possible effort to harass interior of ROK along lines North Vietnamese are trying in Vietnam.

6. In view of magnitude of dual threat—overt and covert—being built up by North Koreans and in light of great economic progress in ROK, not to mention huge investments of US in ROK in war and peace, I think President Park's new approach makes sense and is in US national interest as well as ROKs.5

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. V. Confidential; Eyes Only. Repeated to Wheeler and to CINCUSARPAC, Hawaii. Passed by Wheeler to Rostow, Clifford, Rusk, and to each of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

2 On February 20 the Korean Cabinet passed a decree implementing a 1961 law permitting establishment of a local reserve corps. The homeland reserve force was to be supervised by the Minister of National Defense, who could delegate authority to local police officials for use against armed infiltrators at the local level. (Airgram A–406 from Seoul, February 26; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–3 KOR S)

3 Pak's first public statements addressing these themes came on February 7, when he announced plans to arm the nation's veterans and older reservists to always carry a rifle. The Embassy viewed Pak's comments skeptically, given the government's weapons-control policy and fear of assassination. (Telegram 4085 from Seoul, February 8; ibid., POL 23–7 KOR S) A few days later the Defense Ministry announced an extension of the length of active service from 30 to 36 months in the army and marines and from 36 to 42 months for the Navy and Air Force to meet internal security needs. (Telegram 4227 from Seoul, February 14; ibid.)

4 In a February 16 meeting between U.S. and Korean military authorities the Minister of National Defense expressed a similar interest in the Israeli approach of training and equipping its population to supplement regular armed forces and enhance its defenses. (Telegram 4311 from Seoul, February 17; ibid., POL 7 US/VANCE)

5 The Embassy also urged policymakers in Washington to fund the program. Porter argued that Pak's commitment to the homeland reserve force represented a significant shift in his approach to the North Korean threat from retaliation to self-defense. (Telegram 4634 from Seoul, March 3; ibid., DEF 19–8 US–KOR S)

184. Memorandum to Holders of Special National Intelligence Estimate Number 14.2–67 184. Memorandum to Holders of Special National Intelligence Estimate Number 14.2–671

Washington, February 29, 1968.

NORTH KOREAN INTENTIONS AND CAPABILITIES WITH

RESPECT TO SOUTH KOREA

Dated 21 September 1967

1. Events since last September tend to confirm the conclusions of SNIE 14.2–67,2 that North Korean activities will include a campaign of military harassment in the DMZ area, continued attempts to infiltrate guerrilla teams, and the dispatch of terrorist and sabotage missions. The raid on the Blue House represents the most dramatic and flagrant manifestation of the campaign begun in late 1966 to disrupt political order in South Korea, to tie down large ROK forces, and to encourage insurgency in the South. North Korean handling of the Pueblo crisis reflects an intention to heighten tensions and exploit US preoccupations with Vietnam. Kim Il-Song's recent speeches indicate he is still determined to maintain a bellicose posture.

2. These developments have hardened Seoul's attitude and increased the likelihood of a major ROK reaction to North Korean harassments. The North Koreans probably believe that the US will impose restraints on the ROK and will be reluctant to escalate its own responses in Korea. The North Koreans now probably see great and continuing opportunities to exacerbate relations between Seoul and Washington.

3. We continue to believe that Pyongyang realizes that an intensification of incidents and attacks could escalate to the point of open warfare. We still estimate, however, that North Korea does not plan to invade South Korea and will not deliberately provoke hostilities on a scale which would amount to a resumption of the war.

4. Nevertheless, the general situation in Korea is more dangerous than it was last fall, since the possibilities of miscalculation are greater. The North Korean attitude is more openly truculent than at any time since 1953. The raid against the Presidential residence indicates that the North Koreans are willing to run high risks; they must have been aware that assassination of President Pak would have provoked a major ROK retaliation. They may be counting heavily on US preoccupation with Vietnam, and on the deterrent value of their own mutual defense treaties with China and the Soviet Union.

5. We believe that North Korea is pursuing an independent policy. Pyongyang probably does not consult with Moscow and Peking on the tactical development of its policy against the ROK and the US. North Korea's relations with China are cool, and thus Peking's influence is quite limited. In any event, we believe Peking does not want to be involved in a new Korean War at this juncture. As for the USSR, recent events have probably forced it to pay somewhat more attention to developments in Korea. We believe that the USSR does not want a major war in the area. In the event of a crisis in Korea, the Soviets would probably be reluctant to apply immediate pressures on Pyongyang, lest they jeopardize the position they have built up there. And in any case their influence would not necessarily be decisive. However, we believe that if major hostilities seemed imminent the USSR would try to exert some restraint over North Korea.

6. Additional evidence since our last estimate suggests that North Korea will continue its efforts to establish guerrilla bases in the South. But we believe that their prospects for success in this endeavor remain poor.

7. We now believe that the North Korean Navy has at least four “W”-class submarines, at least seven “KOMAR”-class guided missile boats and associated Styx missiles, and two “Shershen”-class fast patrol boats. Eighteen surface-to-air missile (SA-2) sites, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] have been identified. Otherwise, the general level of equipment and strength of the North Korean forces is as described in Annex I of SNIE 14.2–67.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council History, Pueblo Crisis, 1968, Vol. XI, Background Documents. Secret; Controlled Dissem. According to a note on the cover sheet, the Central Intelligence Agency, the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, and the National Security Agency participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred with this estimate on February 29 except the representatives of the Atomic Energy Commission and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

2  Document 130.

185. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson 185. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson 1

Washington, March 7, 1968.

Paul Nitze and I are impressed with the continuing dangers of the Korean situation. With the improvement of weather at the onset of spring, the North Koreans may well launch further infiltration forays with serious material and psychological consequences. Furthermore, any likely settlement formula at Panmunjom would probably be resented by the sensitive ROKs. We therefore believe that we should push ahead with the implementation of the Vance Recommendations, improving our own posture in respect to Korea and endeavoring to build upon the degree of trust and confidence re-established by his Mission. His recommendations fall into four broad categories which I believe can be approached as follows:

1. U.S. Posture

A. Reassessment of our policies and goals toward Korea

With the assistance of a small inter-agency group I am taking a very close look at where we are and where we should go in respect to both Koreas.2 I intend to submit a report on this matter by 1 May.

B. Protecting our [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] weapon sites

Recommendations by the Joint Chiefs of Staff concerning personnel requirements for improving the security of our [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] weapons sites are currently under review in the DOD. Study by the Joint Chiefs of Staff is continuing to determine whether additional physical security measures should be taken. This study will be completed by 1 April 1968.

C. Improving the Korean DMZ Barrier

Additional counterinfiltration items are being delivered to Korea with airlift of most critical items authorized. Many critical items are already in Korea. An operations analysis study in support of DMZ security and counterinfiltration efforts is in progress. Included in the FY 1968 supplement of $100 million is an additional sum, yet unspecified, for counterinfiltration items.

D. Reconnaissance Activities in Korea

General Bonesteel has been authorized to keep Ambassador Porter fully informed of all reconnaissance activities scheduled for the vicinity of Korea.

E. Communications

To improve our secure communications between Washington and Seoul, on Saturday, 20 February, a secure teleconferencing system was established connecting the Departments of State and Defense with the American Embassy and General Bonesteel's headquarters. Also, on 20 February, the Department of Defense dispatched by air the necessary equipments and technical engineering personnel to establish a secure voice system to connect several key State and Defense facilities in Seoul, and these, in turn, with Washington.

2. Influencing South Korea

A. Defense Ministerial Meetings

We wish to arrange promptly a meeting between the ROK Ministry of National Defense and our Department of Defense, preferably in April in Hawaii. Paul Nitze plans to head our delegation and CINCPAC would be directly involved. This would be portrayed as a direct follow-up on the Vance Mission and would be designed to pull the ROKs closer to us and to keep the ROKG calmed down. Their desire to retaliate will inevitably increase if the North Koreans step up their raids as the weather improves.

B. Visit of Korean Prime Minister

In accordance with Vance's recommendations, and if you approve, I wish to authorize Ambassador Porter to invite Prime Minister Chung to visit the United States this spring.3

C. Under Secretary Baird's Visit

Under Secretary of the Navy Baird plans to visit a number of East Asian countries in April. We will include Seoul on his schedule as an additional political input.4

D. American Investment

The North Koreans have already accomplished part of their objective of diverting the ROKs from their economic effort and frightening-off foreign investment. In continuation of Vance's efforts, we are attempting to keep the ROKs focused on economic development and endeavoring to buttress up American investment intentions. I will be in touch with George Ball on this subject.

E. Protection for President Park

The Air Force's Office of Special Investigations (OSI) has trained and equipped the personal Presidential guards of the Heads of State of the Philippines, Bolivia, Thailand, and the Republic of Vietnam. In view of President Park's intense fear over his own safety, and that of his family, we asked Ambassador Porter to offer OSI training to President Park's personal protective force. President Park was highly appreciative of the offer and arrangements are now being made to initiate the OSI training and equipage program within the next three weeks.

3. Influencing North Korea

The Pyongyang Government is difficult to influence under any circumstances but the problem is compounded while they hold the Pueblo crew as hostages. Yet, as Vance recommended, we must endeavor to bring political pressure to bear on them. We have already approached the Russians about the dangers of the current Pyongyang course and our difficulties in restraining the South Koreans in face of continuing provocation. We have urged them to use what influence they have to persuade the North Koreans to agree to a reasonable settlement of the Pueblo issue and to ease tensions in the area. We have made somewhat similar approaches to the Japanese and British and will endeavor to expand our bilateral approaches to other countries. If we can obtain the release of the crew, we would be in a better position to peel off our political gloves in an effort to indict Pyongyang as a threat to peace. This might include calling a Security Council Meeting on the subject.

4. Military Assistance

Vance has made a number of military assistance recommendations including increased MAP levels in the next few years. These are under study and we will report in a separate memorandum our recommendations regarding future military assistance programs for Korea.

Nicholas deB Katzenbach

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. VI. Secret; Nodis. The report was forwarded to the President under a March 7 covering memorandum from Rostow that indicates that the President saw the memorandum.

2 The Korean Study Group, consisting of representatives from the Department of State and the Department of Defense, held an organizational meeting on March 5 and agreed to consider adding a representative from CIA and from AID/ECON. (Memorandum for the record, March 7; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL KOR S–US) John Walsh of the Executive Secretariat wrote to Porter on March 10, advising him of Korean developments and attaching a copy of Katzenbach's memorandum. (Ibid.)

3 The President approved extending the invitation.

4 An earlier version of the memorandum included the possibility that Rusk would visit Seoul following the SEATO meeting in April. (Memorandum for the President, March 4; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL KOR S–US) While in Asia for the SEATO, ANZUS, and Seven Nation meetings, Rusk met briefly with Foreign Minister Choi to discuss those meetings and bilateral issues. (Telegram 143511 to Seoul, April 8; ibid., POL 15–1 KOR S)

186. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 186. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, March 8, 1968, 1045Z.

4784. Subj: Additional ROK Troops for Vietnam.

1. For second week in a row, Prime Minister deliberately raised subject of additional ROK troops for Vietnam. (See memo of conversation dated Feb 29, 1968.)2 This time he began by asking whether U.S. would increase number of troops being sent to Vietnam. Ambassador said he believed we would be at level of about 525,000 men in very near future. Prime Minister said he thought that was good, but didn't U.S. need more Korean troops. Ambassador replied that we do and that, as he had indicated a week ago, he intended to approach ROKG on this subject again soon. Had Prime Minister's thoughts on this developed since our last mention of it, Ambassador asked.

2. The Prime Minister then outlined an elaborate scenario, indicating that he had been thinking about this subject since our last meeting, which involved the following: he said that he had excellent information to effect that within next year or so, Prime Minister Sato of Japan would request U.S. to return Okinawa to Japan. This would give Sato a political advantage he would need to stay in power and to permit U.S./Japan Defense Treaty to remain in effect after 1970. Meanwhile in Vietnam the war would be continuing, and he agreed with the Ambassador that this was a crucial year in Vietnam and there would be a continuing need for more troops to exert maximum pressure on the enemy.

3. After stressing that he was giving only his own ideas and had consulted no one, the PriMin said that an American victory in Vietnam is a victory for Korea, and an American defeat in Vietnam a defeat for the ROK. Under certain circumstances, PriMin believed, ROK might be persuaded to send an additional two divisions and perhaps more. However, this could only be managed through a meeting between President Johnson and President Park, perhaps in Hawaii. At that meeting (or perhaps beforehand) PriMin thought U.S. should state its willingness to: (A) Provide necessary financial assistance to permit ROK to place its three ready reserve divisions, which are now fully equipped, on active duty.

(B) U.S. should then bring the seven ROK rear area security reserve divisions up to the equipment levels of regular ready reserve divisions. This could be done at an equipment cost of about nine million dollars for each division.

(C) U.S., with reversion of Okinawa in mind, should construct a large air base on Cheju-do for use by such sophisticated aircraft as the F–4.

4. If this could be done, PriMin continued, President Park would probably be willing to send two regular divisions to Vietnam, perhaps replacing these regular active duty divisions in Korea with the three activated ready reserve divisions. In addition, by following through on previous proposal to employ five thousand civilian reservists in logistical jobs in Vietnam to enable the dispatch of previously discussed light ROK division, it would then be possible to increase number of ROK troops for Vietnam by two divisions and the two-regiment light division. This would make a total of five ROK divisions in Vietnam.

5. Comment: PriMin carefully characterized foregoing as entirely his own idea, which he has discussed with no one. It seems clear, however, that from refinements contained in this presentation, and from scope of his proposal, that he has been thinking about this subject since our last meeting, and that he has quite probably discussed it with others, possibly including the President. I responded to all this by saying that we would think about this and would discuss subject with him again in near future.

6. I would appreciate your thoughts and suggestions for use in follow-up I should make on this subject. Also, questions which you would wish to have clarified in connection with it.

7. General Bonesteel has seen this message and requests copy be routed to CINCPAC.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. A typed copy of the telegram was forwarded to President Johnson with a March 9 memorandum from Rostow. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. V) With reference to discussing the matter with Pak, President Johnson penned at the bottom of Rostow's memorandum, “Why not meet him in Korea—LBJ”.

2 Memorandum of conversation not found, but the conversation is summarized in telegram 4572 from Seoul, February 29. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S)

187. Information Memorandum From the Chairman of the Korean Task Force (Brown) to Secretary of State Rusk 187. Information Memorandum From the Chairman of the Korean Task Force (Brown) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, March 12, 1968.

SUBJECT

Possibility of Obtaining Two Additional ROK Divisions for Viet-Nam

REFERENCE

Seoul's 47842

The Situation

1. ROK Prime Minister Chong Il-kwon has suggested to Ambassador Porter the possibility that the ROKG might be persuaded to send to Viet-Nam two combat divisions in addition to the light division which President Pak has already agreed, in principle, to deploy. The Prime Minister's proposal is set forth in detail in Seoul's 4784, a copy of which is attached. Although Chong stated that this proposal is entirely his own idea, it is possible that he has discussed it with President Pak and other ROKG officials.

2. The pros and cons of this proposal are discussed below. Because a decision on this subject will have an impact upon our budget and upon equipment modernization for GVN and US forces, I do not believe any decision can be made regarding it until equipment availabilities are sorted out and decisions made regarding US reserve call up and possible additional deployments to Viet-Nam.

Discussion

3. The Prime Minister has proposed that the ROKG deploy to Viet-Nam two regular ROK Army divisions, one light division (two regiments), and 5,000 civilian reservists (the latter to free 5,000 ROK logistic troops in Viet-Nam for combat duty). The result would be a total ROK force in Viet-Nam of about 97,000 men, including five ROK Army combat divisions, and 17 divisions in Korea. In conjunction with these deployments, according to Chong, the US Government, in addition to equipping, supporting, and paying the overseas allowances of deployed forces, would be expected to: a. Finance the mobilization to active duty in Korea of the three Ready Reserve divisions (estimated cost $23 million);

b. Provide equipment to bring the seven ROK rear area security reserve divisions up to the level of regular Ready Reserve divisions (estimated cost $63 million);

c. Construct a large air base on Cheju Island (as a possible eventual replacement for Okinawa when that island reverts to Japanese control).

4. ROK-US negotiations for the deployment of the light division and 5,000 civilians have already virtually been completed, with the exception of the issue of pay scales for the civilians. Equipment which could be used for this light division (or for US or GVN forces) is available in Okinawa. However, the ROKG has not yet sought National Assembly approval of this deployment.

5. Deployment of two additional divisions would also require approval by the Assembly and its approval is by no means to be taken for granted.

6. In conjunction with the despatch of the light division, we have agreed to provide to the ROKG: two destroyers, 12 helicopters, one battalion of 8-inch howitzers, operating and maintenance costs of 8 additional battalions constituting a counter-infiltration strike force, a $32 million counter-infiltration program, and financial support for the light division and 5,000 civilians. Delivery on these commitments is proceeding on schedule. Total one-time cost of this package is estimated at $54.7 million, with an annual recurring cost of $77 million.

7. Implementation of the Prime Minister's proposal would have the following advantages: a. It would provide two additional combat divisions for Viet-Nam over and above the light division the ROKs have already agreed to supply;

b. It would be a strong demonstration to the North Koreans that their efforts to deter the ROKG from further participation in Viet-Nam had not only failed but had resulted in increased ROKG participation;

c. It would strengthen the ROK armed forces in Korea.

8. Possible disadvantages include the following: a. Availability of major items of equipment, such as the M–16 rifle and helicopters, is so limited that a choice would have to be made between arming US reserves activated, ARVN troops, or the two ROK divisions;

b. It would require major augmentation of US logistical personnel in Viet-Nam (roughly one American for every three Koreans);

c. The style of ROK operations in Viet-Nam is such (i.e., virtually to take over the government of the areas in which they operate) that doubling the size of the ROK forces might have a significant adverse effect on Vietnamese attitudes;

d. Such a large increase in the level of ROK forces in Viet-Nam (from 49,000 to about 97,000) would greatly strengthen the ROKG's demand and expectation for active participation in strategic planning regarding the Viet-Nam conflict, in planning for peace negotiations and in the negotiations themselves. In this regard, we should bear in mind that the ROKs even now take a hard line in expecting a military victory in Viet-Nam and they would not double their forces unless they were determined to pursue this outcome. Thus US–ROK relations might be complicated and frictions might result which could have an inhibiting effect on ROKG participation in post-Viet-Nam activities elsewhere in the area.

e. Cost—$141 million one-time cost (without including any estimate of the cost of building an airbase on Cheju-do) and a recurring cost of $387 million. (Both figures include the cost of the light division and 5,000 civilians.) 9. We have had preliminary discussions of the Prime Minister's proposal with DOD/ISA. Our tentative conclusion is that, unless the equipment shortage is so acute that the equipment now in Okinawa and presently earmarked for the light division will have to be limited to US or ARVN use, Ambassador Porter should be instructed to seek the early deployment of the light division and 5,000 civilians, without prejudice to the proposal to deploy two additional divisions. Decision regarding the latter will, we assume, have to await decisions regarding further US deployment.

10. This course of action, involving two Assembly approvals, might make the second approval of the two additional divisions more difficult if this proposal should turn out to be desirable and feasible. However, the light division could be deployed soon while the two divisions proposal is highly tentative and at best will take weeks to negotiate and months to implement. We conclude that it is the wise course to proceed with what has already been agreed and not entangle it with this more complicated new proposal.3

11. We are requesting Ambassador Porter's considered views on the two division proposal, including his reactions to the specific pros and cons listed above.4

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Fleck and cleared by Steadman (DOD). Copies were sent to Katzenbach, William Bundy, and Habib.

2  Document 186. The memorandum indicates that Rusk saw this telegram, a copy of which was attached.

3 Paragraphs 1–10 were repeated in an undated action memorandum from Bundy to Rusk, a copy of which was sent to the Department of Defense, where Warnke forwarded it to Clifford with a covering memorandum indicating that he concurred with the recommendations contained therein. (Memorandum from Warnke to Clifford, March 12; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 370)

4 Transmitted to Porter in telegram 128972 to Seoul, March 13. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S)

188. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 188. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, March 15, 1968, 0105Z.

4907. Subject: Additional ROK troops for Vietnam. Ref: A. State 128972;2 B. Seoul 4784;3 C. Seoul 4572.4

1. We believe Dept has correctly identified main advantages and disadvantages of PriMin's proposal for major augmentation of ROK troops in Vietnam. We could elaborate further on these in terms effect of proposal on NKorea's aggressive plans and possible miscalculations, ROK/Vietnamese relations, command and control in both Vietnam and ROK, and ROK expectations with respect to conduct and settlement of Vietnam conflict, but Dept doubtless aware all these permutations.

2. Our own reaction to PriMin's proposal is that he has been trying to pass us a message. As we interpret it, he is saying that circumstances in both Vietnam and ROK have been drastically altered by Tet offensive and Pueblo/Blue House raid, including their aftermath, and question of additional ROK forces for Vietnam now has to be viewed from entirely new perspective: that ROKs want us to make all-out military effort to settle Vietnam conflict once and for all, and would be willing under certain conditions to participate in such major effort. The ROKs are genuinely concerned. They are worried that VC and NVN may force compromise solution in UN if war carries on until U.S. elections. This would then, they feel, encourage Asian Communists to try concentrate next on ROK.

3. We believe he is also telling us that because of new circumstances previous understanding on despatch of light division alone would be regarded as piecemeal effort by ROK public, and Assembly and ROKG would have difficulty in supporting it now. He is hinting that ROK public accepts everything we have promised and implemented since Blue House raid/Pueblo incident, including light division quid pro quo items, as response to new situation here and that quid pro quo offered in exchange for light division would no longer be sufficient to justify political risks of proposing this relatively minor increase in ROK contribution. He is pointedly stressing that what is needed to obtain further ROK participation in Vietnam is very dramatic program—call for a larger ROK troop contribution matched by a larger U.S. aid program—which will clearly strengthen, as opposed to maintain, ROK military strength in country.

4. Extent to which PriMin's proposal has Park's backing is difficult to assess with certainty. If Park has been exposed to this plan, we doubt that it has been in more than general way. We feel that at this juncture proposal should be considered as being essentially PriMin's without Park's approval. Proposal, if implemented, has serious budgetary implications for ROKG—a factor which would be of lesser concern to PriMin but would give Park pause because of potential impact on economic development programs. We suspect origins of PriMin's proposal are to be found in his recent activities in Defense and mobilization planning. In this connection PriMin is aware ROK armed forces are working on concept of 30-division force by early 1970's which involves converting rear area security divisions to ready reserve divisions, and problem is how to get equipment for these additional ready reserve divisions. PriMin may feel that in light recent press stories on need for additional forces in Vietnam, we are preparing put pressure on ROKG for more than light division and if ROKs take initiative with generous offer, U.S. would respond in same generous vein.

5. Park's current attitude on light division despatch and related timing consideration is not clear. National Assembly action is major consideration. Under present planning, Assembly will meet in mid-April for one month, reconvene early July for one month, and then convene in early September for year-end session. Reverberations of Blue House raid/Pueblo/Vance mission are still strong enough to make Park hesitate about going to April session for troop despatch authorization unless he can put it forward in rather elaborate context of additional American troop contribution, clear indication that ROK forces will be built up at home and as result of agreement at highest U.S.-ROK levels. If none of these factors present, believe Park would wait until July to seek authority for light division only. Nature and intensity of NK infiltration by July, and ability of ROKs to contain it, would also have important bearing on this.

6. For more precise estimate I would have to probe much further than I have been able to so far to get clear picture of what lies behind PriMin's proposal and extent to which it is supported by President Park, and to learn Park's current attitude toward despatch of light division only. I feel we may have to open up a line of discussion fairly soon if we are to get ROK troops of any size before end of summer. As indicated in previous para much depends on what U.S. is going to do.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis.

2 See footnote 4, Document 187.

3  Document 186.

4 See footnote 2, Document 186.

189. Editorial Note 189. Editorial Note

President Johnson planned to travel to Honolulu on April 4, 1968, for consultations with various officials on the situation in Vietnam following the Tet Offensive and the President's initiatives outlined in his Address to the Nation on March 31. (For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1968–69, Book I, pages 469–476.) President Pak had accepted an invitation to meet with President Johnson in Honolulu on April 7. Following the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr., on April 4 and the subsequent civil disorders that erupted in Washington and other major urban centers, President Johnson postponed his trip and scheduled meeting with President Pak.

Rescheduling the Presidential meeting was complicated by circumstances in Korea. President Pak was reluctant to agree to meet with President Johnson after learning he would first meet with President Thieu of South Vietnam. President Pak believed that to meet under those circumstances would cause him to lose face and would create the impression that he was merely a follower, rather than a leader of high stature. Korean officials also worried that the presence of both Presidents Pak and Thieu “would make it look to world that President Johnson had brought to Honolulu two leading objectors to bombing pause policy in order to force them into line and accept bombing pause publicly announced by President Johnson on March 31.” (Telegram 5637 from Seoul, April 11; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US) President Pak strongly opposed President Johnson's decision to halt the bombing in Vietnam and seek a negotiated settlement with North Vietnam. (Intelligence Information Cable, TDCS 314/06457–68, April 17, and Intelligence Information Cable, TDCS 314/06455–68, April 17; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. VI)

President Pak was also affected by President Johnson's announced withdrawal from the upcoming U.S. Presidential election. The Embassy learned that President Pak, who valued his close, personal relationship with Johnson, was upset that he received no advance information about the President's announcement. Intelligence reports characterized President Pak as “depressed deeply over President Johnson's decision not to seek re-election and the possible ramifications on future U.S. security policies toward Korea and Asia.” President Pak reportedly repeated frequently that with President Johnson in office “for the first time in Korean diplomatic history, a major world power had treated Korea on an equal country-to-country basis.” (Intelligence Information Cable, TDCS 314/06457–68, April 17; ibid.) Facing the loss of a strong supporter of Korea in the White House, President Pak and other Korean leaders were uneasy about the upcoming change in U.S. leadership. (Telegrams from Seoul and memoranda from Rostow to the President, April 11 and 12; ibid., International Meetings and Travel, Honolulu, [2 of 2]; ibid., Country File, Korea, Vol. VI; and National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 7 US)

President Johnson, who arrived in Hawaii on April 15, greeted President Pak at the Honolulu airport the evening of April 16 (see footnote 1, Document 191), and the two met the following day; see Document 194. President Johnson met with no other Asian leader while in Hawaii and returned to the United States on April 18. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary) Remarks by both Presidents as well as the joint communique issued at the conclusion of their meeting on April 17 are in Department of State Bulletin, May 6, 1968, pages 574–577. Extensive documentation on the meeting is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel, Honolulu [2 of 2]; ibid., [Meeting with Park], April 1968; ibid., Special Head of State Correspondence, Korea, January 1, 1968 to November 30, 1968; ibid., Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. VI; and National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL KOR S–US; and ibid., POL 7 US.

190. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson in Texas 190. Telegram From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson in Texas1

Washington, April 13, 1968, 1706Z.

CAP 80808. Following are summary briefing notes for Honolulu meeting with President Park. We shall have a big black book with us on Monday.

Major Topics

Park has three things on his mind: A. Your personal decision2 and its effect on US policy in Asia.

B. Korean defense and other problems.

C. The Viet-Nam situation and negotiations.

A. US Policy in Asia

Park has shown great unhappiness over your personal decision and has even expressed the feeling that he should have been consulted, as an old and true friend. Above all, he fears that without your leadership the US may abandon the Asian policies it has been following.

Thus, he would deeply appreciate your full comment on the political situation at home and what it means for our policy in Asia.

B. Korean Problems

1. Retaliation for further North Korean incidents. Although the North Koreans have not engaged in significant incidents since mid-February (when an upsurge did occur last year), Park and all the Koreans remain anxious. You will recall that Park pressed Vance very hard indeed for a general undertaking that we would join him in immediate retaliation in kind. He strongly implied the ROKs would go it alone if we did not join.

Suggest you stick to Vance's position—that we are prepared for joint discussion in the light of the facts of each case. However, we cannot get away from the fact that any reprisals could build up rapidly and even threaten major hostilities. You understand how the Koreans feel, but they must reckon that any major hostilities are not in their interest any more than ours, and that, in view of our major responsibility to help in their defense, we must be fully consulted.

2. Building Up ROK Defenses. Park will probably describe significant and recognized defects in the equipment of his armed forces and counter-infiltration agencies. We are in fact proceeding rapidly under the MAP program, and have worked out agreement on the uses for the $100 million pending supplemental appropriation. These take into account his expressed desires.3 In addition, we have now moved approximately 150 US aircraft to Korea.

Suggest you be prepared to go over these actions, on which we will have details.

3. Maintenance of US forces in Korea. Park may request assurance that US forces, including the additional aircraft, will not be withdrawn from Korea without his consent. We have told them many times that we have no plan to reduce the general level of our ground forces—by implication as long as they have forces in Viet-Nam. We have given no assurance on the additional aircraft.

Suggest you repeat that we have no plan to reduce our ground forces under present circumstances, but avoid going further than promising full consultation both on the aircraft and on any later plan concerning ground forces.

4. Amendment of Defense Treaty. Park and other Koreans have pressed us for an amendment of the treaty to make it automatic in the event of aggression. They have drawn a parallel with declarations we have made in the Philippines—that an attack there would necessarily involve our forces at the outset.

Suggest you point out flatly that any amendment of the treaty is out of the question, and that any declaration would have the same Senate problems. At the same time, you can tell them flatly that they can count on us if aggression actually takes place.

5. 16-Nation Declaration. Park and other Koreans have pressed us to join them in getting a reaffirmation of the declaration made in 1953 by 16 nations—that they would act in the event of aggression and that hostilities would not necessarily be confined to Korean territory. We have told them that we ourselves fully support that declaration, but that others—such as the French and even the British—would not go along with reaffirming it today. We have pointed out that, in the absence of unanimity or very close to it, a strong effort to get reaffirmation would be a net minus.

Suggest you stick to this position. (Our soundings, even with such as the Thai, confirm our fears that we don't have the votes.)

6. Pueblo Case. As you know, Park is worried that our private meetings could imply recognition of the North Korean regime. He is worried that we may go too far in the direction of apology. And he regrets that we did not take tougher action after the seizure.

Suggest you calm his fears about recognition—tell him that we will continue to keep him fully informed—and be prepared to review with him our proposed conditional apology, to which he has not objected. Repeat at the same time that we are not going to apologize for any alleged actions which we cannot independently confirm.

As to more forceful action, suggest that you note that we have examined many actions, but have concluded that little ones would be mere pinpricks, and that any major action (for example, against the North Korean Air Force) would almost certainly mean major hostilities. He understands this bind, even though he does not like it.

C. Viet-Nam Issues

1. Additional ROK Forces. Thieu has now formally asked the Koreans for more forces. We have been discussing a light division with them since last fall, and also 5,000 additional civilians.

Park is prepared to discuss these matters, but does not want them in the communique—and we have agreed.

We are uncertain at this point what position to recommend. Both the 5,000 civilians and the light division make sense from a military standpoint, and would have major political advantages for us. However, the DOD tentatively thinks that providing for equipment for these forces may cut across our top priority for ARVN, at least this summer. We need to hammer this out before you leave.

2. General Situation. Park has just had an optimistic report on the military situation from his own General Chae. He will want to compare notes across the board.

3. Negotiations and ROK Participation. We have assured the Koreans that they will be fully consulted both in contacts and talks. They have no plan to be at the site of contacts, but will certainly send a representative to the site of the talks and will be looking for some form of participation at that stage. We have not yet discussed with them our position during the contacts, nor have we gone into any detail on our substantive position in the talks.

Suggest that: A. You be prepared to go over the instructions to Ambassador Harriman fully, but without showing him the actual document (which does not refer to ROK participation being nailed down in the contacts).

B. You assure him categorically that our position in the talks will be based on the Manila communique and the 14 points. We stand on the Geneva Accords for both Viet-Nam and Laos, and on conditions for free choice in the South.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel [Meeting with Park], April 1968. Secret.

2 Reference is to the President's decision not to seek reelection.

3 The $100 million supplemental-aid package approved by the Embassy, the Korean Task Force, the Department of State, and the Department of Defense consisted of an F–4D squadron, small arms for the homeland reserve force, support for the Korean National Police, and M–16 rifles for designated counterinfiltration units. (Memorandum from Warnke to Clifford, March 11; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 091.3 MAP) Differences between Pak and his Defense Minister over the proposed package led to the latter's dismissal from office. Documentation on the internal controversy and the aid package is ibid. and National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69,POL 15–1 KOR S; POL 33–6 KOR N–US; POL 7 US/VANCE; DEF 19 US–KOR S; and DEF 19–8 KOR S.

191. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 191. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Seoul, April 16, 1968, 0205Z.

5706. 1. I am sure you have in mind fact that Park reacts sensitively to special attentions shown him on such occasions as the Honolulu meeting. If it is intended to move him forward on question of additional troops, it is vital that consideration be given to gestures indicating personal esteem of President Johnson for him.

2. I do not believe that the problem of additional troops is as difficult for him as he and his associates pretend, but their attitude does lend emphasis to para one above, and there will of course be substantial, perhaps outlandish, price tag attached. Park's thinking on subject will also be conditioned by his estimate of probable outcome of our presidential election.

Porter

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. VI. Top Secret; Specat Exclusive; Immediate. Repeated to the Department of State for William Bundy. Rostow added a handwritten note at the top of this telegram that reads: “Mr. President: This Porter cable suggests why it may be useful to meet Park tonight. Bill Bundy strongly recommends. Courtesy may make it easier to be tough on the new demands and the light division.” The President went to the airport to greet Pak upon his arrival in Honolulu the evening of April 16. (Ibid., President's Daily Diary)

192. Talking points for President Johnson 192. Talking points for President Johnson 1

Honolulu, April 16, 1968.

SUBJECT

Additional Korean Forces in Vietnam

Background

Following your December 21 luncheon meeting with Park in Canberra, Ambassador Porter worked out agreement that the Koreans would deploy an additional brigade (approximately 6,000 troops) and 5,000 civilians to Vietnam. The civilians would free 5,000 logistic troops now in Vietnam for combat duty, and the result would be an additional light division.

With the January raid and resulting tension, Park shelved this, with our tacit consent, and has never sought National Assembly approval.

Nonetheless, we have gone ahead with a substantial part of the commitments we offered in the negotiations. All told, we had offered direct support and equipment costs for the light division totaling approximately $88 million, plus additional military assistance totaling about $45 million. Of the latter, we have already gone ahead with virtually the whole, including the $32 million counterinsurgency package described to you at this morning's briefing. As a matter of practical fact, all these items made sense, and we would have found them reasonable in any case. However, you should note that the $32 million has been funded from DOD funds under an authority that exists only where there is a relationship to Vietnam.

Thus, there is basic truth in what General Wheeler says—that we have performed a lot already, while they have not moved on their side.

Park's problem is quite simply that he is not at all sure of getting Assembly approval, in the face of a general feeling that Korea needs its forces at home. Porter has reported since that they might now ask for additional commitments. Moreover, as General Wheeler pointed out this morning, the $12 million worth of equipment now set aside in Okinawa for the Korean light division contains many items of highest priority for South Vietnamese armed forces.

Suggested Talking Points

1. Suggest you start by feeling Park out on his Assembly problem, while making it absolutely clear to him that the additional forces would be most useful.

2. If he asks for additional commitments from us, you might point forcefully to the very large totals we are now providing under MAP and service funds this year, shown in Tab A attached.2 The total is about $292 million. You could, of course, say that you would study additional requests within reason.

3. If he takes the opposite tack—saying that he simply cannot get Assembly approval unless things really cool down in Korea this summer—suggest you at least point out clearly how much we have already done under our commitments, and note that this presents us with something of a Congressional problem—particularly for the $32 million. You might go on to explore the possibility suggested by Secretary Rusk—that they increase their forces in Vietnam simply by delaying rotation or by “rounding out”. While Park has a commitment to his Assembly to get specific authority for additional major units, he once before evaded this by a “rounding out” that amounted to about 2500 men. If he could use the same technique—up to perhaps 5000 men—it would be most useful.

General

Suggest strongly that you take up this topic privately with him. If he has his Ministers in the room, the price would go up, and he paint himself into a bad corner.

Finally, we have already agreed—at his request—that the subject will not be mentioned in the communique or in any press backgrounder. We stuck to this agreement this morning and told the press that so far as we knew, the topic would not come up. Obviously, he would be highly sensitive to any implication that he agreed to an increase at this meeting. However, he is also well aware of the need—and he now has a general request for more forces direct from Thieu.

WPB

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel, [Meeting with Park], April 1968. Secret. The paper indicates the President saw it.

2 Attached but not printed. The breakdown of support consisted of $160 million, including around $12 million for the light division, in 1968 MAP funds; $100 million in supplemental MAP funds; and $31.2 million for the counterinsurgency package.

193. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 193. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Seoul, April 16, 1968, 0335Z.

5708. Ref: Seoul A505.2

1. In ref airgram I transmitted ROK MND plan he proposed surface at aborted Honolulu meeting of April 7. I assume MND will now bring it up at April 17 meeting. I want to bring this plan to your attention now since Bonesteel has sent message to Sharp on it.3 In view of his message, I felt it would be useful to you to have in advance conclusions of politico-military assessment prepared by Embassy on the MND plan and ROK strategic intentions.4 Will have full paper with me at Honolulu for you and others to read and ponder. Following paragraph contains conclusions:5

2. “22 [21]. The April 5 MND plan would provide a force structure and equipment capability vis-e-vis North Korean which would: A. Give the ROK ground forces an advantage in quantitative combat power, an advantage considered to be beyond the needs of a purely defensive mission, assuming adequate US augmentations.

B. Enable the ROK Air Force to match more nearly the combat strength supported by a hardened base structure as possessed by North Korea, and give ROKAF a higher capability for surprise quick strike action.

C. Greatly increase the Navy/Marine offensive capability by establishing about a division size amphibious force with a commensurate increase in shore bombardment means, as well as a significant surface striking force.

23 [22]. The implementation of the April 5 MND plan would provide the ROK with an increased military capability which could, without US support or sanction, engage in retaliatory actions of greater scope and magnitude against the North.

24 [23]. If logistic needs were accumulated in advance or logistic support from some source assured, the force structure contemplated in the April 5 MND plan could tempt the ROKG to undertake a preemptive attack against the North in the belief that it could win a relatively short war.

25 [24]. There are therefore grounds for serious concern that the ROK national leadership may be contemplating military moves which may range from substantially larger retaliatory actions to a preemptive strike against the North to effect reunification. A move of the latter type would be initiated at an appropriate time but prior to the anticipated overt military action by the North. The ROKs may in fact be counting on another dramatic raid by the North Koreans to provide the provocation for a justifiable retaliatory move which the proposed force structure would permit developing into a full-scale assault on the North.

26 [25]. ROK national leadership believes that if reunification can be effected rapidly by military means, the great powers will not intervene and will accept the fait accompli.

27 [26]. Full US support of the April 5 MND plan, as we interpret it, is not justified in terms of present US objectives in Korea because it could lead to a military force capable of independently taking courses of action inimical to the US national interest.

28 [27]. Since there are adequate indicators that the North Korean military capability has, in the relatively recent past, been significantly improved and its total defense posture enhanced, and if, as the ROKs expect, the North will attempt to unify Korea by overt military means in 1970 or possibly sooner, the ROK/US defense posture requires improvement. To effect a defense posture capable of holding north of Seoul, in addition to the availability and timely arrival of envisaged US augmentation forces, certain elements of the plan would, if implemented, contribute to this objective. Extensive hardening of forward positions is necessary: improvements in infrastructure for army, navy and air force needs should be undertaken, particularly construction for airfield dispersal and hardening and to support an air LOC; facilities to permit rapid receipt and forward movement of external combat and logistic support should be provided; selected improvements in mobility and communications for the existing force structure are required; and, though not mentioned in the April 5 plan, the availability in the area and largely under US control, of ammunition war reserves for all services should be assured.”

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, DEF 1 KOR S. Secret; Immediate; Specat. Repeated to the Department of State for Bundy, which is the source text.

2 Airgram A–505 from Seoul, April 10, transmitted a briefing paper prepared by the Korean Ministry of National Defense entitled “Problem Areas in the Republic of Korea Defense.” In addition to a Foreword, Conclusions, and two annexes, the paper addressed five areas: (A) Defense of ROK, (B) ROK Force Improvement Plan, (C) Home Reserve Forces—Armament, (D) ROK Force Levels, and (E) $100 Million Package. (Ibid.)

3 Not found.

4  Porter forwarded a copy of the staff analysis, “ROKG Strategic Intentions and Military Planning—A Politico-Military Assessment,” to the Department of State as an enclosure to Airgram A–521, April 16. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, DEF 1 KOR S)

5 The numbers in brackets reflect the paragraph numbers used in the original document. The Embassy also sent two press articles to the Department of State containing reports of Pak's comments to reporters en route to Honolulu. The articles, one from the Korea Herald and one from the Korea Times, both April 18, had in the Embassy's view “an interesting relationship to the line of thought reflected” in this staff analysis. (Airgram A–535 from Seoul, April 19; ibid.)

194. Summary of Conversations Between President Johnson and President Pak 194. Summary of Conversations Between President Johnson and President Pak 1

Honolulu, April 17, 1968, 10:10 a.m.–12:30 p.m. and 5–6:30 p.m.

1. Open Invitation to Park to Visit US

President Johnson advised President Park that another visit by the latter to the United States would be well received by the US people, and President Johnson would welcome Park and send a plane for him at any time he wished to visit with President Johnson.

2. Additional ROK Military and Civilian Manpower Commitment to SVN

(a) US View—At Canberra on December 21, 1967, President Park indicated willingness to send 5,000 civilians and 6,000 additional troops to South Vietnam; the equivalent of a light division. On the basis of the ROK commitment in Canberra, US assistance in equipment amounting to $88 million and additional military assistance of $45 million was earmarked from defense appropriations for the use of the additional ROK troops to be sent to Vietnam. $32 million of DOD funds for counterinsurgency equipment had been utilized for this purpose, and that counterinsurgency equipment plus $30 million other equipment is waiting in Okinawa for the use of the new ROK light division. Many of these items of equipment are of highest priority, and if additional ROK troops cannot use them, the USG must ship them to SVN for use by the ARVN.

(b) ROK View—President Park said it would be “impossible” for him to send more active soldiers to South Vietnam at present because of the situation in South Korea. He said, however, that it would be possible for the Republic of Korea to send one combat group (regimental combat team) numbering 5,000–6,000 men from rear areas in South Vietnam and to have them replaced by civilians. Park said about 1500 ROK soldiers are rotated every month and it would be possible in about three months to send 5,000 civilians to SVN. He agreed to set July 1 as the target date.

There is a possibility that the ROK might send more troops in the future but not under the present circumstances. If the military strength of ROK forces in South Korea is strengthened, however, it would be possible to send one or two additional ROK divisions to SVN. At a later point President Park said he would like to send 6,000 additional troops but he had just barely organized the local reserve corps in South Korea whose members must undergo training so he must wait until summer to see how the situation develops. The National Assembly will not (now) approve the troop dispatch proposal. When President Park “feels relieved at a certain stage” he will send the additional troops to Vietnam.

3. Proposal for ROK Extension of SVN Duty Tours

President Johnson suggested that before January 1969 the period of service of ROK troops already in Vietnam be extended and he observed that this action would have the effect of increasing ROK military strength in Vietnam by one division. Park will consider this proposal. The President hoped to have Park's reply by the time Thanom (5/8–9) and Gorton (5/27–28) visit the US in May.

4. Bombing of North Vietnam

President Park spoke in favor of removing all restrictions against enemy targets in North Vietnam.

5. Situation in Korea

(a) US View—The Administration has sent an Aid to Korea Budget Bill totaling some $400 million to Congress. Mr. Vance recommended an extra $100 million2 for Korea, which Congress has not yet acted on. The Administration is asking that part of the $100 million go toward activating one air squadron. The President noted that we had sent to Korea some squadrons already and called up reserves because of the Korean situation, which should have been destined for Vietnam [sic]. With the increased air power in Korea President Johnson thinks that South Korea is capable of defending itself from3 North Korea in all the services military capabilities and he does not think that North Korea will stage a large scale attack now.

(b) ROK View—The ROK is grateful for the added appropriation request but does not “feel at ease with this amount” since North Korea aims at creating a second Vietnam in South Korea. President Park considered ROK air power superior and ROK naval strength about equal to North Korea. He feels that since North Korea has tens of thousands trained guerrillas, the ROK army must strengthen defense in rear areas. He feels that ROK army fire power is “far inferior to North Korea's.” He would like to strengthen the ROK air force and he needs US assistance for the strengthening of the local reserve corps.

6. ROK Investment in US Securities President Johnson asked whether ROK could make short term investment in US bonds and securities in the amount of $50 to $100 million and said this purchase would be helpful in having Congress approve a $230 million military aid bill. President Park did not respond directly but noted that the total ROK national budget is only about $1 billion.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. VI. Top Secret; Nodis. The two Presidents met in the Library of Kaiser Estate, Koko Head, Honolulu. Prepared by Read from a lengthy memorandum of conversation. (Memorandum from Read to Rostow, April 29, and memorandum of conversation; both ibid.) This summary was forwarded by Rostow to the President, who reviewed and corrected the text; see footnotes 2 and 3 below. Pak also met with Vance and Wheeler in Honolulu April 17 1:15–4:15 p.m. The focus of their discussion was the situation in Vietnam and the need for additional Korean troops there. (Memorandum of conversation; ibid.)

2 The President circled the figures $400 and $100 and noted “400 includes 100.”

3 The President deleted the words “superior to” and substituted “capable of defending itself from.” He also deleted the remainder of the sentence following the conjunction “and.”

195. Intelligence Information Cable From the Central Intelligence Agency 195. Intelligence Information Cable From the Central Intelligence Agency1

[location not declassified], April 23, 1968, 1520Z.

TDCSDB–315/01422–68

Country: South Korea

DOI: 18–20 April 1968

Subject: President Pak's Critical Reaction to the Honolulu Conference

ACQ: [1 line of source text not declassified]

Source: [5 lines of source text not declassified]

1. [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] said that President Pak Chong-hui was deeply disappointed by, and critical of his meetings with President Johnson at the Honolulu Conference. President Pak, during a private discussion with Chief Presidential Secretary Yi Hu-rak and Defense Minister Ch'oe Yong-hui on 19 April, said he felt President Johnson attempted to evade the key issues of military assistance to Korea and a formal revision of the ROK-U.S. Mutual Defense Treaty. President Pak said he sensed President Johnson has lost considerable political power and influence since his announced decision not seek re-election. He said President Johnson no longer exercises effective authority over Congressional actions on foreign military and economic assistance programs.

2. As a result of his discussions with President Johnson, President Pak said he could not consider sending additional ROK combat troops to Vietnam in the foreseeable future. ([less than 1 line of source text not declassified] implied that President Pak made this decision after it was clear to him the U.S. Government was unwilling to offer substantially increased military assistance, in addition to the $100 million pledged by the Cyrus Vance mission in February 1968.)

3. [5– 1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

4. Yi Hu-rak was extremely critical and outspoken against President Johnson after Present Pak briefed him on the results of the two meetings with President Johnson. Yi said the ROK can no longer rely on the U.S. for long-range military assistance.

5. [3 lines of source text not declassified] said on 11 April, prior to the Honolulu Conference, that President Pak was willing to dispatch another ROK division to Vietnam provided North Vietnam showed clear evidence of disinterest in real peace negotiations, and provided the U.S. gave specific assurance of provision for weapons adequate to modernize the ROK army and detailed procedures removing domestic “redtape” and opposition to ROK military aid.

6. [1 line of source text not declassified] report class Secret/No Foreign Dissem/Controlled Dissem/No Dissem Abroad/Background Use Only.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. VI. Secret; Priority; No Foreign Dissem; Controlled Dissem; No Dissem Abroad; Background Use Only.

196. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 196. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, May 2, 1968, 0700Z.

6043. For Bundy from Ambassador.

1. Two weeks after the Honolulu meeting of the two Presidents, it is possible to assess its effect in Korea. If there is no pronounced, or even noticeable change in Korean thinking as a result of the meeting, it can be said that the top echelon, especially President Park, derived a considerable sense of achievement from it. Drawing their inspiration from the top levels here as usual, press and public alike seem to feel considerably reassured in the ever-vital matters of American support for this country, and the sensitivity of the American President to their problems. As this is the effect we were striving to achieve, success of the meeting seems clear.

2. This is not to say that such successes have any permanent character. It is in the nature of this people and their leaders to require assurances and gestures periodically, and this will be especially true while North Korean pressure is maintained, and while candidates for U.S. Presidency discuss solutions for Viet-Nam problem in terms which cause uneasiness here and in other parts of free Asia.

3. The fact of a day-long meeting of American and Korean Presidents would have its own considerable impact here, but this was supplemented by a communique at Honolulu which provided considerable support for ROK Government in matters of internal security and investment—certainly the areas of greatest concern to the Korean President. Park is said to be in something of a glow about this, and if that is true it is understandable because no one accuses him of giving anything in return. Even the opposition, not noted for its perception or objectivity, feels required to stand publicly on the position that the communique contained nothing new, or was more or less the same as previous pronouncements. This is hardly political fare to arouse the interest, or the fears, of the Korean public.

4. In ROKG eyes, the contribution of the country, i.e. fifty thousand troops to the Vietnam problem, has found clear expression of American appreciation in this bilateral meeting, placing American/ROK relations on the special plane the ROKs think they merit. What the other allies think of this is of little concern to ROKs as long as proper inference is drawn here—and ROKG has seen to that. The Vietnamese, Thais and Australians may now proceed singly or collectively to Washington, but the ROKs have had their day with our President and they appreciate it.

Porter

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. VI. Confidential; Exdis. Attached to a May 2 memorandum from Rostow to the President that indicates that the President saw the telegram.

197. Editorial Note 197. Editorial Note

The Korean National Assembly addressed the issue of the Homeland Reserve Force in early May 1968. The opposition New Democratic Party had already publicly recorded its opposition, expressing fears that the force could be used for political purposes and stating that existing military and police units were sufficient to meet threats from the North. (Airgram A–480 from Seoul, March 28; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 12 KOR S; and telegram 6054 from Seoul, May 2; ibid., POL 23–3 KOR S) After attempts to reach a compromise on the issue failed, the New Democratic Party boycotted the National Assembly, leaving the matter to the Democratic Republican Party to debate and pass. The Assembly passed modified legislation creating the Homeland Reserve Force on May 10. (Telegrams 7031, May 6, and 7144, May 10, from Seoul; both ibid., POL 23–3 KOR S) The legislation incorporated several provisions proffered by the opposition party, such as giving the police rather than the military authority over the unit and preventing the unit from participating in political activities. (Telegram 7144 from Seoul, May 10; ibid.) The Embassy prepared a detailed summary of the legislation that outlined and analyzed its provisions. (Airgram A–604 from Seoul, May 23; ibid.)

198. Action Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 198. Action Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 9, 1968, 2 p.m.

SUBJECT

Loan to the Korean Reconstruction Bank

Attached is a Zwick-Gaud2 request for your approval to proceed with a $15 million loan to the Korean Reconstruction Bank, the major source of development finance for Korean industry. The Bank has helped spur the rapid growth of the manufacturing sector, which increased output by 18% in 1966 and 22% in 1967.

The Korean Government will increase its own subscription to the Bank by $23 million.

The proposed loan would be the last AID loan to Korea in FY 1968 for a total of $30 million, as against $61 million last year.

Proceeds from this loan are to be used exclusively to buy machinery, equipment and services in the United States. Treasury agrees that the loan would have a minimum adverse effect on the U.S. balance of payments.

State also concurs in the loan.

I recommend that you approve the proposed loan.

Walt

Approve3

Disapprove

Call me

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. VI. No classification marking.

2 Two memoranda attached but not printed.

3 This option is checked.

199. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 199. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, May 14, 1968, 0130Z.

7178. Ref: A. State 159444;2 B. Seoul 7146.3

1. It is not very difficult to specify evidence to support existence of Korean ardor for reunification (Ref A). Problems in this connection arose as far back as 1953 with Syngman Rhee and resurfaced again recently as result of Blue House raids and other current forms of NK pressure. The Vance mission correspondence sheds considerable specific light on the subject, as well as on ROK view of the improbability of great power non-intervention. To this we add our assessment of current atmosphere based on our knowledge of personalities at the decision-making level.

2. The desire to reunify this country runs very deep. It is the natural impulse of a homogeneous people living in one half of a divided nation, and this impulse is only strengthened by fact that many ROKG leaders are Northerners. If our telegrams of late have contained reminders of this sentiment, it is because we are currently injecting more military hardware into the ROK armed forces, and I want to be sure that all concerned have in mind the various [garble] and implications of ROK preparedness.

3. My emphasis has not been on ROK ardor or anger at NK provocations. They are but parts of the education. Whether ardor, anger or frustration can trigger action we wish to prevent depends largely on capability, and therefore whether the problem of unification becomes more or less acute in months or years ahead would seem to depend in large part on the type of equipment we furnish. It is timely to examine this subject because ROKs will probably table a substantial additional military aid program request at meeting of Defense Ministers later this month.4

4. It is of course a welcome development that the Foreign Ministry, perhaps not unmindful of Defense Ministers' Meeting, announced that it has instructed ROKG embassies to assure all that ROKG has no thought of anything other than peaceful reunification of the country (Ref B).5 We have not yet heard that assurances have actually been conveyed to you, but in any case the announcement did not evoke any notable public approbation or attention here. Perhaps that was because Foreign Ministry opinion would not be decisive, nor very influential, in such a matter.

5. None of this, I am sure, will be construed as meaning that we are hesitant about further contributions to the defense of the ROK. We believe in the preservation of the results of constructive work and the valuable position we have here. We believe that our future moves should be carefully considered in this context, especially as they affect the capability of the ROK forces, both offensive and defensive.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 32–4 KOR. Secret; Limdis.

2 In telegram 159444 to Seoul, May 7, the Department of State requested further information concerning Embassy reports discussing “(a) ardor of ROK leadership to reunify country, perhaps by military adventure, and (b) belief of ROKG that if confronted by fait accompli of this type great powers would not intervene.” (Ibid., DEF 6 KOR S)

3 Telegram 7146 from Seoul, May 10, summarized remarks made by the Vice Foreign Minister at a press interview at which he stated, among other things, that Korea had no intention of using force to unify the country. (Ibid., POL KOR S)

4 Fulfilling one of the provisions of the joint communique issued at the conclusion of the Vance Mission to Seoul, the Joint U.S.-ROK Defense Meeting was held in Washington on May 27 and 28. Related documentation is ibid., DEF 1 KOR S; POL 7 KOR S; POL 7 US; and in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. V.

5 On July 4 the Prime Minister told Porter of the establishment of a Ministry of Unification that “would supervise research and collate general information on problems of reunification.” In response to Porter's inquiry as to whether the official announcement about the new ministry would “mention their attachment to peaceful reunification,” the Prime Minister conceded the importance of the point without committing himself further. (Telegram 8360 from Seoul, July 5; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69,POL 15–1 KOR S)

200. Special National Intelligence Estimate 200. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, May 16, 1968.

SNIE 14.2–68

THE LIKELIHOOD OF MAJOR HOSTILITIES IN KOREA

Conclusions

A. We believe that, under present circumstances, Pyongyang does not intend to invade South Korea. Nor do we believe that, at least for the next year or so, Pyongyang will take actions that it considers involve high risk of provoking a new Korean War.2

B. We do believe, however, that Pyongyang is engaged in a determined effort to apply its own version of the doctrine of “peoples' war”: to provoke incidents along the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) and to carry out terrorist attacks throughout the South in hopes of creating a situation which would, in time, shake the ROK Government's control of the nation.

C. Pyongyang might be tempted to go well beyond incidents along the DMZ; e.g., it might attempt to seize and hold a piece of territory south of the DMZ or stage a raid into South Korea with fairly large forces. In general, however, we believe that Pyongyang would consider such moves too risky, especially any attempt to hold South Korean territory.

D. Hence, in the short term, the principal danger is that of miscalculation; i.e., that the North Koreans will press so hard that Seoul will order large-scale retaliation. In this case, Pyongyang would be likely to respond with commensurate force, and there would be an increasing chance of escalation into major hostilities.

Discussion

1. The seizure of the Pueblo and the attack on the presidential mansion in Seoul, both in late January 1968, were followed by a period of relative quiet. Since mid-April, however, North Korean harassment and infiltration in the area of the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) has intensified, and it appears that saboteurs have again been active in Seoul. With the advent of favorable weather, we expect guerrilla teams to begin moving down the coasts of South Korea in a renewed effort to establish bases in the mountainous hinterland.3 On the propaganda front, the bellicose line adopted by North Korean Premier Kim Il-Song at the October 1966 Korean Labor Party Conference has been maintained, with somewhat greater truculence since the Pueblo incident. It is apparent, therefore, that we are entering another cycle of North Korea's campaign of violence and intimidation against the ROK.

2. We have reviewed the available evidence and concluded once again that, under present circumstances, Pyongyang does not intend to invade South Korea. Nor do we believe that, at least for the next year or so, Pyongyang will take actions that it considers involve high risk of provoking a new Korean War. This judgment rests in part on our view of how North Korea would assess its prospects in a new war. Despite the emphasis on modernizing its armed forces, on training reserves and increasing local militia, and on the protection of key installations against air attack, Pyongyang almost certainly would not expect to overrun South Korea or to escape serious damage in the North. The ROK Army is superior in numbers; Pyongyang would almost certainly consider that the presence of US forces virtually assured their participation and their reinforcement if necessary; and North Korea itself would require material support, and probably manpower, from China or the USSR.4 Thus, any plans for a deliberate attack leading to a renewal of the Korean War would require the assurance of support from the USSR, China, or both. Under present circumstances, it is extremely doubtful that Pyongyang would receive any assurances in advance from either Communist power that the support required for a large-scale conflict in South Korea would be available.

3. More directly, we do not see indications of preparations of the nature and scope we would expect to see if North Korea were planning war or expected it in the near future. There is, for example, no evidence—in this nation of chronic shortages—of unusually large imports of food or medicines, or other unusual international transactions. There have been rumors of increased draft calls, mobilization of reserves, unusual troop movements and deployments, and the buildup of stockpiles near the DMZ, but none of these or similar indicators of impending large-scale action are supported by reliable evidence. The “war is coming” tone of letters from North Korea to Japan appears to reflect official propaganda; such letters almost certainly suit the regime's purposes since all outgoing mail is carefully censored. Finally, if North Korea were planning a surprise attack, it would seem unwise to foment tension and keep the ROK and the US on the alert.

4. Nor do we believe that the North Koreans are trying to provoke the ROK into a resumption of major hostilities. Pyongyang might hope thus to activate its defense treaties with China and the USSR, and also to avoid condemnation by world opinion. But we do not believe that the North Korean leaders would expect either the USSR or Communist China to cooperate in a “counterattack” that could overrun the South.

5. We do believe, however, that Pyongyang is engaged in a determined effort to create the conditions for a “peoples' war” in South Korea. We also believe that Pyongyang currently rates the risks of this enterprise as not very high. The North Koreans probably view the US involvement in Vietnam and the resultant discord in the US as limiting the military capabilities and the will of the US to support any serious ROK retaliatory ventures against the North. US restraint in the Pueblo affair probably strengthened this view, and North Korean intelligence probably has a reasonably accurate picture of Washington's pressures on the ROK to forgo strong retaliatory measures in the Blue House and other affairs.

6. Thus, Pyongyang probably feels reasonably safe in creating incidents along the DMZ and in carrying out terrorist attacks throughout South Korea. These serve to give some credence at home to its claims of “imperialist aggression” and a developing resistance movement in the South. Pyongyang also intends them to embarrass and distract the ROK Government and to cause a loss of confidence in its leaders which could, in time, loosen their control of the nation. Meanwhile, these actions have caused some misunderstanding and strains between the ROK and the US.

7. Pyongyang might be tempted to go well beyond incidents along the DMZ. It might, for example, attempt to seize and hold a piece of territory south of the DMZ or stage a raid into South Korea with fairly large forces. We do not entirely rule out such actions. They would depend on how Pyongyang judged the probable reactions of the US and ROK. In general, however, we believe that Pyongyang would consider such moves as too risky, especially any attempt to hold South Korean territory.

8. Kim's present course of action vis-e-vis South Korea dates from 1966, although some indications of long-range preparations for intensified action were visible earlier. After several years of economic difficulty at home and consistent failure to capitalize on political unrest in the South, the frustrated Kim attempted to inject some dynamism into his regime by securing tighter control over the government and driving the population to greater efforts in its behalf. He seems to have succeeded in pruning much of what he considered deadwood from the government, the party, the military, and the economy; a series of low-keyed purges has reduced his leadership group to a handful of trusted comrades; and Kim has demanded and is receiving personal adulation on an unprecedented scale.

9. Public participation in the regime's many new programs has been fostered (along with acceptance of hardships) by nationalistic exhortations to prepare for “the foremost revolutionary task”—i.e., a Communist takeover of the South and reunification on Pyongyang's terms. In Kim's doctrine, the success of the revolutionary struggle in the South requires parallel efforts to build up the revolutionary base in the North, to improve its economy so that it will impress the southerners, and to strengthen its defense against the day when reactionary forces in the South, in desperation, strike northward. It is apparent that to make this line credible requires, at a minimum, some evidence of revolutionary struggle in the South and a demonstrably aggressive enemy along the DMZ. War tensions apparently prevailing among the northerners are evidence that the regime has achieved some degree of success in its indoctrination program.

10. This does not mean that North Korea will be satisfied with the mere semblance of a revolution in the South. Pyongyang's violent actions in 1967, coupled with its longstanding campaign of political subversion in South Korea, attest to the seriousness of its purpose. But Pyongyang probably has little expectation of developing a revolutionary movement in the South in the near term. North Korean theoreticians tend to emphasize the inadequate basis for revolutionary action in the South and the time and energy required to develop one. Thus, the leadership probably views its current efforts as part of a long-term campaign to upset the political equilibrium in the South, meanwhile strengthening in some measure the existing Communist clandestine apparatus there.

11. It is possible that North Korean leaders have persuaded themselves that political and military conditions in the US and in Korea, as well as in Vietnam, make this year the best time for a radical intensification of this revolutionary strategy. In our view, however, North Korea is not committed to any particular sequence of moves nor to any firm timetable. Pyongyang's propaganda, in contrast to the statements of captured North Korean infiltrators, has invariably been vague on timing; the phrase most frequently used is “within our generation.” The North Korean plan of action appears similarly flexible; ROK and US defense measures and other responses, and the demonstrated effectiveness of various types of North Korean operations are the prime considerations. At any rate, to serve Pyongyang's current strategy, the campaign of violence need only continue; there seems to be no requirement for escalation to the level of major hostilities.

12. In this situation, the principal danger in the short term is one of miscalculation—i.e., that North Korea, in the process of probing ROK and US resolve, will overplay its hand and that an increasingly exasperated President Pak will order large-scale retaliation. Pyong- yang's response in this situation would be difficult to predict with any degree of confidence. On the one hand, the North Koreans might feel that they had to accept the ROK retaliation because, at this juncture, the risk of major hostilities would seem too high. It seems more likely, however, that they would feel compelled to respond with commensurate force. Though North Korea would probably stop short of actions certain to provoke a full-scale war, the proximity of hostile armies would make the situation highly volatile and war could result.

13. In such a crisis, decisions in Pyongyang and Seoul on any further moves would probably be affected, and perhaps decisively, by the attitudes and advice of their major allies. In our view, neither the USSR nor Communist China would consider a war in Korea to be in its interest. Without flatly refusing Pyongyang all military support, they would probably encourage North Korea to limit hostilities.

14. The Longer Term. In any case, a tense and risky situation is likely to continue in Korea well beyond the one year period of this estimate. Kim Il-Song is a relatively young man; he appears to be in firm control in the North; and his hard-line views are likely to hold sway there for many years. Of critical importance will be the ability of the ROK people over the years to stand united against Communist subversion, and the ability of ROK forces to cope effectively with North Korean harassments. ROK confidence in the face of these long-term threats will depend heavily on the US posture in the Far East.5

Annex

NORTH AND SOUTH KOREAN FORCES

1. The North Korean Army has a strength of about 345,000. It is probably at full strength, with a larger proportion in combat units than US/ROK forces have. North Korean troops are disciplined, highly trained, and alert. By their standards they are probably combat-ready. We do not know to what extent, if any, their heavy ground equipment is currently being replaced or augmented by the Soviets. With the exception of assault rifles and some new rockets, Soviet-designed weapons of World War II continue to predominate. Present stockpiles appear sufficient to support offensive action for at least a month.

2. The South Korean Army has some 532,000 personnel and the marine force numbers about 31,500. Of the total forces, some 50,000 are in Vietnam.ROK units are limited by old equipment, shortages of spare parts, and very austere supply levels. The two US divisions in Korea are under strength and not rated as having attained combat-ready status.

3. On balance, we estimate that neither side has the ability to conduct a sustained attack (i.e., for six months) or achieve a decisive advantage without substantial outside logistical support.

4. The North Korean Air Force could provide a strong defense against air attack. It has some 450 jet fighters—380 Mig-15/17s, 7 Mig-19s, and at least 60 Mig-21s. Almost all of the Mig-21s have probably been delivered over the past two years. Over the past three years, the number of surface-to-air missile (SA–2) sites has increased from 2 to 20. There are also 80 IL–28 jet light bombers, which, with its fighters, provide North Korea an offensive capability unmatched by the ROK Air Force. The ROKs have about 200 fighter aircraft, predominantly F–86s, but about 60 F–5 supersonic fighters have been introduced. The ROK Air Force has been heavily reinforced since the Pueblo incident by the basing of some 150 US supersonic jet fighters in South Korea.

5. The North Korean Navy is essentially a coastal patrol and inshore defense force. Its main offensive strength includes at least 4 “W”-class submarines, at least 7 “Komar”-class guided missile boats and associated Styx missiles, and 3 “Shershen”-class fast patrol boats. The “Komars” and “Shershens” have probably been provided by the USSR over the past two years or so. North Korea also has 39 other motor torpedo boats, and there are at least 2 cruise missile coastal defense complexes. The ROK Navy is also primarily a coastal patrol force; it has about 60 ships, including 4 destroyer types, 6 fast attack transports, 10 mine-sweepers, 20 patrol ships, and 20 amphibious ships.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council History, Pueblo Crisis, 1968, Vol. XI, Background Documents. Secret; Controlled Dissem. According to a note on the cover sheet, the Central Intelligence Agency, the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, and the National Security Agency participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred on May 16 except the representatives of the Atomic Energy Commission and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

2 The intelligence community had uncovered no signs of preparation for war in North Korea, despite reports to the contrary gathered from diverse sources. The President was kept apprised of the situation in Korea and received copies of those reports. (Memoranda from Rostow to President Johnson, May 4 and 24;CIA, Intelligence Information Cables TDCS–314/07456–68, May 3, TDCS–314/07314–68, May 3, TDCS–314/07385–68, May 13; all ibid., Country File, Korea, Cables, Vol. VI)

3 The ROK continued implementation of a counterinfiltration program begun in 1967. (Telegram from Seoul, March 25, National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S; airgram A–547 from Seoul, April 26, POL 23–3 KOR S; and airgram A–549 from Seoul, April 30, DEF 1 KOR S) In mid-1968 the Country Team studied South Korean counterinfiltration measures and prepared an analysis of internal security needs. (Airgram A–742 from Seoul, August 2; ibid., POL 23–1 KOR S)

4 See Annex: North and South Korean Forces. [Footnote in the source text.]

5 This report was part of a larger effort to evaluate and respond to the situation in Korea. The Department of State, the CIA, and the Strategic Air Command explored alternatives such as “raids, sabotage or other activities across the border which might either (a) deter the North Koreans or warn them of a stiffer attitude on our part, or (b) provide a safety-valve for pent up ROK frustration, or both.” The Pentagon also examined ways to defend against a range of potential actions by North Korea, and the intelligence community sought to close gaps in information about North Korea. (Memorandum from Brown to Katzenbach, May 14; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69,POL KOR S–US)

201. Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning Council of the Department of State 201. Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning Council of the Department of State1

Washington, June 15, 1968.

U.S. POLICY TOWARD KOREA

Abstract

Despite the substantial success of US policies in Korea, the need to change our approach is increasingly evident. The ROK's economic progress is no longer dependent on our massive economic aid, and ROK political development is increasingly incompatible with the deep involvement we have had in Korean economic and, at times, political decisions. At the same time, the more belligerent behavior of North Korea has given us a new incentive to re-examine our security posture in Korea.

The US cannot simply congratulate itself on a job well done and walk away. A rapid disengagement—political, economic, and especially military—could pull the props from under much of what our blood and treasure have helped to build. Political and economic disarray, or worse, would probably be produced in the ROK. The signal conveyed to the Communists by a brusque military pull-back, especially if it were coupled with a bad outcome in Viet-Nam, could be disastrous.

The US must long retain a real though diminishing role in support of the ROK. It is not realistic to hope that the animosities which focus in Korea can soon be abated by some form of peaceful reunification, nor should we expect Japan to replace us in our Korean role. In fact, the modest contribution to ROK security which Japan may make is probably contingent on our continued lead in both political and military matters.

Our policy choices in Korea are thus really rather narrow and center largely on security considerations. We can: (a) continue our support for a gradual increase in ROK defensive capabilities or (b) seek through substantial additional resource inputs to give the ROK rather quickly the capability of handling an all-out North Korean attack with only US logistic support.

Considerations of cost aside, the second of these strategies is clearly preferable. We could in this way rapidly adjust our military, as well as our political and economic, policies to the growing self-reliance of the ROK. More important, this strategy would in a few years time all but eliminate the risk that US combat forces would have to be committed to help the ROK repel a new North Korean attack.

Even in terms of cost, the first of the above strategies would probably have no advantage. At projected military assistance levels, the growth in ROK defensive capabilities would be very slow. The reduction in US force levels in Korea would have to be correspondingly gradual, thereby prolonging the heavy burden of their maintenance as well as the risk of their involvement in a new war.

The return of the ROK forces from Viet-Nam will open the way to a strengthening and restructuring of the ROK military and to the phased withdrawal of the bulk of US forces from Korea. It will not be difficult to make ROK ground forces—and the ROK navy—more than a match for the North Korean army and navy. In fact, the North Koreans may already be overmatched on the ground and the sea, though there is not the margin of safety one might wish. A ROK ground force of about 20 divisions (equivalent to what they would now have if the two divisions in Viet-Nam returned to replace the two US divisions in Korea), modest equipment modernization, and improved logistic infrastructure are needed.

The balance is quite different in the air. The North Koreans acquired a large air force after (and in violation of) the Armistice, while the ROK has leaned heavily on US air support. Although the US could bring the ROK to “parity” in air strength, it is probably unnecessary and undesirable. Unnecessary, because much of the North Korean air force is obsolete and of dubious effectiveness in supporting an all-out assault on the ROK, and because US air strength would in all relevant contingencies be able to redress any unexpected reverses. Undesirable, since numerical parity would be extremely costly to provide and maintain and could simply lead to an accelerated arms race on the peninsula. We should therefore support only a modest expansion of the ROK air force from 11 to 13 tactical fighter squadrons and concentrate on modernization of existing units and improvement of base facilities.

[2 lines of source text not declassified] Remaining US forces would ultimately consist of headquarters staff, military advisers, and personnel in selected logistic units.

Our economic strategy will depend in some degree on which approach we choose in the security field. If we do not make an intensive effort to build up ROK military strength, but keep our forces in Korea somewhat longer, there will be less pressure on the ROK economy, and our economic aid can taper down more rapidly. If, as this paper recommends, we make the intensive effort, there may be corresponding strains on the ROK and our aid phase-out should probably be somewhat deferred. Moreover, there are still major uncertainties in the ROK's economic future and we should terminate Development Loans and Military Budget Support only after the critical presidential election of 1971.

We still have some influence on political decisions in Seoul, and we should retain the tools which give us that influence until the ROK is past the 1971 hurdle. We should recognize, however, that our position is already very different from that of some years ago and should not try to transform our old role as a flying instructor into that of a permanent copilot.

The major steps in carrying out the preferred strategy might look something like the following:

FY 1970. Return of one ROK division from Viet-Nam and phase-out of supporting assistance.

FY 1971. Return of remaining ROK troops from Viet-Nam, making possible the resumption of the MAP Transfer Program.

FY 1972. Development Loans and Military Budget Support phased out. Shift of MAP to soft-term credit sales begun. The US 2nd Division would be withdrawn from Korea. The UN Command might at this point relinquish operational control of ROK forces, except in emergencies.

FY 1973. PL 480 local currency sales ended and remaining PL 480 sales made on long-term dollar basis. The US 7th Division would be withdrawn from Korea.

FY 1974. PL 480 Title II program (rural development) ended.

FY 1975. Modernization of ROK military structure substantially completed. [1 line of source text not declassified]

All of these steps of course, depend to various degrees, on developments in the interim.

Several major questions may fairly be raised concerning the preferred strategy: Would the ROK accept it? Would it increase the risk of a ROK attempt to re-unify Korea by force? Could the required resources be found for the projected build-up of ROK defensive capabilities? And, finally, what about the Chinese threat?

Concerning the first question, ROK leaders will be unhappy over the withdrawal of the two US divisions and the prospect that other forces would eventually follow, but in time they would realize that they had no rational alternative but to go along.

The danger of a “March North” seems minimal: there are few fanatics among ROK leaders, and we can probably continue to rely on ROK dependence on US logistic support to inhibit any rash adventures. We should, however, support a primarily defensive posture for ROK forces, and we should continue to make clear that our guarantee does not apply to hostilities arising from ROK attack.

The resources problem may be the most difficult of all, but its solution would be facilitated after the end of major hostilities in Viet-Nam by the withdrawal of the US divisions from Korea, which will result in very large savings and will more than offset the added expenditures required by the preferred strategy. Also, the ability of the ROK to pay for its own defense is increasing, modest amounts of non-lethal military assistance may be forthcoming from Japan, and any excess equipment after Viet-Nam would further reduce costs.

Fortunately, Chinese participation in a new attack seems unlikely, so long as the US maintains its present security commitment to the ROK, backed up by both a nuclear deterrent and the ability to deploy forces to Korea if the need arises. The strategy proposed here would increase the ROK's ability to fight a delaying action against a combined Chinese-North Korean attack, but even a very large build-up of ROK capabilities at great expense to both the US and the ROK could not eliminate the need for US combat forces.

No strategy is without its problems including the one advanced here. This strategy nevertheless offers the best hope of reducing our vulnerability to direct involvement in any new Korean war without making such a war any more likely than it is today. We would preserve our major interests in Korea while moving to a new relationship in which the ROK is no longer a dependent client but a full-fledged, self-reliant ally.

[Here follows the five-part study comprising 70 pages. Part I is entitled “US Interests and Objectives in Korea,” Part II, “Major Problems in Korea Over the Next Decade,” Part III, “Assessment of Strategic Alternatives,” Part IV, “The Preferred Strategy,” and Part V, “Recommendations.” Also included were annexes A–F. Annex A is entitled “Present US Commitments,” annex B, “Current US-Korean Relations,” C, “Major Problems in the ROK,” D, “North Korea's Prospects,” E, “Reunification,” and F, “Contingencies.”]

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Senior Interdepartmental Group Files: Lot 70 D 263. Secret. According to the preface, the study originated from a recommendation made by Vance after his trip to Seoul in February. The Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Joint Staff, the CIA,AID, and the Bureau of the Budget contributed to the paper, although no agency was “in any way committed to the analysis and recommendations presented in the study.” SIG members were asked to review the study prior to a SIG meeting to discuss it. (Memorandum from Arthur A. Hartman to SIG members, June 26; ibid.) The paper was reviewed in the Department by the East Asian and Pacific Interdepartmental Regional Group (EAP/IRG), which discussed some of the problems inherent in the study on July 25, including the timing of several actions, funding of ROK forces, and potential withdrawal of U.S. forces from Korea. Minutes of the meeting, prepared on August 2, and a summary of IRG comments, prepared on August 6, are ibid. Jenkins sent Rostow the study and relevant documentation under cover of a September 16 memorandum prior to the September 19 SIG meeting. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, Senior Interdepartmental Group, Vol. 7, 43rd Meeting, September 19, 1968) The JCS reviewed the study and opposed its military components and recommendations in an August 21 memorandum to Clifford. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 91–0017, Korea 092 [Sensitive])

202. Information Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 202. Information Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, June 19, 1968, 10:30 a.m.

Mr. President:

Herewith Sec. Clifford argues that we should not proceed with the dispatch of the 5,000 Korean civilians to Vietnam because of the high budgetary cost in allocating the equipment held on Okinawa to expedite the reequipment of the GVN forces. He also argues that to accept the civilians would make it more difficult to get the additional 6,000 combat troops which were to have been part of the 11,000 light division from Korea.

This item is on the lunch agenda today.

Walt

Attachment

Washington, June 18, 1968.

Department of Defense Paper

Additional ROK Deployments to Vietnam

Last fall, the South Korean Government agreed to deploy an additional light division to South Vietnam. They proposed to send 5,000 ROK civilians to replace an equal number of present support troops. In addition, 6,000 combat troops were to be sent to make up the light division total of 11,000.

During the conversations in Honolulu, President Park reaffirmed the commitment to supply additional combat forces but contended that it was not feasible for him to proceed to secure the National Assembly's support for this deployment at this time. He urged, however, that we go ahead with the deployment of 5,000 ROK civilians and the conversion of that number of ROK support forces to the combat role.

Intelligence reports indicate that Park's assessment of the political situation eliminates any chance that he will dispatch additional combat forces to Vietnam now or within the foreseeable future. However, the ROK Government continues to press us to agree that they should send the 5,000 civilians to Vietnam. It seems clear that they view this arrangement as a way to obtain high paying jobs and to earn additional foreign exchange.

Korean Defense Minister Choi raised this matter with Secretary Clifford and Secretary Nitze during his visit here last month.2 In response to his argument that the question of the 6,000 additional combat troops could be dealt with separately and later, he was told that this decision could only be made by the President.

It is recommended that we not now agree to the dispatch of these additional ROK civilians and that this be delayed until such time as the ROK Government is prepared to send additional combat troops. This recommendation is supported by the following reasons: 1. These 5,000 civilians have always been part of the package for an additional ROK light division of 11,000 men. If the package is now divided and the civilians separately approved, the chances, already slim, of later obtaining the additional 6,000 combat troops, are probably much diminished.

2. Because the ROKs view this as a monetary transaction, they have asked for comparatively high pay scales for these civilians. At their “asking” price, the total wages for 5,000 additional ROK civilians would cost the U.S. about $22 million annually. Ambassador Porter thinks it would take at least $15 to $18 million annually to satisfy ROK political and economic requirements. However, Ambassador Bunker and Admiral Sharp recommend we pay no more than $4 to $5 million annually. Wages for a comparable number of ROK military personnel in Vietnam, including overseas allowances paid by the U.S. and base pay and allowances paid by the ROK Government, would be about $5 million annually. Wages paid in Korea for a comparable number of ROK civilians in equivalent jobs would be about $4 million annually. The Korean asking price for the lowest grade civilian would be about $4,000 per year, compared with about $800 per year earned by a ROK soldier in Vietnam for an equivalent job and about $600 per year earned by a ROK civilian in Korea in a comparable position.

We continue to receive congressional and public criticism of U.S. payments to Korean troops and civilians currently in Vietnam. We are criticized for hiring “mercenaries” and for giving Korean civilians preferential consideration over U.S. and other TCN personnel. If we now accede to either the Korean asking price or Ambassador Porter's recommendation, the resultant bonus paid to these additional Korean civilians in Vietnam could generate more public and congressional criticism at home.

3. Combat equipment for 5,000 additional ROK forces would be required. This is equipment identical with that which we are attempting to provide to the GVN forces on a priority basis and any provision to the ROK would result in a one-for-one slippage in the timing of our efforts to make the GVN capable of assuming a larger role in the war. This problem of priorities would also exist in the follow-on support for these forces.

The major equipment for a full ROK light division (11,000 men) is still being held on Okinawa. If we do not now agree to the dispatch of the 5,000 civilians, all of this equipment should now be released to expedite the reequipment of the GVN forces. If the ROK Government should later decide to go ahead with the deployment of the light division, at least 90 days would be required to ready these forces. The necessary equipment could be reconstituted in from 90 to 120 days. Accordingly, the release of the equipment at the present time would not result in any appreciable delay if a deployment decision is reached later.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Cambodia 5E(3), November 1968 to January 1969. Secret.

2  Choi visited the United States May 27 and 28. Documentation covering that visit is in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 337.

203. Memorandum From the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Atomic Energy (Walske) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze) 203. Memorandum From the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Atomic Energy (Walske) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze)

Washington, August 8, 1968.

[Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1304, Korea 471.61. Top Secret. 2 pages of source text not declassified.]

204. Report Prepared by the Department of State 204. Report Prepared by the Department of State1

Washington, August 14, 1968.

SITUATION IN NORTH KOREA

The posture of the North Korean regime remains extremely hostile, but there are no discernible indications that they are considering an all-out attack on South Korea or even a large-scale provocation of some sort.2 The frequency of incidents along the DMZ, which had been considerably lower this year than last, has risen in recent weeks. The character of these incidents has, however, not altered.

Despite the continued propaganda attacks on US and our South Korean “puppets”,3 we have not observed any changes in North Korean military dispositions which would indicate that an attack is likely. Their posture is such that we might have little or no warning of an attack over the DMZ but its prospects for success would be dim. President Pak and his colleagues, who were extremely nervous some months ago, now seem confident that the US and ROK forces can handle any contingency. Talk of an “Israeli-type” lightning blow from the North is less frequently heard. Nor are the ROKs talking about the need to retaliate against provocations.

Provocative infiltrations through the DMZ and attacks on our patrols have continued, but the incident and casualty rates since February are well below 1967. Small groups sent to reconnoiter military targets are most common. Infiltrations by sea, a real worry last year, have been close to zero this summer, though a few may have taken place undetected. Since late July DMZ incidents have increased in frequency but it is too soon to say if this is a brief flurry or a disquieting trend.

In sum, we do not believe the North Koreans are planning any large-scale operation which would risk provoking a war. Tension remains high, however, and the Intelligence Community is keeping the closest watch on the situation.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S. Secret. Attached to an August 14 memorandum from Read to Rostow that states the report was prepared in response to a request from the President. Rostow forwarded the report to the President by telegram. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. VI)

2 The Embassy prepared frequent reports on North Korean infiltration and subversive activities. Those assessments are in the National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S.

3 An analysis of North Korean propaganda efforts revealed increased activity “designed largely to provoke anti-American sentiment and to enhance the image of the DPRK.” (Intelligence Note 424, June 3; ibid.)

205. Action Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 205. Action Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, October 9, 1968, 7 p.m.

SUBJECT

PL–480 Rice for Korea

You asked me to look further into the Purcell amendment and the rice package for Korea. The Purcell amendment requires, in the case of the PL–480 credit portion of the sale, that the Koreans make an additional cash payment to cover U.S. expenses and other specified uses, unless you determine this would be inconsistent with the objectives of the Act.

The recommendation is that you so determine. These are the reasons: 1. The PL–480 rice is part of a 400,000 ton package that has an exceptionally good commercial portion. —245,000 pounds, valued at almost $42 million, is under PL–480 terms: This includes the usual 5 percent cash down payment and the balance payable in dollars over forty years. In itself this is a shift for Korea from local currency to dollar repayable terms. This shift is in accordance with the objectives of the Act.

—100,000 tons, valued at $17 million, is a straight commercial CCC transaction repayable in dollars in three years, one-third each year.

—55,000 tons, valued at $9 million, is for cash.

2. It would have been possible to apply the straight cash portion of the transaction to the PL–480 part of the package. This would have met the Purcell amendment requirement but would have been less advantageous to us. We would have gotten these dollar receipts over the course of a year but under the present package, we receive the cash payment immediately. Furthermore, the commercial part of the package would be smaller. This would be inconsistent with the stated objective in the Act to build up commercial markets.

3. As the previous memo pointed out,2 we are competing with the Japanese. The Koreans, mindful of their long-term interest, might be pushed further but we cannot be sure. There would be a risk. In any event, there would be more delay and some balking at reopening what seemed in the preliminary negotiation to be a fair deal for both of us.

Our prospective rice surplus situation is a further point. If the 400,000 ton Korean sale does not go through, this rice would be added to our carryover at a storage cost of almost $3 million a year. In addition, we would lose the immediate budgetary and balance of payments gain of the cash part of the sale.

In the legislative history, Purcell and the full Agriculture Committee made it clear that the amendment was a best effort rather than a mandatory provision. Furthermore, in executive session, the Committee said that this and other amendments should be applied with maximum flexibility in the case of Korea and Vietnam. A Purcell waiver on this agreement should cause no problem on the Hill.

I believe that waiver of the Purcell amendment on this deal is consistent with the objectives of the Act and justified on commercial grounds. I recommend you approve negotiation of the agreement.3

Walt

Approve4

Disapprove

Call me

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos Vol. VI. Confidential.

2 Reference is to an October 2 memorandum with attachments from Rostow to President Johnson. (Ibid.)

3  Rostow added a handwritten notation at the bottom of this memorandum that reads: “The agreement will be negotiated if you approve. The actual signing of the waiver will come to you only after the negotiation is completed. W.”

4 The President approved the recommendation and added: “if you [Rostow] consult and is approved by Purcell and Poage.” In an October 11 memorandum Rostow informed the President that Poage and Purcell approved the package and the waiver and that negotiations with Korea would begin. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. VI)

206. Intelligence Note From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to Secretary of State Rusk 206. Intelligence Note From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, October 22, 1968.

No. 829

SUBJECT

A North Korean in New York: Probable Repercussions

Several recent developments have suggested that Pyongyang is trying harder than usual to be represented in this year's UN debate on the Korea question. The DPRK's annual statement on the unification issue contained a softer approach to the UN,2 and an attempt has been made to have the representation issue taken up as a procedural matter rather than as part of the Korea question debate, with the aim of enhancing North Korea's chances of being invited. Cambodia, Syria, and other delegations friendly to Pyongyang have submitted a draft resolution inviting North Korea without preconditions. Should a North Korean delegate actually go to New York, Pyongyang's verbal aggressiveness might be abated somewhat, but adverse effects would probably accrue both in Seoul and in the U.S.

Better Behavior from Pyongyang? The seating of a representative in New York might cause the North Koreans to modify somewhat their strategy for achieving unification. Pyongyang's willingness to participate in UN discussion of the Korea question should imply an appreciation of the importance of maintaining a good UN image. While the DPRK Government would probably continue to carry out DMZ harassment activities and infiltration attempts throughout the South at what have become “accepted” levels, and would still hope thereby to undercut ROK political and economic stability, it may be more circumspect with regard to serious provocations, such as last January's Blue House raid and the Pueblo seizure.

Pyongyang's foreign relations could not but benefit from the participation of a North Korean delegate in New York, even though substantive DPRK positions in the Korea debate would gain little support. Assuming its envoy would be able to carry out his ceremonial and propaganda responsibilities without any serious gaffes, his mere presence in New York would be regarded by many new nations in the UN—nations which did not exist at the time of the Korean war and have little appreciation of the roots of the Korean problem—as tantamount to an official UN stamp of legitimacy for the Pyongyang regime.

Repercussions in Seoul. Since Koreans generally are more concerned with the matter of representation per se than with the substance of the Korea question in the UN, a decision to permit North Korean representation would have a traumatic impact in South Korea. For years the Seoul press has been apprehensive about the so-called “UN formula” for achieving unification, on grounds that unification cannot possibly be realized through the UN, and also that continued, unimaginative reliance on the UN by the ROK Government will eventually redound to Pyongyang's advantage. Despite their lack of constructive alternatives to the UN formula, the Government's critics would give forth with loud cries of “we told you so.” Indeed, it may be expected that Pyongyang's strategy in trying to have its representative invited to New York includes its hopes that such an occurrence would cause the South Korean people to lose faith in their government's ability to defend ROK interests in the UN—and in the willingness of the US to help protect those interests.

We could anticipate, moreover, that the ROK Government would try to pass off much of the responsibility for such a debacle onto the US. There would certainly be some degree of official unhappiness expressed to us through the Foreign Ministry. The South Koreans tend to believe that their acceptance of US advice on the handling of the invitation issue each year entitles them to hold us responsible for the voting results. This problem is compounded by the tendency of Kim Yong-sik, Chief ROK Observer in New York, to submit vague and self-serving reports to Seoul regarding his role in the joint US–ROK-allied strategy sessions. He apparently wishes to convince his home government, if necessary, that some decisions are reached without his concurrence or over his objections.

Problems for the US. Aside from the matter of US–ROK relations, other difficulties would confront us if a North Korean were to attend the UN debate. Not the least of these is the problem of his security. Between the Korean war and the events of last January, a group of super-patriotic citizens—or perhaps some South Korean residents here—would not have to grope to justify expressing antagonistic feelings toward a Pyongyang official. Anti-North Korean protest demonstrations could be difficult to control.

But beyond this basically administrative problem is the question of our stature in the UN and our prestige in general. We have long resisted attempts by nations sympathetic to Pyongyang to prevent South Korean participation in the UN and, recently, to force a North Korean delegate into the proceedings. To many nations unfamiliar with the complexities of the problem it would seem that the US had finally lost the fight. Coming after the Pueblo seizure and subsequent propaganda exploitation of the crew, this would create more political and propaganda problems for the US, both at home and abroad.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 32–4 KOR. Secret; No Foreign Dissem.

2 See IN–755, “North Korea States UN Position,” September 25, 1968 (Secret; No Foreign Dissem). [Footnote in the source text. According to that document, the North Koreans traditionally “rejected the UN's competence and authority to deal with the Korea question on the grounds that the UN was ‘reduced to a belligerent' in the Korean war.” They adopted a posture of blaming the United States for misusing the UN and professed their respect for the aims of the UN Charter and insisted on being invited to represent Korea in that body as the only legitimate government of that nation.]

207. Intelligence Note From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rusk 207. Intelligence Note From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, November 8, 1968.

No. 870

SUBJECT

North Korean Seaborne Infiltrations into the ROK

North Korean armed infiltrators landed on both coasts of South Korea over the weekend of November 1–3. The two seaborne operations mark the end of a virtual hiatus in coastal infiltration during most of 1968.2

Coordinated Intrusions. Two North Korean infiltrators were sighted in the morning of November 1 near Sosan on the west coast of South Korea. Later in the day, a ROK force sweeping the area killed two intruders in a firefight. A cache of equipment, including dynamite, was discovered nearby. No further infiltrators were subsequently detected in the area.

Two days later on November 3, a series of firefights broke out in the DMZ, one of them in response to a platoon-sized North Korean penetration. These incidents, and possibly the west coast landing, were evidently diversions staged in support of an unusually ambitious commando team landing midway down the east coast of the ROK. A suspicious boat was detected during the evening of November 2 off the east coast, but managed to elude capture after putting commandos ashore undetected near the town of Ulchin. The next day, armed North Korean agents moved into a small village in broad daylight, conducted propaganda sessions and distributed large sums of ROK currency (later reported to be counterfeit), and released the villagers a few hours later. One villager was killed, and three more civilians were later reported dead at the hands of the intruders.

In response, ROK security forces cordoned off a large area and had killed nine of the intruders as of November 8. The South Koreans appear confident of apprehending all the intruders, although the difficult terrain has slowed the task. There are conflicting reports of the total number of intruders, some of which put the original group at 30, while others speak of simultaneous landing of two 30-man teams.3

Infiltrators' Mission. Until these two seaborne infiltrations, only three instances of North Korean agent landings along the ROK coast had been detected in 1968 despite our expectations of a higher number. The commando group was the first specially trained large group to attempt penetration of the ROK since the January 1968 raid on the Presidential Palace in Seoul. (In the January raid the intruders infiltrated through the DMZ.) The tactic of propagandizing villagers is new. It was evidently planned in advance, judging by the supply of counterfeit currency brought by the agents, their reported photographing of villagers and their requiring the villagers to put their thumb prints on a paper as a sign of allegiance to the communist cause. Supplies of propaganda leaflets and North Korean Workers Party membership applications were also discovered in the area. Thus it seems that maximum psychological impact was one of the goals of the North Korean team.

In a larger sense, the mission may have been designed to test the feasibility of winter guerrilla activities in the ROK patterned after Viet Cong tactics. The South Korean Defense Minister ventured this opinion in addressing the ROK National Assembly November 6, and it has been suggested privately by other ROK officials.4 So far it appears that the east coast operation has met with complete uncooperativeness on the part of the local populace, which has always proved to be the flaw in North Korean efforts to foment guerrilla activity in the ROK.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Controlled Dissem.

2 This incident was followed by the North Korean capture of 16 South Korean fishing boats and 76 fishermen on November 8 and 9. The Korean Desk officers believed that the actions were perpetrated so that the North Koreans could “obtain the intelligence they need in mounting infiltrations by sea.” (Memorandum from Leonard to Bundy, November 8, attached to a memorandum from Rostow to the President, November 9; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. VI)

3 A later analysis stated that about 120 armed infiltrators entered South Korea in the November operation. Of that number, a reported 107 had been killed, 7 were in ROK custody, and the rest were presumed to have perished from exposure to harsh winter conditions. (Intelligence Note No. 53, January 30, 1969; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69,POL 23–7 KOR S) The incident and its aftermath spurred the South Koreans to undertake a review of their counterinfiltration policies and organizations. (Telegrams 11631, December 6, and 11920, December 23, from Seoul; both ibid.)

4 Some ROK officials believed the actions were timed “to coincide with the US declaration of a bombing halt on North Viet-Nam,” a policy criticized by the ROK and SVN. Some also believed that the Ulchin raid “was a trial effort before carrying out large-scale guerrilla warfare against the ROK” following the pattern established by the Viet Cong of “trying to 'liberate' villages one by one.” (Memorandum from Leonard to Bundy, November 8, attached to a memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson, November 9; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. VI)

208. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (McCain) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 208. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (McCain) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Honolulu, November 16, 1968, 0538Z.

160538Z. The Korean Situation.

1. From all appearances, Kim Il-Song is accelerating considerably his drive to unify Korea on Communist terms. Coming at a time when the Vietnam situation is in a state of flux, Kim's strategy of subversion and terror could have serious implications for the PACOM. Realizing that trying to predict the whys and wherefores of Kim Il-Song's behavior is a risky business, I am, nevertheless, taking this opportunity to pass on my views on the Korean situation.

2. On the dangerous side, I see Kim implementing a Korean-style “Vietnam strategy” to foment revolution in the ROK. For the first time we are experiencing in the winter months a surge of rear-area, guerrilla-agent actions combined with intensified DMZ activities. This may well be Kim's opening, and what he may consider to be decisive, drive to establish a viable infrastructure of revolution in the South. I am confident that the South Koreans, with our help, are capable of dealing effectively with Kim's threat, but I am also concerned that his failure to subvert the ROK may lead him to further rash actions. The chance that the ROKs could be provoked or would be more inclined to take unilateral action is now increased greatly.

3. Although we have not been able to establish a direct relationship between the actions occurring in Vietnam and those in Korea, I am concerned that events in each place may be correlated and coordinated in future Communist strategy and military actions. Kim probably has fairly accurately assessed the general scheme of things in Southeast Asia. He will use every opportunity originating in SEA to increase tension in Northeast Asia. For instance, there is considerable uncertainty regarding North Korean actions if the Vietnamese Communists were now to embark on a renewed country-wide offensive activity. The termination of hostilities and the resultant draw-down of friendly forces in Vietnam also could be viewed by Kim as an opportune time to cause trouble. The vision of a revitalized ROK power base could lead Kim to hasty action in a “now or never” drive to subvert the ROK or even to attempt a reunification of the Koreas by force. This situation could hold a number of possibilities for miscalculation by the Communists.

4. Trying to predict North Korea's behavior, however, can lead us down some dark passages. There are constraining factors which are bound to inhibit Kim's efforts to unify Korea. He appears strong militarily but is not in a position to take over South Korea by his own forces alone. Kim speaks stridently and is inclined to take risks and there is a chance that he can miscalculate, but I do not believe he is wholly irrational. We can expect him to be deterred at least in some degree by the risks to his country and to himself of initiating open conflict.

5. On balance, we expect that Kim will do everything in his power to subvert South Korea short of open hostilities. He could become particularly dangerous if he feels his timetable for subversion is running out. My people are constantly and closely watching the Korean situation.

6. Very respectfully and warm regards.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. IV. Secret; Noforn; Eyes Only. Repeated to COMUSKOREA and DIA and forwarded by Wheeler's office to Rostow, Rusk, and Helms.

209. Memorandum of Conversation 209. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, November 20, 1968.

SUBJECT

Korea

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Winthrop G. Brown, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs

General Charles H. Bonesteel, CINCUNC/COMUSFK/CG 8th Army, Korea

Henry Bardach, Country Officer for Korea

1. General Bonesteel desired to discuss a number of subjects prior to his departure on vacation at Cape Cod. The following are the salient points of the discussion:

MAP Level

2. General Bonesteel expressed concern about the inadequate level of this year's MAP, and felt we might face a crisis of confidence with the ROKs despite the fact that such a crisis is not warranted. Ambassador Brown said that the change of administration might probably provide an opportunity for raising this subject with the new Secretary of State. It could, for example, be included in a “first ninety-days” issues paper. General Bonesteel responded that he thought the Pentagon would go along with raising this subject with the new administration. General Bonesteel continued that he had given considerable thought to various ways of filling the gaps. With the bombing halt, he felt that there might be a possibility to transfer Viet Nam weapons for use by the Homeland Reserve forces in the ROK. Two of his men were exploring this in Saigon at the present. Another idea would be to get some US destroyers to patrol the south coast. He said that he had a gut feeling that the other 16 nations who participated in the Korean War might be able to help, for example Australia and New Zealand could send ships. However he was not advocating this very strongly. Ambassador Brown responded that we would have to move cautiously on involving the Australians in the Korean military assistance picture.

3. Asked about the effect of this year's MAP reduction General Bonesteel said it would probably affect the supply of 20 light helicopters and cut off half a squadron of F–5's. Ambassador Brown asked whether the ROKs might be willing to cut out some of the F–4's. General Bone-steel said he had discussed this possibility with Mr. Warnke but that they had not reached a definite conclusion. Ambassador Brown felt that an approach to the ROKs on the F–4's would be a question of timing.

4. General Bonesteel mentioned the high annual maintenance costs as being central to the MAP problem. He thought that the Pentagon would support a restoration of this year's cut in next year's program. If such a restoration could be achieved, General Bonesteel would give priority to replacing old artillery with new pieces. He would also fill out the F–5's that have been programmed for this year.

5. General Bonesteel said he could use our support in pushing on the MAP pipeline for Korea which he said amounted to about $200 million. In particular he wants trucks moved more rapidly to the ROK.

MAP Transfer

6. General Bonesteel said we should get the MAP Transfer Program back on the track. He recognized that our commitment to the Koreans made this difficult but that we might raise with them the possibility of transferring certain selected items to the Korean budget. There were a number of items such as cement on which there might be as much as a 60 to 75 percent savings in costs.

7. After a brief discussion of the current status of our PL 480 local currency generations, General Bonesteel said that there should be closer coordination between consideration of economic development and defense requirements in the ROK. Ambassador Brown agreed that we should take a close look at the local currency generations for military budget support.

Retaliation

8. General Bonesteel said that he had just received a cable from General Friedman reporting continued high level concern in the ROKG on why they (the ROKs) have to sit back and take all the North Korean provocations. General Bonesteel felt that although President Park won't march to the Yalu, there was a continuing feeling in the ROK that the punishment should fit the crime; he believes this issue needs to be given further attention. General Bonesteel said that he continues to feel that there is a potential of carefully directed retaliatory actions by the ROKs as a means to allow them to let off steam.

9. Ambassador Brown replied that we had discussed this subject with General Depuy, who had not been encouraging. General Bonesteel responded that the General had never been in Korea.

10. (We showed General Bonesteel the Embassy's cable reporting President Park's conversation with Codel Roybal in which Park had taken a more relaxed attitude about the North Korean harassment and ROK retaliation).2

North Korean Provocations and ROK Counter-Infiltration Effort

11. General Bonesteel said his fundamental assessment of the North Korean threat remains the same, that North Korean aggressiveness is increasing, and that Kim Il-sung is making North Korea an armed sanctuary. He feels that there is a danger of miscalculation on both sides and that the North Korean efforts are oriented to provoking the ROKs into retaliation. Such a situation could lead to more substantial moves on either side and blow up into major hostilities. General Bonesteel said that he had been trying to be “ahead of the curve” of the increased North Korean hostile actions with the limited resources available to him. He feels that 1969 will be a period of decision for us to reverse the curve. General Bonesteel is concerned about an arms race between the North and the South and feels that the best way to deal with the situation is to be effective at the DMZ and effective in countering infiltration in the interior.

12. Asked how he was planning to increase the effectiveness of the DMZ defenses, General Bonesteel said that he was trying out several new ideas for which he hopes to obtain Service funding. He said he had been working on scientific means to beef up the fence and that a joint US–ROK team was at present studying this matter. He mentioned that better lighting of the fence would serve as an effective deterrent and that the Australians had a device that would serve this purpose. General Bonesteel also felt that there should be more US support to deal with the sea infiltration problem but he did not go into details. He did, however, mention his request for additional US security companies—a total of 2,000 men—and said that DOD was reluctant to take action on his request because of US balance of payments considerations. He said that he appreciates the US balance of payments problems, but wondered how super-sensitive this problem really is, observing that there was a limit when such considerations should cease to be an overriding factor.

13. General Bonesteel also felt that it was important to have the Department's support on getting some more men to the regular US forces in Korea. The four US battalions on the DMZ were having a difficult time and although our record was better than the ROKs in this regard, both he and the ROKs were concerned about this situation. General Bonesteel explained that at present US troops were at 70 percent of strength and the strength of the KATUSA were at 80 percent. It would take 8,500 additional men to bring his forces up to 90 percent of full strength and it would be most useful to effect such an increase in order to deal with the rear area security problem.3 Here too, he felt, balance of payments considerations were inhibiting DOD action. He had discussed the matter with Mr. Nitze who had reacted with expressions of concern about the high cost of maintaining US soldiers abroad. Finally, General Bonesteel said that his fundamental view was that we must build up our forces in the ROK now in order to withdraw them later on.

Evaluation of North Korean Intentions

14. General Bonesteel feels that the intelligence community has not evaluated North Korea on a totally integrated basis and strongly supports a new SNIE.4 He added that every time his staff has had a look at the North Korean situation, he has observed that the Russians are doing quite a bit more, notably assistance to North Korean airfields. He had also seen evidence that MIG–17's were being changed to MIG–21's.

15. General Bonesteel continues to be concerned about the overall military capability of North Korea. He is also concerned about the congestion at our airfields which makes it difficult to flush out our planes rapidly. According to his calculations all airfields in the ROK, except Taegu, could be reached by the enemy with only 7 minutes notice.5

Korean Production of M–16's

16. General Bonesteel said that the Department of the Army Survey Team had been impressed by the ROK capability to produce M–16's, that the Koreans could manufacture the rifle for $50 apiece compared to the US cost of about $130 apiece. A Defense Department loan of $40 to $60 million would, however, be necessary to finance a ROK facility. General Bonesteel felt that we should move rapidly on this project and noted that interest in helping the ROKs establish an arms production capability had been expressed by the Israelis.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, DEF 19–8 US–KOR S. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Bardach.

2 Not further identified. In early 1969 Pak remarked to Bonesteel and Porter that “his warnings about ROK retaliation were ‘for political purposes.'” Pak stated that minor infiltrations helped “to keep ROK units on their toes,” but admitted that if several actions occurred simultaneously the “matter would become serious nuisance.” (Telegram 44 from Seoul, January 8, 1969; ibid., POL 23–7 KOR S) In a New Year's statement appearing in the pro-government Kyonghyang Sinmun on January 4, however, the Prime Minister took a very hard line on the question of retaliation and emphasized his belief that the ROK should act against North Korean provocations. (Telegram 18 from Seoul, January 7, 1969; ibid.)

3 The Joint Chiefs requested an additional 8,500 troops for Korea in January, in February, and most recently in October. (Memorandum to McNamara, October 17; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 370)

4  SNIE 14.2–69, “Confrontation in Korea,” January 30, 1969, concluded that North Korea did not intend to invade or to provoke major hostilities with South Korea or with the United States. The report maintained that during the next few years South Korea would prove an inhospitable environment for North Korea guerrilla bases and that the North would continue provocations against the South, thus risking retaliation by ROK forces that could potentially lead to the outbreak of general hostilities. The actions of and the situation in both North and South Korea could be influenced by the position of the major powers—the United States, the Soviet Union, and Communist China—as well as by a settlement of the Vietnam conflict. (Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 110, SNIE 14.2–69)

5 In a Top Secret segment of this conversation Bonesteel “agreed that the present location of the nuclear weapons [in South Korea] could create a most serious situation.” But he advocated leaving the weapons in place to avoid sending “the North Koreans the wrong signal and [encouraging] them on new adventures.” (Memorandum of conversation, November 20; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, DEF 12–2, KOR S)

210. Action Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 210. Action Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, November 22, 1968, 6:26 p.m.

SUBJECT

Aid to Korea

Attached is a Zwick-Poats-Freeman request2 for your authority to negotiate a $112 million 1969 assistance package with Korea, composed of an $82 million P.L. 480 agreement and $30 million in AID program assistance.

P.L. 480

The P.L. 480 sales agreement would provide approximately 650,000 tons of wheat, 270,000 tons of corn (over a three-year period), 160,000 bales of cotton, 34,000 tons of inedible tallow, and 10,000 tons of lard.

In previous years P.L. 480 Title I sales have been entirely payable in local currency. The present package provides for 60% for local currency sales and 40% for convertible local currency 40-year dollar credit. The credit sale includes a 30% payment the first year. That payment, plus a 29% U.S. uses payment of the local currency sale, will meet one-fourth of our estimated expenditures for Korean currency in 1969.

AID Program

The proposed AID program includes a $10 million program loan and a $20 million Supporting Assistance grant in support of the economic stabilization program. This is $10 million below the 1968 level. This continued phasedown is possible because of Korea's dramatic economic growth in recent years.

Congressional Amendments

State/AID reports that Korea continues to satisfy the requirements of both the Symington and the Conte-Long amendments.

The Purcell amendment requires that payment be made at the time of delivery in an amount to cover U.S. needs, except when it would be inconsistent with the purposes of P.L. 480. Our local currency requirement in Korea for next year is estimated at $65 million in excess of the receipts from the local currency sale and other sources. Clearly a payment on that order cannot be expected from Korea, and would indeed be inconsistent with the purposes of P.L. 480. Under the present proposal Korea would make a Purcell payment of $10 million. A higher payment would be difficult to negotiate, and seemingly unwise to attempt, along with the $30 million expected in commercial sales and the $15 million in payment derived from local currency sales.

Balance of Payments

All AID funds would be tied to procurement in the U.S. The list of commodities would be selected to assure additionality.3

Recommendation:

That you authorize negotiation of the proposed AID and P.L. 480 programs.4

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. IV. Confidential.

2 Not printed.

3 Next to this statement Rostow added “Joe Fowler concurs.”

4 Following this recommendation President Johnson wrote “OK L.”

211. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson 211. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson 1

Washington, December 23, 1968.

SUBJECT

Review of United States Policy Toward Korea: Status Report

Last February, upon his return from Seoul, Mr. Vance recommended to you that we reassess our policy toward Korea. You asked me to take responsibility for this task. This assessment has been going forward under the direction and supervision of the Senior Interdepartmental Group.2

As a result of the work, the issues are now well understood.3 A considerable amount of highly technical analysis—economic, military and political—remains to be completed but these studies, too, are now well under way.4 Thus, we should be able to present your successor with incisive, well-grounded policy options and with detailed program recommendations to carry out these options.

This memorandum is in the nature of an interim report—to tell you what we have accomplished to date and what remains to be done.

Importance of Korea

I need not dwell on the extent of our Korean involvement and its dangers. Our intelligence both as to intent and capability needs improvement,5 but it does seem clear that North Korea remains aggressively bent on swallowing the South. Over the past year Pyongyang has significantly stepped up its provocative actions. South Korean patience is running thin. We are tied to South Korea's defense by treaty commitments and perhaps even more by history. Our military presence in Korea still numbers over 50,000. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Last year we provided some $350 million in military and economic assistance (plus the special $100 million military assistance appropriation you sought of the Congress).

We should be proud of our efforts in Korea. The Koreans have used our assistance well. Their economy is growing at near fantastic rates and the prospects for ultimate viability are excellent. Korean military forces are among the best in the world, as their 50,000 troops in Viet-Nam more than attest.

Our Objectives in Korea

Our objectives in Korea are: —To keep South Korea out of hostile hands;

—To reduce the probability of large-scale North-South hostilities;

—To maintain a stable compromise among the great powers with interests in Korea;

—To increase ROK ability to defend itself;

—To promote South Korean economic and political development;

—To encourage a greater Japanese contribution to ROK security and prosperity.

Some Tentative Conclusions

The conclusion which I and the other members of the SIG draw from this record is this:

There must be no question about the strength and importance of our commitment to the security of South Korea in the face of an aggressive adversary. But, as time goes by, it is appropriate to reconsider the question of whether our present posture decided many years ago is still an optimal one for meeting our commitment.

The answer could well turn out to be that it is. But the SIG believes that there is here a real and pressing question of national policy and strategy which will bear further examination by the next Administration.

—The Republic of Korea (ROK) has made great progress in all areas. Increasingly, she has the strength—and should be encouraged—to stand on her own two feet.

—Our knowledge about North Korean military capabilities is limited and may not be altogether reliable. This raises questions about what the military balance—with and without United States forces—actually is and how, if necessary, it should be improved.

—Our present policy effectively ties down in Korea two United States divisions, which are not available for use elsewhere. They require substantial expenditures for support both in Korea and the United States.

—Our present posture leaves us little choice as to whether and how to become involved on the ground in the event large-scale hostilities reoccur on the Peninsula.

Whether or not we consciously change our strategy, the United States will face important decisions in Korea over the next few years. Sooner or later, the ROK divisions in Viet-Nam will return home. We will have to make choices on the kinds of force structures—both ROK and U.S.—we should maintain. The prospects for the Korean MAP—so essential to our defense policy toward Korea—are uncertain and we need to consider whether to try to transfer this program completely to the Defense Department budget. Some of our policy options re- quire considerable lead time (e.g. MAP), and the new Administration will have to act soon if the United States wants to maintain these options.

Uncertainties

There are a number of uncertainties which hinder reaching definitive conclusions on any changes in policy: —First, as already indicated, our limited intelligence makes it difficult to estimate the precise nature of the threat to South Korea.

—Second, there is the even greater difficulty of determining the likely effect on North Korean, USSR, and Communist Chinese attitudes, intentions, and policies, of any change in our military posture.

—Third, the outcome in Viet-Nam may affect the general climate in East Asia including Korea.

—Fourth, the 1971 Korean Presidential election raises serious questions about the continuation of political stability in Korea.

—Fifth, our position in Japan or Okinawa—now essential to Korea's defense—could well be eroded in coming years.

Some Key Issues

The critical problem to resolve is whether it is possible to substitute improved Korean combat forces in whole or in part for our forces now in Korea and still maintain a combined ROK-U.S. strength adequate to provide deterrence and, if necessary, deal with the likely military threats. This question in turn raises a host of subsidiary questions.

—Is the United States combat presence, 15 years after the Korean War, an irreplaceable element of deterrence against North Korean attack?

—If our forces are reduced or withdrawn, will we be politically able in the United States to reintroduce them should hostilities again break out?

—How much of a South Korean defense is needed to replace United States forces and what will it cost? What kind of United States force capabilities would we want to keep in readiness against certain major military contingencies such as a combined Chicom-North Korean attack? [1 line of source text not declassified]

—Is it feasible to reduce the margin of uncertainty about North Korean military capabilities by a stepped-up intelligence effort?

—What would be the effect of a United States troop withdrawal from Korea on our position in Asia?

In addition, there are several subsidiary questions: —To what extent is a “trade-off” between US and ROK forces compatible with our objectives for Korean political stability and development?

—Similarly, what share of the cost of its own military needs can we ask the ROK to assume without impairing her now very favorable economic prospects?

—And, finally, how can we obtain the necessary funds to assist the ROK in a multi-year program for the improvement of her forces?

Remaining Efforts

I have listed only some of the more fundamental problems involved in any policy change. They are not easy to resolve. To deal with them in an orderly manner we need a more detailed look at these and similar problems. The SIG has commissioned an interagency group to assess them and to determine, as precisely as the subject allows, the technical, and political feasibility, requirements, costs, advantages and disadvantages, of various policy options in Korea.

The end-product of our whole review effort will be alternative five-year programs for ROK and United States forces and for United States economic and military assistance programs which can serve as the basis for decision-making by the new Administration.

Parenthetically, I am hopeful that the interagency study effort will also shed light on how to improve our whole approach to integrated country planning and programming in areas where security, economic, and political considerations so greatly overlap.

The Deputy Secretary of Defense and the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence concur in this memorandum.

Nicholas deB. Katzenbach

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 1 KOR S–US. Secret; Sensitive; Nodis.

2 Reference is to the study, “U.S. Policy Toward Korea,” June 15; Document 201.

3 The SIG members met to discuss the paper on policy toward Korea on September 19. A September 9 Issues Paper and an undated Briefing Paper were prepared in advance of the SIG meeting. Copies of those documents as well as minutes of the SIG meeting are in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, Senior Interdepartmental Group, Vol. 7, 43rd Meeting, September 19, 1968 and National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Senior Interdepartmental Group Files: Lot 70 D 263.

4  Katzenbach sent a memorandum to SIG members on September 26 directing the initiation of an interagency study based on the issues raised and points of agreement derived from the September 19 SIG meeting. (Ibid.)

5 A letter from Katzenbach to Helms, November 30, discussing options for an effective intelligence program in Korea as well as similar documentation focusing on the intelligence issue are ibid., Central Files 1967–69, POL 1 KOR S–US.

Pueblo CrisisPueblo Crisis

212. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, January 23, 1968, 0855Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Exdis. Also sent to Seoul and repeated to Tokyo. Drafted by Bundy; cleared by Brigadier General Steakley and in substance by Rusk and McNamara; and approved by Gendreau (S/S-O).

213. Notes of Meeting

Washington, January 23, 1968, 12:58–2:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo I. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held in the White House.

214. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, United Nations Command, and Commander of United States, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Seoul, January 23, 1968, 1405Z.

Source: Department of State,INR/IL Historical Files, Pueblo, 23 January 1968 to December 1968. Secret; Immediate; Noforn. Repeated to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and passed to the Department of Defense, the White House, the Department of State, and the Defense Intelligence Agency.

215. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Helms to Secretary Defense McNamara

Washington, January 23, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. I, Part B (through January). Secret; Sensitive. Also sent to Nitze, Rostow, Rusk, Katzenbach, Bundy, General Carroll, Hughes, and General Carter. Rostow sent this memorandum under a January 23 covering note to the President indicating that it contained Helm's “personal assessment.” Rostow's note indicates that the President saw the memorandum.

216. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, January 23, 1968, 2121Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–14 KOR/UN. Secret; Flash. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD and the White House. Drafted by Fleck and Berger; cleared by Steadman, Meeker, Bundy, Rostow, and Read; and approved by Rusk.

217. Summary Minutes of Meeting

Washington, January 24, 1968, 10:30–11:45 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Bromley Smith, Meeting of Pueblo Group, January 24, 1968, 10:30 a.m. Top Secret. Notes of this meeting were also drafted by George Christian. (Ibid., Meeting Notes File, Meeting at State on Pueblo) When McNamara informed the President of this meeting and its participants in a phone conversation earlier the same morning, the President suggested that Clifford also attend, explaining that “he ought to learn it, cause it's gonna be heavy.” (Ibid., Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of Telephone Conversation between President Johnson and McNamara, January 24, 1968, 9:18 a.m., Tape F68.01, PNO 1)

218. Notes of Meeting

Washington, January 24, 1968, 1 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo II, 1:00 p.m. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room at the White House. A memorandum of this meeting was also prepared by Harold H. Saunders, and summary notes of this and a brief meeting following the NSC meeting were prepared by Bromley Smith. (Both ibid., National Security File, National Security Council Meetings, Vol. IV, Tab 62, January 24, 1968)

219. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, January 24, 1968, 2105Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Exdis.

220. Minutes of Meeting

Washington, January 24, 1968, 6 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Bromley Smith, [Meeting on Pueblo Crisis, January 24, 1968, 6:00 p.m.]. Top Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith. The meeting was held in Katzenbach's office at the State Department and ended shortly before 7:30 p.m. (Ibid., Rusk Appointment Book)

221. Notes of Meeting

Washington, January 24, 1968, 7:50–8:25 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo III. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room.

222. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan

Washington, January 25, 1968, 0029Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Exdis. Repeated to the White House. Drafted by Berger; cleared by Katzenbach, Nitze, and Read; and approved by Rusk.

223. Notes of Meeting

Washington, January 25, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo IV, 8:30 a.m. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held at the White House.

224. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, January 25, 1968, 1627Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted at the White House, cleared by Rusk, and approved by Read.

225. Notes of Meeting

Washington, January 25, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo V, 1:26 p.m. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held in the family dining room at the White House.

226. Notes of Meeting

Washington, January 25, 1968, 6:30–7:45 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo VI, 6:30. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson.

227. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, January 26, 1968, 1150Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Received on January 26 at 8:46 a.m.

228. Notes of Meeting

Washington, January 26, 1968, 11:08 a.m.–12:02 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo VII, 11:00 a.m. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room at the White House. The time of the meeting is from the President's Daily Diary. (Ibid.)

229. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson

Washington, January 26, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. I, Part B (through January). Secret. Attached to a January 26 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson in which he noted that Katzenbach “seeks to convince you that things are in somewhat better shape than you may think; and—basically, he is right.” The memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

230. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, January 27, 1968, 1458Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Top Secret; Flash, Nodis. Received on January 27 at 10:50 a.m.

231. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, January 27, 1968, 1500Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Received January 27 at 11:14 a.m.

232. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, January 27, 1968, 1720Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–14 KOR/UN. Secret; Flash; Exdis. Repeated USUN.

233. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, January 28, 1968, 0152Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus. Repeated to USUN. Drafted at the White House, where it was cleared by the President; cleared by Berger and Walsh; and approved by Katzenbach.

234. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, January 28, 1968, 0208Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus. Repeated to USUN. Drafted by Meeker; cleared by Berger, Rostow, and Walsh; and approved by Katzenbach.

235. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, January 28, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968. Secret; Nodis; Cactus. The memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

236. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg)

Washington, January 28, 1968, 11:38 a.m.

237. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, January 28, 1968, 2055Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus. Repeated to USUN. Drafted by Berger; cleared by Rostow, McNamara, Rusk, and Katzenbach; and approved by Walsh. A draft version was approved by the President and read by him in its entirety during a phone conversation with Goldberg, who also approved its contents; see Document 236.

238. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, January 28, 1968, 2104Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by Malcolm Toon, Country Director, Soviet Union Affairs; cleared by Helms at CIA and Read; and approved by Katzenbach.

239. Memorandum for Record

Washington, January 29, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Eisenhower, Dwight D. Secret. The memorandum indicates that President Johnson saw it.

240. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, January 29, 1968, 1045Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

241. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, January 29, 1968, 8:41 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of Telephone Conversation between President Johnson and McNamara, January 29, 1968, 8:41 a.m., Tape F68.01, PNO 4. Secret. This transcript was prepared by the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume.

242. Report on Meeting of the Advisory Group

Washington, January 29, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Walt W. Rostow, Material re: Vietnam and Pueblo, January–February 1968. Top Secret. Prepared on February 1.

243. Notes of Meeting

Washington, January 29, 1968, 1:04–1:40 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo, VIII. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room.

244. Notes of Meeting

Washington, January 29, 1968, 1:40–3:25 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo, IX. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting took place in the family dining room at the White House.

245. Editorial Note

246. Information Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, January 29, 1968, 6:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. I, Part B (through January). Confidential.

247. Editorial Note

248. Notes of Meeting

Washington, January 30, 1968, 1:08–2:50 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo XI, 1:00 p.m. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held at the White House. The time of the meeting is from the President's Daily Diary. (Ibid.)

249. Telegram From the Joint Intelligence Committee to the Central Intelligence Agency

London, January 31, 1968, 1250Z.

250. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, February 1, 1968, 1552Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Cactus. Repeated to the White House. Drafted by Berger, cleared by Read, and approved by Katzenbach.

251. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, February 1, 1968, 1904Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Cactus. Repeated to USUN. Drafted by Meeker; cleared by Berger, Walsh, Sisco, and Rostow; and approved by Katzenbach. According to a copy of the telegram in the Johnson Library it was also cleared by President Johnson. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus I, Cactus State Cables, January 28, 1968 to February 10, 1968)

252. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson

Washington, February 1, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret. Drafted by Meeker and Berger and redone in Katzenbach's office.

253. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 2, 1968, 0405Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Cactus.

254. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 2, 1968, 0741Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus II, Cactus Seoul Cables, January 29, 1968 to February 9, 1968. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus. Rostow sent this telegram to President Johnson under a covering note of February 2, stating that the North Korean representative “was obviously instructed to stonewall until the U.S. position was revealed. This looks like a slow track at the moment.” Porter made a similar point in his comments on the meeting in telegram 3892 from Seoul, February 2, also attached to Rostow's February 2 note. Rostow's note indicates that the President saw the telegram. (Ibid.)

255. Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, February 2, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis; Cactus. A copy was sent to Katzenbach, Rostow, Read, Helms, and McNamara.

256. Memorandum From Alfred Jenkins of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, February 2, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part A (beginning February). Secret; Nodis; Cactus.

257. Paper Prepared by the Department of State

Washington, February 2, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part A (beginning February). Secret. Attached to a February 3 memorandum from Read to Rusk transmitting this and five additional papers covering other potential courses of action, including possible adjudication and arbitration, sending a Presidential letter to President Pak, making another advance to the USSR, and assessing third country approaches to the Soviets.

258. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, undated.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib. Part A (beginning February). Top Secret. A handwritten notation on the memorandum indicates it was received on February 3. Although the memorandum is on Department letterhead and is unsigned, presumably it is from Rusk.

259. Report Prepared by the Ball Committee

Washington, undated.

Source:Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Ball Committee Briefing Book, February 1968. Confidential. The principal members of the committee were George Ball, Chairman, Admiral David McDonald, General Mark Clark, and General Laurence Kuter. An identical copy of this document, without the attachment, bears a typewritten notation “Revised 2/3/68,” and a memorandum for the record shows that the initial meeting of the committee to discuss its organization and terms of reference was held on February 3. (Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Pueblo, Envelope marked “Hold for Mr. Ball”)

260. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, February 3, 1968, 1910Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus.

261. Memorandum From the Department of State to President Johnson

Washington, February 3, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Bundy.

262. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, February 3, 1968, 0242Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Meeker; cleared by Berger, Sisco, and Walsh; and approved by Katzenbach. The President saw a copy of the telegram. (Memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson, February 3; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus I, Cactus State Cables, January 28, 1968 to February 10, 1968)

263. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 4, 1968, 0355Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Nodis; Cactus.

264. Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, February 4, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret.

265. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, February 4, 1968, 2201Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6, KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Doherty; cleared by Berger, Walsh, Meeker, Steadman, and Sisco; and approved by Katzenbach.

266. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, February 5, 1968, 0020Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis.

267. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 5, 1968, 1045Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus II, Cactus Seoul Cables, January 29 to February 9, 1968. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus. Attached to a February 5 memorandum from Rostow to the President in which Rostow characterized the meeting as “inconclusive” and suggested a prompt decision be made “about the Moscow message in the light of Tommy's cable.” See Document 266. Rostow's memorandum indicates the President saw the telegram.

268. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, February 6, 1968, 0003Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis. Drafted by Rusk; cleared by Read, Rostow, and McNamara; and approved by Rusk.

269. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, February 6, 1968, 1515Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis.

270. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and George Ball

Washington, February 7, 1968, 9:59 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of Telephone Conversation between President Johnson and George Ball, February 7, 1968, 9:59 a.m., Tape F68.02, PNO 3. Secret. This transcript was prepared by the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume.

271. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, February 7, 1968.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Vietnam Policy, Memos to the President, T–167–69, Box 57, SPC–S–094–93. Secret. Drafted by Taylor.

272. Action Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, February 7, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Exdis; Sensitive.

273. Information Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, February 8, 1968, 7:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part A (beginning February). Secret. The memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

274. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 10, 1968, 0756Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Nodis; Cactus. Given to the President under February 10 covering memorandum from James L. Brown, Briefing Officer, White House Situation Room, which indicates that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IIa, Cactus Seoul Cables, February 10 to February 28, 1968)

275. Notes of Meeting

Washington, February 13, 1968, 1:12–2:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Luncheon Group, February 13, 1968. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held in the White House.

276. Action Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, February 15, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis.

277. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 16, 1968, 1122Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus. Rostow forwarded this telegram to President Johnson with an explanatory memorandum, February 16, which indicates that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IIa, Cactus Seoul Cables, February 10 to February 28, 1968)

278. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, February 16, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis.

279. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 18, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. V. Secret. This is a retyped version of the telegram given to the President with an attached memorandum from Rostow, February 20, who wrote: “I am not at all sure that his [Porter's] particular scenario is the right one; but we had better get a scenario soon.” A note on the telegram indicates that the President saw it.

280. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 20, 1968, 0528Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Nodis; Cactus. A copy of this telegram was given to the President under a February 20 covering memorandum from Arthur McCafferty that indicates the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Misc. Papers, February to December 1968)

281. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 20, 1968, 0825Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. A retyped copy of this telegram was given to the President under a February 20 covering memorandum from Arthur McCafferty that indicates the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Misc. Papers, February to December 1968)

282. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, February 22, 1968, 2142Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus. Also sent to Moscow, London, and Tokyo. Drafted by Berger, cleared by Rostow and Read, and approved by Rusk. Rostow sent a copy of this telegram to the President at his ranch in Texas, explaining that he, Rusk, and Clifford met that morning, February 22, and rejected apologizing to the North Koreans based on the alleged confession by the crew, and developed the approach contained therein. (Telegram CAP 80489 from Rostow to the President, February 22; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part B [beginning February])

283. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 23, 1968, 0945Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus.

284. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, February 24, 1968, 1853Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Repeated to Tokyo, London, Moscow, Stockholm, and Bern. Drafted by Yager; cleared by Walsh, Clifford, and Rostow; and approved by Katzenbach. Forwarded to the President at his ranch in Texas; that copy indicates that the President saw it. (Telegram CAP 80531, February 24, Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part B [beginning February])

285. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, February 24, 1968, 1901Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus. Repeated to Seoul. Drafted by Toon; cleared by Walsh, Clifford, Yager, and Rostow; and approved by Katzenbach.

286. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, February 26, 1968, 1405Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis; Cactus.

287. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, February 29, 1968, 0120Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Yager; cleared by Brown and Warnke; and approved by Katzenbach.

288. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, March 4, 1968, 0855Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

289. Memorandum From Alfred Jenkins of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, March 4, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council History, Pueblo Crisis, 1968, Vol. VII, Day-by-Day Documents, Part 14. Top Secret. A copy was sent to Jorden.

290. Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Brown) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)

Washington, March 4, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis.

291. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, March 5, 1968, 0825Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

292. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to Secretary of Defense Clifford

Washington, undated.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 385.3. Secret. The memorandum indicates that Clifford saw it on March 5.

293. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, March 9, 1968, 0020Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

294. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, March 9, 1968, 1856Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Brown, cleared by Walsh and Katzenbach, and approved by Brown.

295. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze)

Washington, March 11, 1968.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 385.3. Confidential. A stamped notation on the memorandum indicates that Nitze saw it.

296. Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Brown) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)

Washington, March 11, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis.

297. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, March 14, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968. Secret; Nodis. Attached to a memorandum from Rostow to the President, March 14, in which Rostow noted “Rusk's proposals on the Pueblo as we approach a dead end” and expressed “one thought: mine Haiphong and regard our Pueblo men as prisoners of the Vietnam war.” Rostow's memorandum indicates the President saw it.

298. Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Brown) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)

Washington, March 15, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis.

299. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, March 21, 1968, 0825Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

300. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, March 23, 1968, 0043Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Yager and Brown, cleared by Steadman and Walsh, and approved by Katzenbach.

301. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, March 26, 1968, 1615Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis.

302. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, March 28, 1968, 1420Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

303. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, April 11, 1968, 0950Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

304. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, April 16, 1968, 1810Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Yager, cleared by Walsh and Smith, and approved by Katzenbach. Repeated to Honolulu for the Presidential party. Johnson was in Hawaii for discussions with President Pak; see Document 194.

305. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, April 22, 1968, 0923Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

306. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, May 8, 1968, 0710Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

307. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 17, 1968, 1–3:15 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Leddy. The meeting was held in the Secretary's dining room at the Department of State. The memorandum is Part IV of V.

308. Action Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, May 19, 1968, 10:50 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968. Secret. Johnson handwrote “Let's discuss Tuesday on Agenda” at the end of the memorandum.

309. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, May 28, 1968, 0600Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

310. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, June 27, 1968, 0850Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

311. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 13, 1968, 5:30 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Homme on August 14.

312. Memorandum From Alfred Jenkins of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, September 4, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Miscellaneous, Vol. I. Secret.

313. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, September 17, 1968, 1050Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

314. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, September 18, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files, 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis.

315. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, September 21, 1968, 2036Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Leonard; cleared by Brown, Walsh, and Steadman; and approved by Katzenbach. Rostow forwarded a copy of telegram 242963 to President Johnson at the ranch in Texas as CAP 82460 with an opening paragraph indicating that Rusk and Clifford cleared the instructions. Rostow told Johnson that Clifford accepted the approach after he “understood the North Koreans were clear about the ambiguity.” Rostow reported that Katzenbach did not “think the other side will accept, but it's worth playing the hand.” (Telegram CAP 82460 from Rostow to Johnson, September 22, Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus Ib, Cactus State Cables, March 1 to September 30, 1968)

316. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, September 30, 1968, 0913Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

317. Action Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Katzenbach to President Johnson

Washington, undated.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968. Secret;Nodis; Cactus. Attached to an October 5 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson that indicates that the President saw it. Another copy is attached to an October 5 memorandum from Katzenbach to Rostow in which the former states: “This is a very important decision and I would very much appreciate it if the President would read the memorandum in its entirety.” (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

318. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, October 8, 1968, 1421Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Leonard; cleared by Meeker, Steadman, Ambassador Brown, Brown (S/S), and in draft by Armstrong (EA/P); and approved by Katzenbach.

319. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, October 10, 1968, 0955Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis, Cactus. Rostow forwarded this document to President Johnson under an October 10 covering memorandum stating, “The North Koreans herewith pretend not to have understood the 'over-write' ploy on the Pueblo crew—or, in fact, did not understand it. The issue remains in the air.” The memorandum indicates the President saw the documents. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IIb, Cactus Seoul Cables, March 1, 1968 to October 31, 1968)

320. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, October 12, 1968, 2130Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Leonard; cleared by Brown, Steadman, Salans, and Walsh; and approved by Katzenbach.

321. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, October 23, 1968, 1100Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Rostow transmitted a copy of this telegram to President Johnson under an October 23 covering memorandum stating that the “North Koreans clarify the 'over-write' ploy on the Pueblo; and they reject it, for the time being.” Rostow's memorandum indicates the President saw the telegram. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IIb, Cactus Seoul Cables, March 1, 1968 to October 31, 1968)

322. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, October 24, 1968, 2118Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Leonard; cleared by Brown, Salans, Steadman, and Walsh; and approved by Katzenbach.

323. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, October 31, 1968, 0610Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

324. Action Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson

Washington, December 3, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Brown on December 2. The date is handwritten on the memorandum. A handwritten note on the memorandum indicates that on December 3 the original signed memorandum was given to Rusk and a copy was sent to Smith at the White House.

325. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, December 11, 1968, 2008Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Also sent to Moscow and repeated to Tokyo and USUN. Drafted by Leonard; cleared by Brown, Steadman, Toon, Meeker, and Walsh; and approved by Katzenbach.

326. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, December 17, 1968, 0816Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

327. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, December 17, 1968.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis.

328. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, December 17, 1968, 2354Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Leonard, cleared by Brown and Walsh, and approved by Katzenbach.

329. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, December 19, 1968, 1100Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

330. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, December 22, 1968, 0625Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

331. Editorial Note

212. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 212. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

Washington, January 23, 1968, 0855Z.

102940. Literally Eyes Only for Ambassador. From the Secretary.

1. Captain of small Navy trawler-class surface ship, USS Pueblo, has reported that at approximately 0010 our time tonight,2 his vessel, according to his report, clearly outside any definition of territorial waters, was taken under fire with small number of badly wounded casualties. Vessel was then surrounded by North Korean naval craft which had been firing on it, and our last report from Captain was that he was being either towed or escorted into Wonsan harbor, roughly 25 miles distance.

2. Seoul, through UNC, should immediately seek MAC meeting. We understand you have already done so in connection with Seoul incidents, and although we are not clear whether attack and seizure can be construed as armistice violation, we would propose to use MAC channel in any event.3

3. Moscow should immediately reach Gromyko or highest available official to present facts and to express in strongest terms our view that Soviets should be in touch with North Koreans to obtain immediate release of vessel and appropriate care for wounded men. You should point out strongly that incident is bound to raise serious tension with North Koreans and must quickly become public. We believe Soviets should act at once to convey our position and strongest protest to North Koreans and should bring their influence to bear in the interest of avoiding any further consequences.

4. You may point out to Soviets that vessels of this type have been in international waters in this area for a considerable length of time and you may note, as you think appropriate, that its mission is similar to that of Soviet trawlers active in many parts of the world including close proximity of USA.

5. In addition, Moscow should convey facts immediately to Wilson party4 with suggestion that Wilson raise matter urgently with Kosygin.

6. All publicity on this matter will be handled from Washington. Orders to this effect have gone to military commands involved and you should hold matter on closest possible basis both before and after any announcement here.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Exdis. Also sent to Seoul and repeated to Tokyo. Drafted by Bundy; cleared by Brigadier General Steakley and in substance by Rusk and McNamara; and approved by Gendreau (S/S-O).

2 The time given is approximately 2:10 p.m. Korean Standard Time on Tuesday afternoon, January 23. Eastern Standard Time is 14 hours behind Korean Standard Time and Greenwich Mean Time is 9 hours behind Korean Standard Time. Numerous detailed chronologies based on transmissions from the Pueblo were prepared in the days and weeks following the seizure of the ship to document the exact sequence of events and time frame involved as precisely as possible. Defense Intelligence Agency, Special Intelligence Summary, “Situation Regarding USS Pueblo,” DIASIS 24–68, January 24, contains an analysis of the seizure of the Pueblo and a chronology of events. (NSA, Center for Cryptologic History, Historical Files, V. Initial Reaction, Box 4) Chronologies are also in the Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council History, Pueblo Crisis 1968, Vol. I, Basic Study and Presidential Decisions, and ibid., Vol. III, Day-by-Day Documents, Part One.

3 In telegram 102967 to Seoul, January 23, the Department instructed Porter to inform the ROKG of the incident; see footnote 2, Document 145.

4 Reference is to British Prime Minister Harold Wilson who was visiting Moscow at that time.

213. Notes of Meeting 213. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, January 23, 1968, 12:58–2:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Notes of the President's Tuesday National Security Lunch

Secretary McNamara told Clark Clifford 2 that “this is what it is like on a typical day. We had an inadvertent intrusion into Cambodia. We lost a B–52 with four H-bombs aboard. We had an intelligence ship captured by the North Koreans.”

Clark Clifford asked, “May I leave now?”

The President asked if there had been any reaction from the Soviets on the ship incident. Rostow said a message was coming up now.

Secretary Rusk said the Soviets had advised the U.S. Government that they had nothing to do with the incident and that the U.S. Government should talk with North Korea.3

Secretary Rusk said the problem of rescuing the ship and its crew is considerably different from retaliation resulting from an attack.

The President asked what are the alternatives. The President said he was sure they included: 1. Hitting the North Koreans with U.S. forces

2. Getting a thorough explanation

3. Capturing one of their ships

The President said he was anxious to know exactly what happened.

Secretary McNamara said he had no explanation other than the information that the ship was in international waters, more than fifteen miles out.

Secretary Rusk said that his department is studying the Armistice Agreement on the definition of international waters. He said there is a close relation to waters “contiguous” to North Korea, but the armistice does not define new international boundaries for the high seas. Where the ship was before the incident is unknown.

General Wheeler said this was not necessarily the case. Using a map, General Wheeler pointed to the position of the ship at 9:25 the night before and at 12 noon it was 25 miles off shore and 16 miles away from the nearest land associated with North Korea.

Secretary McNamara said it was unclear whether or not the ship had strayed into waters near the coast of North Korea prior to the incident.

Secretary Rusk said the North Koreans put out a very bitter statement charging the U.S. Government with spying and aggression. General Wheeler said the North Koreans charged us with engaging in acts of aggression.

Secretary McNamara said the alternatives included picking up units of the North Korean fleet or units of the North Korean army along the DMZ or re-enforcing U.S. troops in South Korea. He said we could fly U.S. aircraft from the states to re-enforce units currently stationed there.

Secretary McNamara said if this incident indicates any new threat on South Korea, this would be [un]desirable because North Korean air power is stronger than South Korean air power. The opposite is true of ground forces. Another alternative is to send additional naval forces.

CIA Director Helms said this incident is one in a series of increased harassment. He cited the recent plot against Blue House and many violations along the demilitarized zone.

[Here follows a brief discussion of a B–52 crash in Greenland.]

Returning to the ship incident off North Korea, Secretary McNamara said there was a period beginning about 10 p.m. in which DoD is not aware of exactly what happened aboard the ship. Secretary Rusk said the commander of the ship did not ask for air cover or help or did not try to get out of the area quickly.

General Wheeler said at 12 o'clock Korean time (noon) the ship encountered a North Korean patrol boat. The Pueblo indicated it was a hydrographic ship when approached. At 13:45 hours the message came back that the ship was being boarded. General Wheeler said the machine gun aboard the ship was not uncovered. The General showed the President a photograph of the ship.

Director Helms said he advised the Senate Foreign Relations Committee this morning of information about the incident.

Secretary Rusk then read from a cable which was brought into the meeting on a session which Ambassador Thompson had with the Soviets in Moscow. The Soviets said this was not their problem. They said the presence of U.S. troops in South Korea is a source of tension. They said they would not take action on the matter.4

The President asked what other channels are open to us.

Secretary Rusk said the Mixed [Military] Armistice Commission meets at midnight tonight to discuss the attack on Blue House. We will raise the matter of the ship at that time.

The President asked what has been the reaction of the South Koreans?

Secretary Rusk said the Minister of Defense chided us for urging them not to retaliate when they are attacked and yet now finding ourselves caught in this situation.

It is unclear whether our men were wounded by self-destruct devices or by enemy fire.

General Wheeler said the man who lost a leg was engaged in blowing up equipment. He said the use of the term “wounded” seemed odd unless enemy fire was involved on some of the casualties.

The President said we need to see what our options are in this situation.

Secretary McNamara said he had a couple of people working on this under Paul Nitze.

Secretary Rusk said the North Koreans may want to trade these sailors for infiltrators who have been captured crossing into South Korea.

The President said he thinks that this incident is related to the whole picture. He said he would not be surprised if something hap pened in Berlin to coincide with what is going on in Vietnam and in Korea.

[Here follows a brief discussion of the situation in Vietnam.]

Walt Rostow asked should the incident be referred to the United Nations, involving the ship.

The President said this would be protective and would show a lack of malice on our part.

Secretary Rusk said we might like to take this to the Security Council. First, we should see what comes from the Mixed [Military] Armistice Commission.

Director Helms said the Soviets have their own ships of this kind including two ships off the Korean coast to keep an eye on the Red Chinese. In addition, they have one ship off Guam.

[Here follows a discussion of various unrelated matters.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo I. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held in the White House.

2  Clifford was at this time Secretary of Defense-designate.

3 The Soviet response is in telegram 2550 from Moscow, January 23. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

4  Thompson met with Soviet Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs Kuznetsov on January 23 to discuss the facts surrounding the incident. (Ibid.)

214. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, United Nations Command, and Commander of United States, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 214. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, United Nations Command, and Commander of United States, Korea (Bonesteel) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Seoul, January 23, 1968, 1405Z.

231405Z/UK 50223. Subject: Briefing of ROK Minister of Defense on Pueblo incident (S).

1. (S) C/S UNC/USFK briefed ROK MND at about 1830 I, 23 Jan 68, local (0930 Z) after approval received for classified briefing. MND was emotionally irate and indicated US had done little after North Korean raid aimed at assassination of President Park except call meeting at Panmunjom and take normal operational steps, but because of Pueblo incident brought F–105's into Osan without prior ROK knowledge, was moving Enterprise, and seemed to be ready to risk war.

2. (S) He said would refrain from retaliatory raids against North Korea for time being, but if North Koreans made other significant raids, he would promise nothing further.

3. (S) He commented it would be wrong to cancel Armistice Commission meeting set for 1100 hours tomorrow because it had been announced publicly with purpose to protest vicious attack on President's mansion, Seoul.

1 Source: Department of State,INR/IL Historical Files, Pueblo, 23 January 1968 to December 1968. Secret; Immediate; Noforn. Repeated to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and passed to the Department of Defense, the White House, the Department of State, and the Defense Intelligence Agency.

215. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Helms to Secretary Defense McNamara 215. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Helms to Secretary Defense McNamara 1

Washington, January 23, 1968.

SUBJECT

North Korean Intentions

1. Per McNamara's request, the Director of Central Intelligence herewith submits a preliminary assessment of the Pueblo incident.2

2. Since the fall of 1966, North Korea has been pursuing a tougher, more aggressive policy toward South Korea and the US. Pyongyang has deliberately heightened tensions along the DMZ, landed infiltration teams inside South Korea, and has been more aggressive in shooting incidents involving South Korean fishing vessels and patrol boats. This policy is probably intended by the North Korean leadership primarily as a demonstration against US and ROK action in Vietnam.3

3. The attempt of an armed North Korean infiltration team to attack the presidential mansion in Seoul was the most conspicuous exploit of this North Korean policy thus far. Now the seizure of the USS Pueblo adds a direct involvement with the US in an unusually dramatic way.

4. In our view the two incidents were not planned jointly. The attack in Seoul almost certainly involved considerable advance planning. It is unlikely that the attack was timed to coincide with the seizure of the Pueblo, which did not begin patrolling until 10 January.

5. Nevertheless, the circumstances of the Pueblo's capture indicate that the North Koreans acted deliberately. If the local North Korean commander was exceeding his instructions, there was ample time for Pyongyang to countermand his actions.

6. What is known thus far does not suggest that the North Koreans are deliberately creating a pretext for hostilities. At this stage, however, regardless of whether they planned for it or not, they are probably now prepared to face a period of sharply heightened tensions. They claim, and they may believe, that the Pueblo was within their territorial waters. They will undertake a heavy propaganda exploitation of the affair for some days at least. They will probably not release the crew or the ship promptly unless they judge that the US will resort to retaliatory action, such as an air attack against the patrol craft involved in seizing the Pueblo.

7. Pyongyang will be aware that the ROK on its own motion will probably undertake some violent retaliation for the episode in Seoul, presumably in the DMZ. The prospect of this will probably cause the North Koreans to exercise some caution in handling the further course of the affair.

8. If tensions rise sharply, the Soviets seem bound to take a hand at least privately. They will almost certainly advise the North Koreans to terminate the episode at an early date.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. I, Part B (through January). Secret; Sensitive. Also sent to Nitze, Rostow, Rusk, Katzenbach, Bundy, General Carroll, Hughes, and General Carter. Rostow sent this memorandum under a January 23 covering note to the President indicating that it contained Helm's “personal assessment.” Rostow's note indicates that the President saw the memorandum.

2 In advance of Rusk's luncheon meeting with the President on January 23 INR prepared an assessment containing conclusions similar to those in this document. (Memorandum from Greene to Denney, January 23; Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, NK Seizure of USS Pueblo, INR/OD, January 1968)

3 See SNIE 14.2–67, “North Korean Intentions and Capabilities with Respect to South Korea,” dated 21 September 1967. [Footnote in the source text; see Document 130.]

216. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 216. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, January 23, 1968, 2121Z.

103144. Ref: Seoul 3562.2

1. Senior UNCMAC member should make strong, dignified and hard statements on both North Korean raid on Seoul and on seizure of Pueblo, keeping both in balance so as not to give South Koreans feeling we attaching more importance to latter.

2. If North Koreans question validity of raising Pueblo under Armistice Agreement, you are to ignore question and avoid argument on this. Wish you to concentrate on fact that raids and Pueblo seizure, following last year's harassments in DMZ and raids, are part of a new pattern of North Korean belligerence and aggressive actions which dangerously increase tensions in this area. If they are persisted in, they will have the most serious consequences to the maintenance of the Armistice and to the preservation of peace in Korea. North Koreans should be warned that these acts cannot be perpetrated with impunity.

3. Leave it to you to work out statement on raiders. With respect to Pueblo you are to draw on DOD statement and State Dept. Spokesman's statement ignoring approach to Soviets, and stressing the following:3 a. Pueblo was in international waters at 39 degrees 25'05” North, 127 degrees 54'09” East.

b. Seizure was in violation of international law. Request an apology for this illegal action.

c. Vessel and crew must be returned intact and immediately.

d. U.S. reserves right to ask for compensation under International Law.

4. You should end presentation with the following words: I have been instructed by the U.S. Government4 to say the following directly to you. The events of last year, and especially the last few days, have put new complexion on the situation in Korea. The North Korean regime has embarked on campaign of provocation, sabotage, and assassination in violation of the Armistice Agreement and international law. The Republic of Korea and the United States threaten no one. If the North Korean regime persists in this campaign, which can only endanger the peace of this area, the responsibility for the consequences will rest with the North Korean regime.5

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–14 KOR/UN. Secret; Flash. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD and the White House. Drafted by Fleck and Berger; cleared by Steadman, Meeker, Bundy, Rostow, and Read; and approved by Rusk.

2 In telegram 3562 from Seoul, January 23, the Embassy referred to the upcoming MAC meeting called to protest the Blue House raid and indicated that, due to time constraints, it preferred to raise the Pueblo issue at a subsequent meeting. (Ibid.) In response the Department of State instructed the Embassy to raise the issue at the January 24 MAC meeting. (Telegram 103026 to Seoul, January 23; ibid., POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3 Initial statements issued by the Departments of Defense and State on January 23, as well as President Johnson's address to the nation on January 26, are in Department of State Bulletin, February 12, 1968, pp. 189–190.

4 The Department of State underscored the importance of the statement being made on behalf of the U.S. Government, even though U.S. participation in the MAC was as a representative of the United Nations. The Department insisted that the statement refer to the “US and US alone,” because Washington did “not want to highlight UNC capacity and thus stimulate UN delegations in New York to question our right to speak in this capacity.” (Telegram 103324 to Seoul, January 23; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–14 KOR/UN)

5 A U.S. observer described the atmosphere of the meeting as “not tense” and the North Koreans as chatting and acting “generally in jocular manner, laughing outright at statement of US demands” presented by Rear Admiral Smith in response to the Blue House raid and the Pueblo incident. A summary of the meeting was transmitted in telegram 3597 from Seoul, January 24. A verbatim text of Smith's statement is in telegram 3608 from Seoul, January 25, and a translation of the statement made by the North Korean Senior Representative, General Pak Chang Kuk, is in telegram 3624 from Seoul, January 25. (All ibid.)

217. Summary Minutes of Meeting 217. Summary Minutes of Meeting1

Washington, January 24, 1968, 10:30–11:45 a.m.

SUBJECT

Summary Minutes of Pueblo Group

PARTICIPANTS

Secretary McNamara

Deputy Secretary Nitze

Assistant Secretary Warnke

Richard Steadman

General Earle Wheeler

Under Secretary Katzenbach

Deputy Assistant Secretary Samuel Berger

CIA Director Helms

[name not declassified]

Walt Rostow

Clark Clifford

George Christian

Prior to the beginning of the meeting, George Christian raised the question of how to deal with the press. In response to his question as to what should be said about our going to the Russians with the request that they ask the North Koreans to return the Pueblo and its crew, it was suggested that he say the U.S. has been in touch with Moscow, is not satisfied with the Russian response and will be in touch with the Russians again. The suggestion was made that the press could be told that Ambassador Goldberg was seeing U Thant this morning. As to what could be said about U.S. reaction to the incident, it was suggested that he say the capture of the Pueblo, because it was a matter of great gravity, was being closely studied prior to the President's decision on his course of action.

Secretary McNamara said the purpose of this meeting should be defined and further organizational arrangements decided. He felt that we should try to answer three questions:2

1. What were the North Koreans trying to do by capturing the Pueblo?

2. What do we think the Koreans will now do?

3. How does the U.S. respond to this incident?

Secretary McNamara suggested that an organization similar to that which handled the Cuban crisis should be set up. He felt we needed to close promptly the gaps in our knowledge and to gather the considered views of those attending the meeting so that recommendations could be made to the President before midnight. He said we must respond firmly and promptly to the North Korean action.

Under Secretary Katzenbach suggested an interdepartmental group under the chairmanship of Deputy Assistant Secretary Berger.

In response to a question by Mr. Rostow, Secretary McNamara said the seriousness of the incident was made clear by our belief that the North Koreans are not about to give up the Pueblo soon.

Director Helms, in answer to the question of why the Koreans captured the Pueblo, suggested two motivations: 1. To hinder the movement of Koreans to South Vietnam, and

2. To harass the U.S. in its conduct of the war in Vietnam.

He referred to several reports from Bloc sources concerning proposals to open a second front in Korea. He also had a report that China would like to see the war in Korea reopened. He concluded that their present estimate was that the North Koreans would not reopen the war now but would make the situation as tough as possible for us. He said essentially it is a question of whether we or they have the tougher will.

Secretary McNamara doubted that the North Korean purpose was to reduce the level of Korean forces in South Vietnam. He said that there were 1,200,000 free world forces in South Korea, and that the risk involved in capturing the Pueblo was much too high if the purpose was to effect the level of forces by 10 to 15,000 troops. He wondered whether they did not have another objective which involved tying down the U.S.—a much more serious objective.

Mr. Helms said he agreed that one objective would be to create the appearance of a second front which would reduce U.S. freedom of action. Mr. Rostow pointed out that the Soviets had this objective in the Middle East crisis but that it hadn't worked very well. Mr. Helms called attention to the response of Soviet Foreign Office official, Kuznetsov, when asked by Ambassador Thompson to convey our concern to the North Koreans. He noted that Kuznetsov replied negatively without reference to anyone and without promising to consult his superiors.3 It was obvious that the Russians knew what was going on in North Korea. Secretary McNamara agreed that the Russians were knowledgeable.

Mr. Berger said it may well be that the Russians assumed we could not respond very effectively to North Korean provocation and that they agreed that the North Koreans should take advantage of the “target of opportunity,” i.e., the presence of the Pueblo off North Korea.

Secretary McNamara responded that there is a great deal we can do, including mining, conducting a quarantine, blocking shipping into North Korea, etc.

Mr. Berger said that possibly the North Koreans wanted to create a second Vietnam. They knew that we were holding down the South Koreans who are anxious to retaliate for recent North Korean raids. Both Secretary McNamara and Mr. Helms agreed that this was a possible motivation for the action.

Mr. Rostow said that possibly they were thinking that the U.S. would be reluctant in an election year to make a major response involving such actions as calling up the reserves. It is possible that they are challenging us and trying to make our problems more difficult. He noted that their action had already led us to divert the aircraft carrier Enterprise from South Vietnam by putting it into the Sea of Japan off North Korea. He said it is possible that the attempt to assassinate President Park was part of this plan.

Mr. Katzenbach described the action as a calculated attack on a target of opportunity. He noted that the North Koreans didn't know the Pueblo was coming their way before the 10th of January. After that date they may have planned to capture it, acting when the Pueblo was off Wonsan. He said that what the North Koreans do now depends a great deal on what the U.S. does. He doubted that the North Koreans would return the ship or the crew.

The North Koreans, according to an intercept, will hold the crew for ten days at least in order to interrogate them. General Wheeler noted that the North Koreans had held some of our pilots for a year and had treated them very roughly before releasing them. Secretary McNamara added that the fact that they will be holding the U.S. crew increases the seriousness of the situation.

Deputy Secretary Nitze said the North Korean motivation might be their hope that pressure on us might lead us to take a weaker position on Vietnam negotiations. Thus, it might be necessary for us to ask Congress for additional authority to take military action in order to make clear to the Soviets that they must not misunderstand our attitude toward the Pueblo incident.

Secretary McNamara said if their effort was aimed at tying our hands in other areas, they had succeeded since we cannot move in South Vietnam until the Pueblo incident is resolved.

Both Mr. Christian and Mr. Rostow mentioned the large number of telegrams from private U.S. citizens which had already been received by the White House. These messages, spontaneously sent, were demanding immediate U.S. action.

Mr. Rostow suggested that the North Vietnamese [Korean] action may have been timed with the North Vietnamese military action at Qhe Sanh.

Mr. Katzenbach doubted the relationship. The North Korean Premier, Kim Il-Song, is opposed to negotiation of the Vietnam war. If there is a relationship, he did not understand why the Russians were opposed to doing anything about North Korea.

Mr. Rostow said he assumed that the Soviets knew of the North Vietnamese action. Considerable pressure was being exerted on us, both in Vietnam and in Korea.

Mr. Helms commented that North Korea wants to be in the hands of neither the Russians or the Communist Chinese. Mr. Rostow added that Soviet influence is more effective in North Korea than it is in North Vietnam. One far-out possibility was that the North Korean action was prompted by the Chinese in an effort to cross up the negotiations on Vietnam. Mr. Helms commented that the attack on the South Korean President's home had been planned for at least two years.

Mr. Katzenbach said the most plausible position is that the Pueblo incident was a North Korean action which had been undertaken with the consent of the Russians and Communist Chinese. Mr. Rostow restated his view that the Pueblo incident may be tied in with numerous Communist actions in the Pacific area. He added that the Russians may have been interested in getting the equipment from the Pueblo.

Mr. Berger said that the North Koreans may be stepping up harassment of all kinds. It could be that the Soviets knew of the North Korean campaign and decided against interfering.

All agreed that the North Koreans will hold the ship and the crew and that they will not respond to diplomatic pressure alone.

Mr. Rostow reviewed some of the diplomatic actions being taken or which could be taken: 1. Ambassador Goldberg is to see UN Secretary General U Thant at 11:00 A.M. He is to try to interest U Thant in a solution of the Pueblo incident but is not to request the Secretary General's good offices.4

2. We could take the issue to the UN Security Council in order to buy time in which a decision can be made as to what U.S. military action is to be taken. There would be no expectation that a solution could come out of the UN Security Council meeting.

3. A letter from the President to U Thant might be used to give the Secretary General a sense of the gravity of the situation. The letter would link North Korean infiltration, including the Blue House effort, to the Pueblo capture.

4. A second effort to enlist the Russians in promoting a solution might consist of a Presidential letter to Kosygin.

Secretary McNamara said we must first decide what we will do. Mr. Berger pointed out that although Korean President Park has agreed not to retaliate for the present, the Koreans will do so no matter what we say if harassments continue to increase. General Wheeler said our commander in Korea is already deeply concerned and had asked whether he should play the current situation hot or cool with the Koreans.

General Wheeler said he was not now prepared to recommend specific military actions but we could do any or all of the following: 1. Reinforce our military strength in South Korea and in the area nearby. We could send additional air and naval units to Korea and to areas closer to Korea. One question was whether we could use Japanese facilities in this reinforcement activity. If we can, it would make a great deal of difference. Mr. Berger replied that we could use Japanese facilities. Mr. Katzenbach said we should consider sending a Presidential letter to Sato or possibly a Presidential emissary.

2. We could use our naval preponderance in the area, both surface and under sea, to do any of the following: a. find North Korean shipping at sea which could be seized or sunk. The purpose would be to seize or destroy something of value to North Korea which was at sea.

b. blockade North Korea by mining selected harbors, either with standard mines or with MARK 36 bombs. Submarines could also be used in this effort.

c. punitive activities against North Korean coastal ocean-going traffic and the blocking of all such traffic.

d. air and naval strikes against selective targets. The port of Wonsan was a tough target because it was well defended. Railroad and POL storage were other targets.

e. a raid in force on an isolated outpost along the Korean DMZ. Although General Wheeler did not favor this suggestion, he said it would be possible to destroy such an outpost and capture the garrison.

f. photo reconnaissance should be undertaken before any other action. A drone unit had been moved to Okinawa and RF 4 planes are in South Korea. These could be used if weather permits. Mr. Helms said that Black Shield could be available for use within 24 hours.5

Secretary McNamara suggested two general types of action: 1. A general military movement into the Korean area which would signal our present intentions and be an indication of things to come.

2. A buildup of U.S. military forces which could include the call up of military reserves and a request of Congress to authorize the extension of the terms of service of those now in the military.

Mr. Rostow said one thing we might do would be to direct the South Koreans to seize the Soviet hydrologic ship which is now following the Enterprise. This action would be symmetrical with the North Korean action and it would get the South Koreans involved in the situation.

Mr. Nitze said such an action would provide an obvious reposte; i.e., the Soviets might shoot back.

Mr. Clifford asked whether there was any merit in trying to get the ship back. General Wheeler responded that this would be very difficult to do because of the air defense around Wonsan and the shallow waters of the port. Mr. Katzenbach said an effort to get the ship back would create psychological problems, i.e., that we placed greater value on the ship than on the personnel.

General Wheeler said that he hated to see a U.S. ship in the hands of an enemy. In addition, there was some equipment still on board the ship, including a computer which would be compromised. He repeated that an effort to sink the Pueblo by submarine would be very difficult because of the shallow water. An air attack on the ship would encounter stiff North Korean resistance.

Secretary McNamara said there were three areas in which action should be taken: 1. on the diplomatic track;

2. reinforce our total military strength, using existing Presidential authority such as extending the term of military service;

3. applying U.S. military power in the area such as restricting foreign shipping, the use of mines, blockade, etc.

Mr. Katzenbach said one idea would be to put another U.S. ship in the area where the Pueblo was seized and give this ship full air and naval protection. This would indicate that we believed we had a right to put the Pueblo where it was, but also have a beneficial effect on U.S. prestige. General Wheeler said the U.S.S. Banner would be available for such a mission.

Mr. Helms said that for some weeks we have wanted to know more about North Korean troop dispositions. However, the State Department had opposed a Black Shield mission. Current developments would probably alter this earlier judgment.

Mr. Rostow said we should put in writing what we know about the incident, what things we are not sure about, and then instruct the intelligence community to focus on whether the Pueblo incident is related to Qhe Sanh or the attack on the Blue House; also, whether the motive is diversionary.

Secretary McNamara agreed with this method of proceeding. He thought we should have a plan for photo reconnaissance, including authorization of a Black Shield mission, by the end of the day.

Mr. Rostow said that at the 1:00 P.M. NSC meeting, we should be prepared to report to the President on the work already done—the intelligence situation, the reconnaissance option, diplomatic moves, reinforcing military moves, including existing Presidential powers. He said that military and diplomatic moves should be used to convey to the North Koreans and the Russians that they have miscalculated the effect of the Pueblo incident on the U.S. In addition, we should initiate a military build-up on the scene.

Mr. Katzenbach suggested that we must answer the question: “What next.” All agreed that before we start down the road, we must carefully look at where it will end.

Mr. Clifford said the North Koreans will say that the Pueblo was within their territorial waters. He asked how we could prove to everyone that the ship was in international waters.

Mr. Katzenbach noted that the South Koreans seized a North Korean ship some 40 miles offshore. General Wheeler added that this was a case of hot pursuit; therefore, would not be applicable to the Pueblo incident.

There followed a discussion of how we could prove the exact location of the Pueblo. The ship had been on its track since January 10 but had maintained radio silence. It had instructions to go no closer than 13 nautical miles from shore. Mr. Clifford asked whether we could use intercepts to disprove the North Korean claim that the Pueblo was within its territorial waters. Mr. McNamara said we would have to use such intercepts because of the seriousness of the actions we would be taking. He added that we would need the fullest justification for our action which would have to be based on proof of the exact location of the Pueblo when it was attacked. Mr. Nitze added that the North Koreans had 83 of our military personnel to brainwash and possibly make confessions.

Turning to the photo reconnaissance problem, Mr. Nitze noted that one pass with the Black Shield was quite safe but two or three passes would make it vulnerable. Mr. Berger asked what we would do if the North Koreans fired on the photo reconnaissance plane. General Wheeler noted that the North Koreans have been practicing with SAMs against targets flying at altitudes used by Black Shield. The drone would create no problem but its reconnaissance was of a limited usefulness. Mr. McNamara added that Black Shield was essential.

Mr. Rostow reviewed the work to be done by 1:00 P.M. and the papers to be prepared for the group when it meets again at 6:00 P.M. in State Department. Mr. Helms will have the reconnaissance plan. Defense will list our military capabilities for action in the area. Existing Presidential authority will be compiled by Defense.CIA will prepare intelligence refinements including why the Koreans took the action and what their present intentions are. State will prepare the diplomatic options and the decisions to be taken in this area. State will also prepare the basis for U.S. action and its presentation to the public. An overall scenario or plan of action will be pulled together by State.

Mr. Clifford said in his view the question was whether the loss of a U.S. ship with its crew was worth a major military confrontation with North Korea.

Secretary McNamara felt that by this afternoon we would be able to narrow the options open to us to apply military pressure. We could probably reach agreement on how the North Koreans would react and what we would do, depending upon their further reaction. However, it is necessary to give the North Koreans promptly a clear message of our firmness.

Mr. Christian asked that consideration be given to whether the President should inform the public as to what we are doing.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Bromley Smith, Meeting of Pueblo Group, January 24, 1968, 10:30 a.m. Top Secret. Notes of this meeting were also drafted by George Christian. (Ibid., Meeting Notes File, Meeting at State on Pueblo) When McNamara informed the President of this meeting and its participants in a phone conversation earlier the same morning, the President suggested that Clifford also attend, explaining that “he ought to learn it, cause it's gonna be heavy.” (Ibid., Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of Telephone Conversation between President Johnson and McNamara, January 24, 1968, 9:18 a.m., Tape F68.01, PNO 1)

2 In his phone conversation with the President that morning McNamara raised the importance of the three questions. In response to the President's query concerning the actions of the Pueblo's commander, McNamara replied: “Mr. President, I honestly don't know. I called Nick [Katzenbach] this morning and later Walt [Rostow] and said I think we need a Cuban Missile Crisis approach to this, and, goddamn, we ought to get locked in a room and you ought to keep us there, insist we stay there, until we come up with answers to three questions: What was the Korean objective? Why did they do it? Secondly, what are they going to do now—blackmail us, let it go, you know, what? And, thirdly, what should we do now? There are a whole series of things we've thought of here—quarantine them, steal one of their ships, etc., etc., etc. But we just have got to act quickly. I don't think we can let the day go by before reporting to you our at least tentative views on those three questions.” The President commented, “I told Walt that I thought we ought to have done that beginning at 2 o'clock night before last and yesterday and then today too,” to which McNamara responded, “I think you're right.” (Ibid.)

3 As reported by Thompson in telegram 2550 from Moscow, January 23. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

4  Goldberg provided a summary of his meeting with U Thant in telegram 3481 from New York, January 24, at which U Thant expressed a willingness to use his good offices to seek Soviet views about the Pueblo incident. U Thant told Goldberg that since “North Korea is '75 per cent in Sov camp'” the Soviets should be contacted first. U Thant also observed that the incident underscored his belief that the United Nations should have North Korean and North Vietnamese observers. (Ibid.)

5 Black Shield missions consisted of intelligence-gathering overflights to conduct photographic reconnaissance. A memorandum prepared by the Directorate of Intelligence, CIA, January 29, assessing the results of the Black Shield mission over North Korea on January 26 and discussing the photographic information obtained by the flight is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Miscellaneous, Vol. I.

218. Notes of Meeting 218. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, January 24, 1968, 1 p.m.

SUBJECT

Notes of the President's Meeting With the National Security Council

PART I

The President: The Security Council meeting was set up before the ship incident. I want Secretary McNamara to bring you up to date on this matter. In addition we have asked Cyrus Vance and Lucius Battle for their opinions and judgments on Cyprus.

Secretary McNamara: All of you know the information which has been published. I will not go over any of that. We do not know what happened except that this incident was pre-planned. The earliest date on which it could have been planned was January 10 since this was the first time the North Koreans knew that the ship would be in the area.

Three things are clear: 1. It was a conscious effort to provoke a response or a lack of response.

2. The Soviets knew of it in advance.

3. The North Koreans have no intention of returning the men or the ship. I view this situation very seriously.

There are three key questions which are unanswered: 1. Why did they do it?

2. What will they do now?

3. How should we respond? The President: Did the skipper ask for help?

General Wheeler: There was a message from the ship “These fellows mean business. SOS. SOS.” His next message was that they were boarding the ship.

At 1200 (noon) the first North Korean vessel made contact with the Pueblo. One hour later, 3 other North Korean vessels appeared and several MIG fighters were seen overhead.

It is important to remember that we have harassments of this type all the time. The skipper probably considered it just that—an harassment—until between 1:00 and 1:45. This was when he recognized it as a very different situation from a normal harassment. At 1:45 he sent out the call for help.

Convert that to Eastern Standard Time, the first encounter was at 2200 (10:00 p.m. EST). This was when he was ordered to “heave to or I will open fire on you.”

At 2345 (11:45 EST) Pueblo radioed she was being boarded.

At 2354 (11:54 EST) the first SOS came.

We ceased to hear from the Pueblo 31 minutes later.

The President: Were there no planes available which were prepared to come to the aid of this vessel? Every press story I have seen this morning said that U.S. planes were only 30 minutes away.

Secretary McNamara: Air defenses in the Wonsan area are extensive. If we had sent airplanes to support and intercept, it is likely that these extensive air defense measures would be brought into play. In addition, it is necessary to consider the time of day and the approach of darkness.

General Wheeler: Aircraft would have needed to refuel in the air. Twilight comes at 5:09. Darkness comes at 5:38. There were only 3–1/2 hours of light. The Commander of the Fifth Air Force issued an order to dispatch aircraft but then reversed the order because of the approach of darkness and the superiority of enemy forces in the area.

Secretary McNamara: The North Koreans have a large air base in Wonsan.

Walt Rostow: We need to get together on these times. I have a document which agrees with yours that the first contact was at 2200. I have that the first SOS was received at 2328. McNamara said this was 2354. I have information that the ship went off the air 0032. Secretary McNamara said the ship went off the air at 0025. For a matter of historical accuracy, we need to determine what is the correct time.

The President: I want you to assemble for me all the facts on this matter. Until now, I have been under the impression that the ship did not ask for help. Get all the facts and document them well so I can study this matter further.

Secretary Rusk: The negative reaction of North Korea and the Soviet Union was to be expected. One would expect the Soviets not to take responsibility. The reaction of the North Koreans last night at Panmunjom was consistent with what I had expected. There are two conclusions: 1. It looks as if this incident was pre-planned.

2. The Soviets may have had advance notice of what was planned.2

The President: What were the reasons for it?

Secretary Rusk: It could be a number of things. They may be trying to put additional pressure on us with reference to Vietnam. They may be trying to open up a second front. I do not see much in it unless they had either of these two objectives in mind.

The President: Have you fully briefed the members of Congress?

General Wheeler: General Brown already has talked with Senator Russell. He will see Senator Mundt, Senator Dodd and Senator Thurmond later today as directed by the President.

Senator Russell seemed satisfied with the explanation given him today by General Brown. He was unhappy that an American ship was taken without a shot being fired on our side.

The House Armed Services Committee was briefed this morning at its regular meeting. I will give the President a full report on that as soon as possible.

The President: All of the Committees will begin investigations of this incident once it cools down. Should we do anything to head this off?

Secretary McNamara: Until we know precisely what we are going to do, I do not recommend meeting with the Congress. They are not interested as much in what happened, which I think has been explained, as in what we plan to do.

Secretary Rusk: In my meeting with the House Foreign Affairs Committee this morning, they were outraged at the action by the North Koreans. They realize it is a very serious matter. They were understanding and were not pushing any particular course of action.

The President: What other ways are there for us to find out more about exactly what happened?

General Wheeler: We will receive additional information for continued research by NSA on intercepts. In addition we will learn more from statements by the North Koreans and the Soviets.

Leonard Marks: From North Korean press reports, it is obvious they are trying to create the following impressions: 1. They want to create fear among the South Koreans.

2. They are trying to create the impression that increased infiltration will take place.

3. They are making very flat statements about this being a “spy boat” which was carrying on hostile actions.

Richard Helms: I would agree with what has been said. This appears to be an effort by North Korea to support the North Vietnamese in their efforts. They want to distract attention from Vietnam.

The President: They may also want to detain the Carrier Enterprise.

The President then read the Reuters wire account of an alleged confession by Commander L.M. Bucher, Captain of the Pueblo. The text of alleged confession is attached at Appendix A.3

Secretary Rusk: We should analyze the tapes to determine if this is Bucher. I frankly do not see how they could get a U.S. Navy Commander to make statements like that.

The President: Look very closely at this record.

(General Wheeler and Secretary McNamara said this was being done.)

Secretary McNamara: It is important to remember that we did not know where this ship was prior to the time of this incident. Our best reports are that the ship was outside of territorial waters.

The President: Is there much chance of error?

Secretary McNamara: Admiral Moorer, Chief of Naval Operations, said there is less than 1% chance of error in daylight conditions such as existed at the time. The radio intercepts of the North Korean craft placed them in the same area reported by the Pueblo: that was between 15–1/2 and 17–1/2 miles from shore.

Richard Helms: Our fix is 15–1/2 to 17. Both of these figures are outside of territorial waters.

Secretary McNamara: The ship did destroy some of its classified equipment. We do know that not all classified equipment was destroyed.

The President: How much of a problem does that create for us?4

Secretary McNamara: This is much less of a problem than the diplomatic problems and the prestige.

Walt Rostow: The confession by the Captain appears to have been written by the Soviets. This is not the language of an American ship captain. The Soviets may have had a hand in drafting it.

Secretary McNamara: The impression that the Soviets were informed in advance is supported by their actions in Moscow. When Ambassador Thompson went to the Soviets, he received a Soviet position on this quite promptly. It is unlikely that the Soviets could have reached [received] the information about the incident, conferred about it, and then taken a position so quickly without advance knowledge that the incident was to take place.

Richard Helms: This is a very serious matter. It appears the North Koreans are doing this in support of the North Vietnamese against us. It looks, at this time, like collusion between the North Koreans and the Soviets. It appears to be another attempt to divert us from our efforts in Vietnam.

Last August, the Polish Military Mission went to North Korea. It was learned [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that the North Koreans have sent 30 pilots to North Vietnam. They also gave the North Vietnamese 10 MIG–21's. North Korea wants to do all it can to help the North Vietnamese. In addition, they want to keep the ROK from sending more troops to assist the South Vietnamese.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said the Soviets are putting pressure on North Korea to take some of the pressure off Vietnam. They advised that 2500 North Korean officers have been trained for sabotage and terrorism in South Korea.

The President: Would not it be wise now that we have definite information where the incident occurred to tell Senator Fulbright so that he will be more responsible about his statements?5

1 Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo II, 1:00 p.m. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room at the White House. A memorandum of this meeting was also prepared by Harold H. Saunders, and summary notes of this and a brief meeting following the NSC meeting were prepared by Bromley Smith. (Both ibid., National Security File, National Security Council Meetings, Vol. IV, Tab 62, January 24, 1968)

2 On January 24 the Bureau of Intelligence and Research issued Intelligence Note 67, which concluded that the Soviet Union “appears to have been caught unawares by the Pueblo incident,” based on a lack of evidence suggesting that “Moscow instigated the North Korean seizure of the Pueblo or that Moscow even knew in advance that the incident would take place.” In terms of Moscow's response to the incident, the report suggested “that the USSR wants to avoid all direct involvement in the present differences between the US and North Korea.” (Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Pueblo, 23 January 1968 through December 1968) An Intelligence Memorandum issued by the CIA on the same day rejected Chinese involvement and concluded that the Soviets were behind neither the Blue House raid nor the seizure of the Pueblo. (Intelligence Memorandum No. 0580/68, “Confrontation in Korea,” January 24; ibid.)

3 Not printed.

4 On January 24 the Director of the NSA cabled two reports to the Special Security Office of DIA and the JCS evaluating the impact of the loss of the ship and its equipment. Regarding the effect on communications security, the Director stated that the capture of the Pueblo represented “a major intelligence coup without parallel in modern history.” Similarly, the overall loss and impact on U.S. ability to conduct signals intelligence was deemed “very severe.” (Both in Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Codeword Material, Vol. I, Part B [through January]) An NSA analysis prepared after the crew had been returned and debriefed concluded that “The unnecessary capture of excess equipment and materials was the most significant loss sustained in the cryptographic area.” (“Cryptologic-Cryptographic Damage Assessment: USS Pueblo, AGER–2, 23 January–23 December 1968”; NSA, Center for Cryptologic History, Historical Files, Carton VIII)

5 The memorandum for the record of this meeting by Saunders indicates that the discussion continued, focusing first on the Cyprus problem and then on the situation in Vietnam. At the conclusion of the meeting McNamara suggested the Pueblo Group meet to discuss a response to the confession apparently made by Commander Bucher. According to notes by Bromley Smith that brief meeting ended with Nitze being given responsibility for preparing a statement for release that evening.

219. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 219. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, January 24, 1968, 2105Z.

3600. From Ambassador Porter. Ref: State 103652.2

1. General dearth of hard info on North Korea here makes it difficult to judge NK motivations and interests.3 In case of Pueblo, it is more difficult for us to make judgement since we do not know how long Pueblo was in area and what its actions and equipment were.

2. Pueblo incident and Blue House raid are clearly related. Once Seoul raid had been successfully carried out, North Koreans, uncertain of what actions we and ROKs might take, may have desired to remove major source of information on their own countermeasures. In so doing, North Koreans may well have had Israeli action against USS Liberty in mind.4 Although there has been some speculation that action was taken to provide KPA with major “victory” for its 20th anniversary February 8, it seems unlikely to us that North Koreans would have taken such grave risk for propaganda purposes alone.

3. While timing of Pueblo seizure is related to Seoul raid, there is complex of reasons why NK would undertake both. In this, Vietnam plays central role. Kim Il-Sung has long advocated greater Communist assistance to NVN and his latest pronouncement, calling for “more positive actions” to aid Hanoi, was carried by AP on Jan 18. At time when all aspects of Vietnam struggle are intensifying, NK leadership may well have felt that they could make no greater contribution to Communist cause and to their own purposes in Korea than to take bold actions designed to reduce support in ROK for augmented or even continued participation in Vietnam, to take advantage of current political difficulties of and to further reduce public confidence in Pak govt, and to shake mutual confidence between U.S. and ROK. Bold action could also, of course, create a diversion in Korean peninsula and force U.S. to divert military resources from Vietnam effort and stimulate additional domestic and overseas pressures against U.S. Asian policy.

4. Forecasting NK actions is risky game. Certainly their past conduct in refusing to release our helicopter in 1965 and returning pilots only after lengthy negotiation, plus their pattern of treatment of ROK fishermen, gives no ground for optimism that they will react favorably by releasing vessel and crew immediately. We are more inclined to believe that they will attempt to exploit their possession of ship and crew to maximum extent from both technical and propaganda points of view. After these purposes have been ably served, they will probably return crew, but under conditions of considerable humiliation to U.S.

5. Although activities of past few days may cause them to proceed with caution, we can expect North Koreans to continue to carry out their basic plan for increased subversive effort against ROK this year, especially if they are not penalized in some way for these two coups. Their propaganda is attempting to make it appear that major revolt is already sweeping South, which they must sustain by action.

6. NK will not permit any action by us to go unchallenged. They seem confident and sure of themselves and appear convinced that we have neither capability nor determination to deal with them while so heavily engaged in Vietnam.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Exdis.

2 In telegram 103652 to Seoul, January 24, the Department of State requested Porter's assessment of why the North Koreans seized the Pueblo and what might be expected from them in the future. (Ibid.)

3 In the view of the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, the North Koreans, being “an extremely security conscious nation,” seized the Pueblo “to silence a US collector, embarrass the US and improve North Korea's image,” conclusions drawn “largely because of its plausibility and the lack of evidence to substantiate the seizure as part of an overall plan to initiate hostilities or motivated by other reasons.” The assessment discounted the possibility that North Korea acted under instructions from Moscow and fully rejected any involvement by Communist China. (Telegram from the Chief of Staff, Air Force, to the Strategic Air Command, January 24; Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Pueblo, 23 January 1968 to December 1968)

4 The intelligence-gathering vessel USS Liberty was deployed in the eastern Mediterranean on May 23, 1967, in response to mounting tensions in the Middle East that culminated in the Six-Day War between Israel and its neighboring Arab states in June of that year. While in international waters off the coast of Israel and the United Arab Republic, the Liberty came under attack through a series of misunderstandings and errors on June 8 first by Israeli jet bombers and then by Israeli torpedo boats. Although heavily damaged and its crew decimated, the Liberty sailed to sanctuary. A history of the incident was written by the National Security Agency/Central Security Service, Attack on a SIGINT Collector, the U.S.S. Liberty, United States Cryptologic History: Special Series, Crisis Collection, Vol. 1 (1981).

220. Minutes of Meeting 220. Minutes of Meeting1

Washington, January 24, 1968, 6 p.m.

SUBJECT

Meeting on Korean Crisis Without the President

Secretary McNamara: The President does not now have the power to extend the tours of duty of military personnel without legislation. He does have the power to call up reserve units without Congressional action and without declaring a national emergency. It would be no problem to move promptly to Korea substantial forces consisting of Army, Navy, and Marine Corps planes (100 to 300). This would be easy and relatively riskless, and should be done. We have considerable flexibility in force movements, call-ups and application of force. We could also restrict commerce or mine selected ports.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: It is important to distinguish between symbolic movement of forces and actual use. The former does not commit you, the latter does.

Secretary McNamara: We must distinguish between (a) the call-up of forces; (b) the movement of forces; and (c) the actual use of our forces. There will be time between the call-up of forces and the movement of these forces for diplomatic activity.

Secretary McNamara: There are airfield limitations on the number of planes which can be handled, but we can put in about 300 maximum.

General Wheeler: The Enterprise can be kept where it is and by the 29th can be reinforced by the Kitty Hawk. There are 130 strike aircraft on the two carriers. We can also bring in additional destroyers and cruisers. Some would have to cross the Pacific, but we could end up with a substantial augmentation.

Secretary Rusk: Was the alleged confession of the Pueblo's captain a voice broadcast?2

Director Helms: Yes, but the recording made in Okinawa was not good. The tape is en route here. The accent was American but the language was stilted and unlike that which an American would use.

Secretary Rusk: Diplomatic moves available to us in the next 48 hours include the use of the UN Security Council. There are difficulties but also much reason in the idea. The United Nations has had a special relationship to Korea, and there has been a long history of association with the problem. There is a preliminary obligation to refer the matter to the United Nations before taking military action. This is not exactly a Charter provision, but is in the atmosphere of the Charter. We did so in the Cuban missile crisis before heading for a military confrontation. It is one way of putting prestige factors in the refrigerator for a few days. Security Council debate affords a framework in which contact can be made with the other side without engaging major prestige. We should try diplomacy by going to the Council at once. We are not yet ready to move militarily to meet an enemy response to our initial military action. Council consideration could also afford an important breathing spell in public feeling.

Assistant Secretary Sisco: We have a paper outlining two possibilities.3

One, the Secretary General to undertake good offices to see what he can do through private talks. There is some indication that he would be willing to try. This would take a long time and any result is unlikely. Meanwhile, in the Security Council we might seek statements from friendly governments urging release of the ship and the crew. This might be one way of proceeding for the next two days in the Security Council, simply aiming for the series of statements with no other UN action.

The second possibility would aim for a resolution calling for the release of the ship and crew and might possibly inject the Secretary General into the issue. Many problems would be encountered in pursu ing the latter course. We have seven sure votes. To get a majority is problematical. We would face a Soviet veto. During a Council debate, we would be able to mobilize support.

Special Assistant Rostow: In the Cuban missile crisis we did not get into the United Nations until we had made our move. There is a danger that if we go into the Security Council, we would find ourselves blocked from taking military action. In the Cuban crisis we faced the danger that the UN would freeze the status quo. The UN resolution might state that actions were to be taken without use of force. This could prevent or hinder our freedom of action. We also have to be careful not to get the South Koreans up in arms by a lack of adequate response.

Secretary Rusk: This is somewhat different from the Cuban crisis. Then, the presence of the missiles was not generally known. We were able to announce the presence of the missiles at the time we announced our action. Here, the basic facts are already known concerning the Pueblo affair. We could work out with the UN that we would be bound not to act for only so long. We may even need a Soviet veto.

Mr. Sisco: The analogy is closer to the Tonkin Gulf incident. We convoked the Security Council, made statements, but asked for no formal action.

General Wheeler: Is it possible to go to the Security Council even if we ask for no formal action without getting the Secretary General into the act?

Mr. Sisco: Yes, but some would surely want to involve him.

Secretary Rusk: We would not tell Council members we did not want formal action. We might indeed want to press a resolution to a vote which might involve the veto.

Mr. Rostow: The question is how do we get out of it if it does not work?

Mr. Katzenbach: In the Cuban crisis, the OAS was insulation from the United Nations.

Secretary Rusk: Would we be strong in the United Nations on the issues in this case?

Legal Adviser Meeker: Yes. We could have used all force to prevent the capture, according to international law. No legal theory is wholly satisfactory, but here we have strong grounds—self defense—stronger if we first take it to the UN.4

Secretary McNamara: I am concerned about the question of territorial waters, and our inability to support this without adequate evidence. We have January 10–22 to account for (in addition to indications that at the time of seizure, we were indeed outside territorial waters by a safe distance). The captain's alleged statement indicated he had been in territorial waters. Should we be worried about the “hot pursuit” argument? (Mr. Katzenbach said “hot pursuit” was not involved.)

Secretary Rusk: We might consider demanding that the captain be produced at the Security Council. We could be in difficulty if captured documents included, for instance, statements from the crew saying that they went under the Soviet guns and took pictures anyway.

Secretary McNamara: I do not know whether we were in territorial waters at some point or not. Is there any concern that the log would show that the ship was in territorial waters?

Secretary Rusk: We can, of course, produce the orders (for whatever they may be worth).

Mr. Meeker: The North Koreans claim 12 miles, as does the Soviet Union. Warships may not be subject to seizure, anyway, even in territorial waters if they do not engage in hostile action.

Secretary Rusk: At the United Nations, at least there would be pressures to settle the matter. And no one could believe that the matter is likely to be settled unless we get our ship and men out.

General Wheeler: Can we put heat on the Soviets to help settle this matter?

Secretary Rusk: Yes, unless the Soviets want to open a second front in Korea.

Mr. Nitze: There would be nothing inconsistent in taking the first two actions recommended by Secretary McNamara, i.e., calling up forces and moving forces, and also taking our case to the United Nations.

Secretary Rusk: That is agreed. We must be braced for anything. The call-up of forces makes our diplomacy more creditable. For instance, the call-up of reserves had an immediate effect on the Russians in the Berlin crisis.

If we go to the United Nations, can we be entrapped by the other side taking no action while we end up being inhibited in taking the actions we want to?

Mr. Sisco: This danger should prove to be manageable in the UN. Probably the most we would encounter would be a resolution inhibiting in a general sense our action, but we could probably avoid even that.

Mr. Rostow: If we go to the UN, it is essential to include the attempt to assassinate President Park.

Secretary Rusk: The first thing to do tonight is to get off a telegram to the Koreans asking them to agree to a letter to the Security Council on both subjects. Then we can talk with New York about when to convene the Security Council.

Mr. Clifford: We need a period to quiet down the feelings which have been engendered. Going to the Security Council would be the best avenue to do this. I do not know how strong our case would be. The North Koreans would probably continue to say that we had violated their territorial waters. It is possible that they might build a better case than we could. If we move precipitately with military force, it might turn out that we had a hard case to prove. Submission of our case to the Security Council has the value of doing something, of recognizing that world body, and of permitting the American people to quiet down in the next 4 or 5 days. This is possibly but the first in a series of incidents. This one is not as sharp as I would like to see it. We should get ready for the next one which may be clearer.

I am concerned about using this incident as the basis for major military actions. As in the case of the USS Liberty, this is not a clear case.5 If we can find a way out with face, we should do so. There will probably be a better case later on.

Secretary Rusk: If the North Koreans come in with conclusive proof that our ship was in territorial waters, we could say in the Security Council that we regretted that action and that now they should give back our men and our ship.

Mr. Berger: And about the attempt to assassinate Park?

Secretary Rusk: They should be called upon to stop such actions. If the UN debate slops over to debate on Vietnam, that is all right, too.

Mr. Katzenbach: The Pueblo was almost an unarmed ship. If we were doing something wrong they could have protested. We presented no immediate threat to them. In the previous case of the USS Liberty, it could have been an immediate threat.

Secretary McNamara: How long would we be in the UN?

Secretary Rusk: Two or three days or we could spin it out longer.

Mr. Sisco: This would depend partly on whether we limit efforts to debate only. If there were a resolution, it would draw things out.

Mr. Warnke: Does self-defense wear out?

Mr. Meeker: Self-defense after a time “wears out”. It begins to get stale.

Secretary Rusk: We have a much cleaner case than Clark Clifford implied. But if we go to the United Nations, it is important that we not go defensively.

Secretary McNamara: I am reluctant to use military force unless we see what we gain and what we lose. I believe we have a good case. If our people do, too, and we do not react, there could be a serious effect on the Vietnam situation. It is not clear what would come after the UN.

Mr. Katzenbach: Time spent in the UN costs less than time spent any other way.

Secretary Rusk: The pressure on us is that our men and our ship are in Wonsan.

Secretary McNamara: If the talk in the UN goes on for two months, then we can't use military force. The UN is okay if it is not dragged out.

Mr. Rostow: We have to move forces so as to act as a counter force to UN Talks. We should let the Soviet Union know that we base our actions on the doctrine of self defense. This doctrine will be part of our case in deciding what action must follow if we do not get satisfaction.

Secretary Rusk: A telegram from Ambassador Porter says that the two incidents (Pueblo and attack on Park) are clearly related.6 The North Koreans will keep up harassments. Then they will probably return the ship and personnel but under circumstances which will make it as humiliating as possible for the United States. This could result in undermining our support in South Vietnam. Porter expects increased penetration and subversive activities by North Korea.

Secretary Rusk: Berger and Sisco should draft a message to Seoul so that tomorrow we can go to the Security Council. We should also send a circular cable to the Korean troop club. If the situation leads to renewed fighting between North and South Korea, we want these people to be interested and to get nervous. We want them to say something to the Russians or to the North Koreans or to any others where they could help build pressure. We should give the 16 nations full details.

Mr. Berger: We often brief the 16 here.

Secretary Rusk: All right, plus the letters. We should talk with Sato. We should also probably make a new approach to the Soviet Union. We can wait for a fuller report from Prime Minister Wilson, but if that is not satisfactory, or if Wilson did not take the matter up with the Soviets, we should press hard again.

Mr. Katzenbach: On Sato, the question is how it is to be done, since we will be using Japanese facilities if major military steps are taken. If we got General Max Taylor to talk with Sato, it would be more dramatic, if that is what you want.

Mr. Berger: We were thinking in terms of an interim approach to Sato, asking the Japanese to express concern to the Soviets.

Secretary Rusk: Now let us talk of other moves. What sort of ship is the Banner?

General Wheeler: The Banner is a COMINT collector. It is now on the west coast of Japan.

Mr. Nitze: It would take about four days for the Banner to get into position off Korea.

General Wheeler: We should not undertake this without ample naval escort and air cover. If there is action, the odds should be on our side. The Banner is now in port in Japan for changes of its codes.

Secretary Rusk: Replacing the Pueblo with the Banner is in range as a gesture.

Secretary McNamara: We might buy some time by saying that we are replacing the captured ship. Such action would add a risk but would convey a message that we are not deterred by the capture of the Pueblo.

Secretary Rusk: We might want the Banner to rendezvous with the Enterprise.

Mr. Katzenbach: If we put the Banner in the same place as the Pueblo was, it will demonstrate our right to do this and our power to do it. The disadvantage is the possible impact on United Nations members if it makes people nervous.

Mr. Nitze: Such action would help us in the Security Council.

Secretary Rusk: Let us consider B, C, and G as preparatory moves.7 As far as the end of the trail is concerned, the use of military force would make us feel better about it, but does not get our ship and our men back. We do not want to take on a second front if we can avoid it. We might consider passive interference with the port of Wonsan.

Secretary McNamara: It can be done with mines but it does invite escalation.

Secretary Rusk: We have a better chance of getting our ship and men back before rather than after using military force.

Secretary McNamara: Using the Banner would reduce our loss of face and reduce the necessity to use force if we do not get back our ship and men. It will have a lesser effect if we delay.

Secretary Rusk: We don't know yet the intentions of the North Koreans. An air cap over the Banner would be necessary. We can't have disaster again. I understand that North Korea has substantial air power. Our cover has to be big. What should be the extent of our call-up of reserve planes?

Secretary McNamara: Our purpose should be demonstration. There should be quite a few. We should call up at least 250 planes. Four hundred were called up at the time of the Cuban crisis.

Mr. Rostow: I am not recommending it, but the most symmetrical suggestion I have seen is to have South Korea pick up a Soviet ship. There is one similar to the Pueblo in the region.

Secretary Rusk: We would, however, be acting just as outrageously as the North Koreans.

Mr. Rostow: Blocking the harbor is a warlike act, too. We do not want to appear weak to the American people by doing no more than beg in the United Nations.

Secretary McNamara: The point Walt makes is well taken. It is not only the reaction of our people which we must take into account but also that of the Asians. The North Koreans have attempted an assassination, taken our ship, humiliated our captain. The Soviets do have a vessel doing the same sort of thing and we do not do anything about it. We cannot continue too long without acting.

General Wheeler: (In response to a question from Secretary Rusk.) There is quite a bit of air patrolling in the Korean DMZ. There are also photo and ELINT missions from time to time.

Secretary Rusk: It is important that we make clear that what we do in Korea will not reduce what we are doing in Vietnam. We might pick up North Korean merchant vessels, but there are only a few such ships, according to these reports. We might, however, influence Japan in the direction of economic sanctions.

Secretary McNamara: This might have political effect, but it would have little economic effect because the Russians would step in.

Secretary Rusk: We should gin up our friends to make statements decrying the North Korean action. NATO should have an interest in this affair, too.

Secretary Rusk and Secretary McNamara recommended the following actions to buy time: Adding 250 planes to those already based in the area and the call-up of 250 reserve planes with crews.

General Wheeler: The Banner should join the Enterprise. Aerial reconnaissance should include the use of drones plus Black Shield.

Director Helms: I recommend that we run three reconnaissance flights in one day and get it done. Seventeen minutes for Black Shield on one flight.

Secretary McNamara: We must indeed fill in the gaps on our intelligence if we contemplate military action. If we have a three-pass mission the first time, there would be a very low loss rate expected. I favor the three-pass mission.

Secretary Rusk: That is okay, but I have not been greatly impressed with drones.

General Wheeler: That is wrong. They take excellent pictures. Eight of the last ten have survived. One met with mechanical failure and one was shot down.

Secretary McNamara: Another benefit in using them is political.

Secretary Rusk: Do they take better photographs?

Director Helms: Slightly better.

Secretary Rusk: I see an advantage of taking a quick look at Wonsan. We ought to have the Task Force examine items B, E, and F in the index outline. We should be able to say that we have checked these out thoroughly. We are not prepared to recommend yet, but we should at least know where we are concerning these.

Mr. Katzenbach: We have the wraps on South Korea now but we do not know how long we can keep them on or indeed how long we will want to.

General Wheeler: General Bonesteel has been urging restraint on the South Koreans who have plans to make retaliatory raids. South Korean officers have been instructed not to let General Bonesteel see these plans. His question is whether we want to play the South Koreans cool or hot. At the present time, he is playing them cool.

Secretary McNamara: We should continue to try to keep the South Koreans cool, at least during the Security Council debate.

Mr. Rostow: We should consider the Park proposal to take out by air attacks the North Korean training bases.

Bromley Smith

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Bromley Smith, [Meeting on Pueblo Crisis, January 24, 1968, 6:00 p.m.]. Top Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith. The meeting was held in Katzenbach's office at the State Department and ended shortly before 7:30 p.m. (Ibid., Rusk Appointment Book)

2  Bucher read a confession over Radio Pyongyang. (Ibid., National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident)

3 Not further identified. Sisco also prepared a paper containing three potential options for approaching the UN: 1) submitting a factual report to the Security Council; 2) requesting the good offices of the Secretary General; and 3) consulting with a few key members of the Security Council and with the South Koreans prior to convening the Security Council. (Memorandum from Sisco to Rusk and Katzenbach, January 24; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

4 Meeker set forth his analysis of the legal aspects of the Pueblo incident in a memorandum to Rusk, January 24. A second analysis by Meeker, January 26, approached the issue using the hypothesis that the Pueblo entered North Korean territorial waters at some point. (Both Department of State,INR/IL Historical Files, NK Seizure of USS Pueblo, INR/OD, January 1968)

5 See footnote 4, Document 219.

6  Document 219.

7 The options were set forth in an Index prepared for this meeting. In addition to Diplomatic Options—approaching the UN, Sato, and the Soviets—other possible actions were: a) sending in the Banner; b) deploying air and naval forces; c) making reconnaissance flights over North Korea; d) interfering with North Korean shipping; e) blockading selected North Korean harbors; f) making selected air strikes; and g) calling up military reserves and extending the term of military service. (Korean Crisis, Index, attached to list of preferred actions stemming from the meeting, January 24; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

221. Notes of Meeting 221. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, January 24, 1968, 7:50–8:25 p.m.

SUBJECT

Notes of the President's Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

Secretary Rusk

Secretary McNamara

Clark Clifford

Walt Rostow

George Christian

Tom Johnson

The President opened the meeting by reading a memorandum from Bob Fleming on the network press coverage at 6:30 p.m. (Attachment A.)2

Secretary Rusk: We met early tonight. We have received a message from Ambassador Porter in Korea. He thinks the Pueblo incident and the Blue House plot are connected with North Korean support for North Vietnam.

We propose the following diplomatic action: 1. We should take this matter to the Security Council. In the United Nations there is a long and strong background for our position in Korea. This would gain time for us. It also would give the Secretary General reason to proceed with private discussions. I think we should take it there, although it is likely that no resolution will pass.

2. Send a telegram tonight to the Republic of Korea to get their agreement on what should be put to the United Nations.

3. Go to the 16 countries who as part of the UN forces had troops in Korea. We should inform them of the situation and get them nervous about it. We should alert them to the possibility of a renewed crisis in which they are involved.

4. We should go to Prime Minister Sato of Japan. He has substantial trade with North Korea. He may be able to bring some leverage to bear with North Korea.

5. We should go back to the Soviets and tell them that their first response was not enough.

The President: I think we should get Ambassador Goldberg down here tomorrow morning for an 8:30 breakfast. Can all of you make it?

Secretary Rusk: Secretary Fowler and I are having breakfast tomorrow to go over our positions prior to meeting with Wilbur Mills.

The President: Why don't the two of you come to the breakfast and then talk afterwards about your problem.

Dean, ask Goldberg to jot down his notes and recommendations. Tell him I do not have confidence in the UN but I do have faith in him (Ambassador Goldberg). I want him to know that we are not going to make decisions about things to put to the UN without him here.

Secretary McNamara: We do want moves which will buy us time. I propose the following steps:

1. Proceed to move armed forces from the U.S. and other places in the area to South Korea and South Korean waters. I propose moving about 250 aircraft in addition to those that are aboard the Enterprise.

The President: Why don't we move the Enterprise back to Vietnam. We do not want them thinking we are diverting from our responsibilities there, do we?

Secretary McNamara: The Enterprise can remain off Korea without any effect whatever on our actions in Vietnam. It was going to the Gulf of Tonkin to supplant and not supplement any operations. We can keep the carrier it was to replace on station off Vietnam.

The President: Are you sure that we have enough air power and support to take care of the situation at Khesanh?

Secretary McNamara: We do have a problem, but I am reasonably confident that what General Wheeler and General Westmoreland have reported is satisfactory.

The President: What's the strength of the North Korean air force?

Secretary McNamara: They have approximately 400 jets compared to 200 jets in South Korea.

The President: How does the aircraft we are sending compare with the North Koreans'?

Secretary McNamara: Our aircraft would be superior to the bulk of their air force. We propose to send, roughly 63 Air Force F–4's; 33 Marine F–4's; 50 F–100's; 50 A–4's; 30 F–8's; 22 F–105's; and possibly some other aircraft. The F–4's and most of the other planes do have bombing capacity.

My second recommendation is that the President has authority to call up units of the reserves. I recommend that we activate selected Air Force and Marine units. There will be approximately 200 to 300 Air Force units involved. All of these units are in a high state of readiness. This would be calling up to active duty approximately 250 aircraft. These would become part of the strategic reserve taking the place of the 400 regular jets which we will have the capability of sending to South Korea.

The President authorized the Secretary to begin making initial plans and draw up the necessary papers for the dispatch of the aircraft to South Korea and the activation of the units suggested. The President stressed that he would authorize more than what has been suggested if it is considered necessary. He said he would prefer to have more than enough to take care of whatever job might be required.

Secretary McNamara: I propose, although there is some difference of opinion on this, that we move the USS Banner in to replace the Pueblo off North Korea. We are planning to send it into the area to join the Enterprise so that if we decide to move, it will be in position.

If we decide to replace the Pueblo with the Banner we should be prepared to cover it with air and other support units.

The President: First, Bob, I want you to be prepared to move and be ready to make these decisions effective after the breakfast tomorrow morning.

2. Take the tentative steps which are required to get ready for this action.

3. I would send 300 planes. Get more than you think you really need.

“Be ready to go when you come out of this meeting.”

Secretary McNamara: We also would like to send Oxcart flight over North Korea tomorrow. The President approved this action.

Secretary Rusk: Also under consideration is sending a drone over Wonsan. However this has not been recommended to the President.

If we put the Banner back on station, we must have adequate cover for it. A second incident in which we come out second best would be disastrous.

The President: What about the B–52's? Should we send some in?

Secretary McNamara: They can operate easily from Okinawa. Flying time is only about 2–1/2 hours.

Walt Rostow: At what level do we propose to reapproach the Soviets on this subject? Do we reapproach them at the Thompson-Gromyko level?

The President: I see no difference in this situation than in the one in which Kosygin messaged me raising hell over Israel. The President then sent Tom Johnson into the Oval Office to get the hot line messages which had been exchanged during the Middle East crisis.3

The President read portions of Chairman Kosygin's initial message to President Johnson on the situation in the Middle East.

Secretary Rusk: I think a message to Kosygin from the President would be appropriate at this time.

The President: Go ahead and draft a message tonight for dispatch tomorrow. Make it strong.

Walt Rostow suggested that the message be sent through the hot line.

The President: I will not use the hot line on this. We will send it as quickly as possible by cable.

The President asked Clark Clifford if he expected any problems during the testimony on Thursday before the Congress.

Clark Clifford: I expect no real problems, although Senator Tower made a comment today that he was disappointed at the appointment. The Senator said he thought the President would now also be running the Defense Department as he is now running the White House and State Department.

The President asked Secretary McNamara if he had appointed a board to thoroughly investigate the Gulf of Tonkin incident.

Secretary McNamara: Yes, a special representative was sent to review the matter. In addition the Navy appointed a special panel to investigate it.

We will have good men to testify if called upon.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo III. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room.

2 Not printed.

3 See footnote 4, Document 219.

222. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan 222. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan 1

Washington, January 25, 1968, 0029Z.

104628. For Ambassador from Secretary.

1. Seek immediate appointment with Sato and inform him that with President Pak's concurrence we are taking Korean situation to Security Council. Ambassador Goldberg has asked for Council meeting January 25. We know Japan will be prepared to support our efforts in UN. We are also continuing our efforts with Soviet Union (this very secret) and others.2

2. We are also considering certain limited military precautionary moves. These would include movement of additional air and naval units from US to South Korea. Amount of US air currently in and around South Korea is minimum we need and we want to strengthen this against contingencies.

3. We are also considering but have not yet decided to move 15 B–52's from US to Okinawa and wish Sato to know of our planning and possible decision in advance. This very secret for his information.

4. We mean for time being to explore and exhaust all diplomatic possibilities before considering what further moves need to be made.

5. We recognize Japan's intense interest and indirect involvement in moves we make vis-a-vis Korea. We are not in belligerent mood and mean to make our moves carefully and deliberately.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Exdis. Repeated to the White House. Drafted by Berger; cleared by Katzenbach, Nitze, and Read; and approved by Rusk.

2 In a January 25 letter to Sato President Johnson expressed concern about North Korea's raids into South Korea and seizure of the Pueblo, indicated that Japan would be kept informed of U.S. intentions, and asked that Sato “consider approaching the Soviet Union in order to impress on them your own serious concern with the developing situation and also to consider what approaches you might make to the North Koreans, or actions you might make, to impress on them the seriousness of the situation.” (Telegram 104284 to Tokyo, January 25; ibid., POL 15–1 KOR S) In response Ambassador Johnson learned that Miki would speak to the Soviet Ambassador about Japan's concerns arising from North Korean actions. (Telegram 4998 from Tokyo, January 25; ibid.) Sato replied to the President's letter by stating that Japan had been in contact with the Soviets and was considering additional ways Japan might assist in solving the crises. (Letter from Sato, January 30; ibid., POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

223. Notes of Meeting 223. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, January 25, 1968.

SUBJECT

Notes of the President's Breakfast Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

Secretary Rusk

Secretary McNamara

Ambassador Goldberg

Walt Rostow

George Christian

Tom Johnson

Mr. Rostow: We have just received a message from President Park of the Republic of Korea. He is pleased that we are taking the matter to the Security Council and raising both the Pueblo incident and the Blue House incident.2

At the UN we can urge the following: —Urge that the ship and men be returned.

—Urge the North Koreans to behave with respect to the 38th Parallel.

—Urge a resolution for return of the ship.

We must not do anything which would tie our hands in the United Nations.

Ambassador Goldberg: Going to the Security Council will give us time. There is a danger of getting our hands tied. The South Koreans also are sensitive to the North Koreans being heard before the United Nations.

The President: What are the gambles we take by going to the UN?

Ambassador Goldberg: It is best to urge a resolution demanding the return of the ship. I do not recommend a resolution asking the UN to condemn the action of the North Koreans. We should ask the UN to support a return to the Armistice Agreements. Of course the Soviets will veto that resolution, but taking this action will satisfy the diplomatic needs.3

It is interesting that Malik will be the Soviet representative today. You will remember that he was absent on the last vote which sent the UN forces to Korea. You can be certain that he will not be absent this time.

As I see it, we will get the following votes:

United States—Yes

Great Britain—Yes

Republic of China—Yes

Canada—Yes

Denmark—Yes

Brazil—Yes

Paraguay—Yes

France—?

Senegal—?

Ethiopia—Yes

India—No

Pakistan—?

Hungary—No

Ambassador Goldberg said France has always been with us on the Korean issue, but he considered it questionable whether or not they will vote with us now.

The President urged that we send a message to President Ayub Khan of Pakistan telling him that we definitely need their support on a matter of this importance. However, the President and Ambassador Goldberg noted that Pakistan has problems with China and may vote no.

The President: Was the Turner Joy an intelligence ship? (This was one of the ships attacked during the Gulf of Tonkin.)

Secretary McNamara: The Turner Joy and the Pueblo are not the same type of ship. They do have some collection devices.

Ambassador Goldberg: Returning to the UN votes, Korea has been a UN matter since 1950. We do need Pakistan's vote. A Pakistani is president of the council. He expressed great personal support for us in a conversation yesterday.4 He is in a delicate position.

There is another alternative. We could use the good offices of the Secretary General. He has indicated some willingness to do this. We could put a time limit on the Secretary General. In the Security Council we could do much the same thing (put a time limit on it).

I would take the matter to the Security Council tomorrow. I think we should call for an urgent session. We may not get a resolution, but it will take care of our diplomatic situation.

The President: Why did the Soviets say in this message that they have passed along our position to North Korea?5

Secretary Rusk: It looks like an added measure on their part.

On the matter of the UN, a resolution which would be hostile to the U.S. would not receive more than 3 to 4 votes.

Ambassador Goldberg: Do we push a resolution to a vote? I would think we would do this only if we have 9 votes.

The President: Our primary objective is to gain time, to give all concerned an opportunity for reasoning together. It will give the Soviets time to bring influence to bear on North Korea if they will.

I want to raise a question about sending a carrier and other aircraft in. Doesn't this raise a challenge to the enemy?

Ambassador Thompson says in his cable that this action seems paradoxical. I think that is worth considering. How will the North Koreans, Soviets, and the Chinese react to the show of force? Won't it lessen our chances of getting the ship and the men out rather than increase them?

What I am asking is this: What's our objective as far as all of this, particularly the action before the UN?

As I see it, our objective is to:

1. Spread out our actions before the UN to show them how serious this matter is and to show them how we have been mistreated.

2. Give us time to try to work something out and to give the Soviets an opportunity to try to bring their influence to bear on the North Koreans.

3. Show the world we are not bellicose.

But there may be a conflict in our doing this before the UN and our sending new planes over there.

Can't the Enterprise take care of the situation for a few days?

Secretary McNamara: We do need more air power in the area if we are attacked.

I see no difference between us having the Enterprise already there with increased air power available and putting in what we need to have to take care of the situation. We already have built up our position with the placement of the Enterprise in the area. To do what Ambassador Thompson has suggested (not putting any additional forces in there) would mean pulling the Enterprise off station.

The President: Secretary McNamara, you look at where you are going to get units and tell me the minimum time that it required to move in an emergency.

Secretary McNamara: I have all of that information now, Mr. President. In addition I have an Executive Order for the President's signature which will authorize the call up of the reserve units (Attachment A).6

In addition I have two press releases which I want George Christian to review and change if necessary. The first press release announces the call up. The second press release announces the actual sending of additional units to South Korea.

We can move the USS Kitty Hawk into the area without public knowledge. She is only two days steaming-time away.

The Joint Chiefs feel very strongly that they do not want to move the Enterprise. It would be wasted effort to replace it with another ship. We propose sending 303 air craft to South Korea. We propose to call up 332 air craft.

Ambassador Goldberg: I would recommend not making public announcement of the call up. I think you should go ahead with the action without public announcement and we will do everything to settle this matter diplomatically. However, the call up will strengthen my position before the UN and will show the seriousness of the situation. I do not see any conflict between the call up and what we will be doing diplomatically. In that I disagree with Ambassador Thompson.

Walt Rostow: As I see it, international law states that the seizure of a ship of the high seas justifies counteraction and equivalent reprisal.

The President: Walt, I do not want to win the argument and lose the sale.

The President then read again the Thompson cable. He stressed the sentence “They (the Communists) always react negatively to a show of force.”7

Walt Rostow: Mr. President, this was not the lesson of the Cuban missile crises or the Berlin crises.

Secretary McNamara: The North Korean air force has substantial superiority over the South Korean air force. If we have trouble we need to reenforce.

The President: But when we send out vast armada, won't the Soviets and the Chinese say that they must be ready to protect their little brothers?

Won't this really increase the tension? Is this a move to defer South Korea? What are we going to do after the aircraft are there? Where does all of this lead us?

Secretary McNamara: I think we will be closer to doing something diplomatically with a call up than without. I would recommend the call up today. I would defer public knowledge of the actual movement of the aircraft. For your information, I ordered diverted 10,000 tons of bombs enroute to South Vietnam. We do not have sufficient bombs in South Korea.

However, we must announce the call up. This will leak. Men have to be called from their homes. There is no way it would hold.

Secretary Rusk: I would announce the call up today. I would go before the Security Council with the matter. By tomorrow evening, we can announce that we are actually sending these squadrons to Korea.

Ambassador Goldberg: I would proceed with stand-by arrangements without announcement. We will parallel these efforts with diplomatic discussions.

Secretary McNamara: The President must sign an Executive Order. There is no way we can do this (make the call up) without public announcement.

George Christian: It would not hold to try to keep from having a public announcement.

Secretary Rusk: The North Koreans may have decided to make a try at South Korea. We must jar the North Koreans loose from the idea of taking South Korea. This call up may do just that (prevent the North Koreans from thinking about offensive action against South Korea).

The President: Bob (Secretary McNamara), we must assume they have calculated what our response will be to this. Will this action (calling up reserve units and sending aircraft to South Korea) jeopardize our position elsewhere, particularly in Berlin?

Secretary McNamara: No, we have other units here and a number of units in Europe. In this country we have aircraft we could move to Berlin. In my opinion, we are in very good shape. The 332 aircraft that we are calling up are cats and dogs, but the 303 aircraft which are being sent to South Korea are in very good shape.

The President: What can we do to bring Congress in on this?

We have got to have a good discussion to see if the Fulbrights represent this country. If they do, we are committing a grave error to send men out. You remember how much trouble we got into on the Tonkin Gulf incident.

I think that Senator Dodd, Senator Thurmond and Senator Russell will balance off what might be said by Senators Fulbright, Mansfield and others.

Secretary McNamara: The President has the authority to call the reserves. It would be valuable to ask for legislation extending the tours of duty of those now serving.

The President: That legislation would put the boys (U.S. troops) on their side. We must keep them on our side.

Secretary McNamara: The best action we could ask for in the Congress would be for involuntary extension. It would permit us to keep on active service a sizeable number of highly qualified personnel.

Ambassador Goldberg: Have you consulted with Congressional leaders?

The President: We need to go to the Congress on this matter.

Secretary Rusk: I do not recognize Senator Church by the statement he made today. He virtually asked for a declaration of war against Korea. He is a hot Korean supporter.

The President: I am sure one of the reasons is that he has a Pocatello, Idaho, boy captured out there.

What concerns me is this. When we get the planes out there and all of the forces you have recommended, what do we do then?

Secretary McNamara: The lowest form of military action is the minding of the coast of North Korea by air. They do have some ports of significant value, but in Wonsan. They do have patrol craft at Wonsan.

Secretary Rusk: What about grabbing some of their ships?

Secretary McNamara: We cannot find any of their ships. They have only 4 small vessels and they aren't of much consequence.

The President: As I see it, these are the steps we should undertake: 1. Take our case to Pakistan and ask them to be with us on this matter

2. Send a message to Park. Tell him that the North Korean side probably will be heard if the matter is raised before the UN.

3. Bob (Secretary McNamara), sit down with the Joint Chiefs and see what we can ask of the Congress in the way of legislation to get an overt action by them in support of our show of force.

4. Get a letter to Kosygin explaining our position and the need for their doing what they can in this matter.

5. Send a message to Prime Minister Sato of Japan outlining the situation.

6. Put our view before all our ambassadors and attaches. We should meet again about noon (the meeting was scheduled for 1:15 for lunch in the Family Dining Room). I want to get Senator Russell's judgment. He wants the Senate to go back on record in support of what we are doing. Let's not let the Congress say we are going to war without consulting them.

Dean (Secretary Rusk), let's get the Cabinet back together to discuss Ambassador Roth's new proposal. It looks as though he has sold the proposal to Mills. I am concerned about financial panic in this country. Roth and Mills think this will stop everything except the textile business.

Secretary Fowler has done a good job. Don't shove him. He is under a terrific strain.

Secretary Trowbridge went to the hospital last night with recurring chest pains. I am afraid he may have another heart situation. He had a heart attack two years ago.

Secretary McNamara then discussed the Executive Order which would call to active duty units of the Air Force Reserve.

The President: I would put in the letter to Kosygin that “I do not know what North Korea has in mind but I do know that neither you or I want to increase world tensions in this area.”

The complete text of the message to Chairman Kosygin is attached as Attachment B.8

Secretary McNamara and General Wheeler should get the U.S.S. Kitty Hawk moving. Also get your unit Commanders alerted. “Anytime you have a world crisis we must have our tanks loaded, our caps on and our planes ready. Let's not be accused of being unprepared.”

1 Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo IV, 8:30 a.m. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held at the White House.

2 Pak's message was relayed in telegram 3626 from Seoul, January 25. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3 Telegram 104660 to USUN, January 25, details these guidelines and transmits a draft resolution. (Ibid., UN 3 SC) Goldberg's letter to the president of the Security Council, his statements made to that body on January 26 and 27, as well as a UNC report on Korea are in Department of State Bulletin, February 12, 1968, pp. 193–200. Although the Pueblo seizure was discussed by the Security Council, no vote was taken on a resolution. Instead the Council adopted a Canadian proposal suggesting the matter be discussed privately between members. Negotiations were held on January 28, but not resumed, and the matter was not returned to the Security Council for consideration. (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1968, pp. 168–173)

4 A summary of the conversation was transmitted in telegram 3481 from USUN, January 24. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident,USUN Cables, Vol. I, January to March 1968)

5 Reference is to telegram 2566 from Moscow, January 25, given to the President earlier that morning, which reports that Kuznetsov told Thompson that the North Koreans were informed of Thompson's approach to the Soviets immediately after the seizure of the Pueblo. (Memorandum from Rostow to the President, January 25; ibid., Vol. I, Part B [through January]).

6 Not printed. The text of the statement informing the public of the call-up of Air Force and Navy reserves made by the President on January 26 is in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1968–69, Book I, p. 77.

7 In telegram 2566 from Moscow, January 25, Thomson included this statement after commenting that “the presence of our naval force off Wonsan will make it virtually impossible for the North Koreans to return our vessel and crew,” and the show of force would hinder the Soviets from acting as an intermediary or quietly exerting influence on the North Koreans to ease the crises. (Memorandum from Rostow to the President, January 25; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. I, Part B [through January])

8 Reference is to Document 224.

224. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 224. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

Washington, January 25, 1968, 1627Z.

104325. Ref: Moscow 2566.2 Please deliver soonest to Gromyko following message from President Johnson to Chairman Kosygin:

“January 25, 1968

Dear Mr. Chairman: On previous occasions you and I have discussed with each other the duty of all great powers to exercise their maximum effort to maintain the peace. On this basis I am urging your most serious personal attention to the irrational action of North Korean authorities in seizing the USS Pueblo in international waters in the Sea of Japan. This calculated action by North Korea is almost literally without precedent in modern times and cannot be accepted. It was engaged in no hostile action, it was clearly in international waters and was seized under circumstances which we find literally intolerable. You yourself have similar ships in various parts of the world, including at least one now present in the Sea of Japan, and could not accept action of the sort perpetrated by the North Koreans.

I was disappointed that Mr. Kuznetsov, in a conversation with Ambassador Thompson, seemed to brush the matter aside as something which does not involve Soviet responsibility. This does not reflect the true responsibilities of our two governments for the reduction of tensions and for the prevention of conflict. This act of provocation by North Korea has created a deep sense of outrage among the American people.

I do not know what North Korea has in mind in this situation. But, recalling our conversations at Glassboro, I am sure that we must agree that our common interests in preserving world peace would not be served by increased tensions in this area of the world.

I am taking the liberty of addressing this frank message to you in the hope that you will use whatever influence you have in Pyongyang and press them to release immediately the USS Pueblo and its officers and men. I hope you will find it possible to be responsive to our concern. Sincerely, Lyndon B. Johnson.”

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted at the White House, cleared by Rusk, and approved by Read.

2 See footnotes 5 and 7, Document 223.

225. Notes of Meeting 225. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, January 25, 1968.

SUBJECT

Notes of the President's Luncheon Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

Secretary Rusk

Secretary McNamara

Under Secretary Katzenbach

General Wheeler

Walt Rostow

U.N. Representative Goldberg

Mr. Samuel Berger—State Department

Clark Clifford

Richard Helms

George Christian

Tom Johnson

The President discussed the draft letter to President Park of Korea. That letter is attached as appendix A.2

Walt Rostow: I would like to ask a few “devil's advocate” questions: —How much time do we use up by our actions at the U.N.?

—Do we have control of the time situation if we get involved in U.N. debate?

—What is the danger if we go to the U.N. for some sort of humiliation? (What is the possibility of the resolution resulting in some humiliating statements?)

—How much danger is there in a resolution for us? Ambassador Goldberg: We are not in control at the time completely. We can say this is a matter of utmost urgency. We can say that we will have 24 hours and that time is of the essence. We can control the time within reasonable limits.

In addition, we can wind up the Security Council exercise on Monday or Tuesday. Then we can knock it off or extend it according to our wishes.

Walt Rostow: There are less fish hooks in this if we do not go for a resolution.

Secretary Rusk: We ourselves need time to get our aircraft and other forces to the area, to talk with Congress, and to give the Soviets an opportunity to bring their influence to bear on the North Koreans.

Secretary Katzenbach: I do not think the Security Council will tie the Korean incident to Vietnam. The non-communists will not want to discuss it.

Ambassador Goldberg: We will not be able to keep Vietnam out entirely.

Walt Rostow: We just received information that a North Korean aircraft is flying to Moscow with two men and 792 pounds of cargo aboard. This could be equipment taken from the Pueblo. It is suggestive that the Soviets were in on this.

Secretary Katzenbach: Could CIA pick up on film the area where the boat is, via satellite photography?

CIA Director Helms: We are programmed for that area.

Secretary McNamara: Shouldn't we send a vessel to the area where the Pueblo dumped overboard its equipment to dive for it?

General Wheeler: Based on radio messages, we have information that the North Koreans are diving for it at this time.

Secretary Katzenbach: Couldn't we get photographic evidence showing the spot where the divers are located and also the coast line. This would be absolute proof of the ship's position and the fact that the ship was also outside territorial waters.

Richard Helms: If we send a plane up there he had better be ready for a fight. They have MIGs flying cover for the divers, I am sure.

Secretary McNamara: The particular plane that we will fly over they will not be able to fight because of the nature of the aircraft. Of course, if there were other aircraft sent, there likely would be aerial interception.

Richard Helms: We will send the plane tonight our time, which is early morning there. What we get will depend on the climatic conditions.

Secretary Katzenbach: Do you think the stuff that was thrown overboard was damaged sufficiently to make it of no value?

Secretary McNamara: I doubt it. We just do not know.

The President: What is the answer why the Air Force cancelled the orders?

Secretary McNamara: It was because of darkness and the time before darkness made the effort marginal. Also, there was a substantial enemy force there. So the commander felt he should not do it and cancelled the order.

The President: Dean and Bob, what should we do?

Secretary Rusk: I would recommend going ahead to the Security Council.

Ambassador Goldberg: I could go to the Security Council tonight and ask for an emergency session. I would call on the President of the Security Council, give him a letter, and release the letter.

The President: What do we do from there?

Secretary Rusk: We've gone to Kosygin. We've gone to Sato. This will get the Secretary General in it. Indonesia, also, has been contacted. The ambassadors of the 16 countries which had troops in Korea are being contacted.

The President: How do we get the ship and the boys back?

Secretary McNamara: 1. We need authorization to extend duty. 2. We need authorization to call up individual reservists.

This would give us something to get a vote on in the Congress. We could ask for special authority to increase aid to the Republic of Korea. I would ask Congress to validate authority to call up civilian aircraft if we are short on transport.

The President: Clark, how did your testimony go this morning? (Mr. Clifford was called to testify on his nomination to the Senate as Secretary of Defense.)

Clark Clifford: I think I got through the testimony all right this morning.

Secretary McNamara: The request to extend tours and call people from the reserves is a good one. We could use this legislation.

Secretary Katzenbach: Would this legislation give authority or would it actually activate units?

Secretary McNamara: It would give the President authority. I would request authority to call up about 150,000 reservists.

Secretary Katzenbach: A request for $100 million in aid does not serve the purpose at all.

The President: Now that all of you have said that, what I want to know is how we are going to get that ship out.

Secretary McNamara: What I recommend immediately is that we ask for authority to call up individual reservists, not units.

Secretary Rusk: We also must face the situation of infiltration.

General Wheeler: We must be in a position to cope with any eventuality.

Secretary Rusk: Remember that North Korea has a 1961 alliance with the Soviet Union and China.

Secretary McNamara: The Joint Chiefs want an extension of the terms of service. The Marines lose 1600 trained men per month. Mr. President, you improve quicker the quality of our armed forces by extension of tours than by any other method. 2,500 men a day leave the service.

The President: When we get all our men out there and all these planes out there and all these extensions, what do we do then?

Secretary McNamara: Mr. President, we are not prepared to make a recommendation on that today.

Secretary Rusk: I have reservations about the Tonkin Gulf resolution unless the other side forces our hand.

Ambassador Goldberg: As a layman, I would like to give you one reaction you may want to consider. I think we want to avoid taking steps which would make it look as if we are seizing on this incident to plug up all the loopholes that are existing in our current military posture. We do not want it to appear through any of our actions that we are using this to fill the gaps on our military program.

Secretary McNamara: Arthur, the facts just will not support that view. If I do not need these men I will not ask for them. We do not have gaps on our forces we have to fill.

Secretary Katzenbach: Won't they relate this to Vietnam (the extension of military tours).

General Wheeler: We could carry on with our rotation in Vietnam at the same time we do what is necessary in Korea.

Secretary McNamara: I can assure you that we have no plans whatever to extend tours in Vietnam absent Korea. In fact, we think that one of the reasons why morale is so high in Vietnam is because of the limited tour of duty. We think it is a good system.

Director Helms: Isn't there a shortage of U.S. officers in Korea?

General Wheeler: There is a world-wide shortage of Captains and Majors throughout the army.

(The President was interrupted by the telephone. He talked for several minutes with Senator Dirksen. After the conversation ended the President reported that he had told Senator Dirksen that we will take whatever diplomatic moves that are available, that we will meet whatever needs the military has, and then we will make decisions about our courses of action. I told him our principal interests were in getting the ship back and in getting the boys back. We must come up with a way to get that ship back.)

Secretary Katzenbach: Mr. President, the only way to get that ship out with the crew is talking through diplomatic channels. We must make it clear that this is the wiser course for North Korea. It is only through diplomatic channels that we will get them out. We must show them that this matter is sufficiently serious to release the ship and the crew.

I think we should take our steps fairly slowly. We should see how we are doing in the United Nations before we ask for broader authority in Korea.

Secretary Rusk: We cannot shoot the men out of there. The North Koreans do not have vessels on the high seas that we can seize.

Director Helms: The only North Korean we have in our possession is the number two man in the North Korean news agency who defected. His point of view is that they will exploit the incident and then turn the ship loose for humanitarian reasons.

The President: That is about the same thing the Ambassador to Korea said.

Ambassador Goldberg: They do have territorial shipping. Assuming they have ships plying at coastal waters, couldn't we seize one of these?

Secretary McNamara: They have only four, and they are of very little importance.

Ambassador Goldberg: Grabbing anything of theirs is permitted by law in limited retaliation of this act. However, sowing mines is an act of war. This would not be considered retaliatory.

Secretary Katzenbach: Military action alone does not get them back. Seizing a couple of ships does not get them back. I think they are more concerned about what we may do. This is more important than taking some limited action so that they know what our response is. You are worse off when they do not know what you might do.

Secretary McNamara: We would like to move certain forces to the area. We need to pace ourselves. The Chiefs would like to move 26 B–52s, 15 to Okinawa and 11 to Guam.

The President: Go ahead and send the B–52s.

Secretary Rusk: We should touch base with Sato before we do this.

Walt Rostow: Ambassador Goldberg called this an incident. What is important is the North Korean policy and what is behind that policy. We know this is new pressure against South Korea and ourselves. If we are to act we must be prepared for any action they may take.

The President: What else do you have in mind, Bob?

Secretary McNamara: I would move other aircraft to the area.

The President: Why not move them out?

Secretary McNamara: I think for two reasons we should delay in moving the aircraft. It reduces our effectiveness of approach at the U.N. We are not contemplating any action right away.

Dick Helms: We do not see any signs of a major offensive action by the North Koreans into South Korea.

Ambassador Goldberg: I would like to address myself to the points raised by Bob McNamara. He is the man who will be responsible if our diplomatic efforts at the U.N. fail. I think to make military moves would not bother me. As the letter to Ayub Khan said, we do want to settle this matter by diplomatic means if possible.3

I see some positive signs that would be provided by the military action (of sending air units to South Korea).

Secretary McNamara: Let's get Sato's permission first. We'll then move the B–52s.

Secretary Rusk: Let's do not call it permission. It is notification.

The President: We must move up our forces to awaken the people to the danger. I would move our forces to the bases we already have. I would move them without saying much. I would be guided by the views of the military. Let's get our defenses in position.

The intercepts show North Korea is going into full mobilization. I would not send the B–52s out to bomb North Korea but I would put them into position. The Chiefs think they should be moved. We have got to have our hand out and our guard up.

Secretary Rusk: I am inclined to agree with Arthur that the military moves will support our diplomatic efforts at the U.N. It will show the urgency and the seriousness of the matter.

Secretary McNamara: It is easy then. We will move the B–52s this afternoon.

Secretary Rusk: I do not see why you have to announce these units squadron by squadron, and give our battle plan.

Secretary McNamara: It will leak all over the place if we don't.

George Christian: I always feel like we should give all the information we can on a matter like this. Our position looks rather weak when we fail to give the units and later it leaks out all over.

The President: Clark, what is your judgment on this whole situation?

Clark Clifford: It has been my experience that when a situation of this type arises the public is first outraged. Later they change their mind.

If anything, I have a feeling that we need to proceed with caution. The situation about the ship is rather fuzzy in my mind. I have great concern about us getting out word of mobilization in this country. Suppose tomorrow that the North Koreans announce that they are mobilizing. Then we really build this situation up. Then, what if we do nothing? I am not comfortable with this large military build-up.

We may find that the matter will simmer down a lot during the U.N. discussion. I feel I should urge great caution in this matter and that we should proceed accordingly. If it appears we pose a threat to North Korea and do nothing, we are in a very difficult situation.

Secretary Rusk: If North Korea goes crazy and launches an attack we couldn't do very much.

General Wheeler: I would agree with that. The South Korean airforce is very weak compared with North Korea.

Secretary McNamara: But we must remember that we have the Enterprise and that it could retaliate with substantial force. There is a place where you get into a very critical position with this build-up.

The President: Then it becomes do we do something or nothing. What is your judgment, General Wheeler?

General Wheeler: I would like to proceed with positioning our force in South Korea as recommended. I would place 170 land-based aircraft in the area. I would proceed to station the U.S.S. Kitty Hawk off North Korea.

I would put her on the coast available to us. This would give us 300 carrier aircraft and 150 land-based aircraft. This would give us ample aircraft to protect us against any eventuality.

The President: Why now?

General Wheeler: We can move the aircraft quickly, but we have to have at least 18 hours to give the pilots a night's sleep and to provide some time to shake down on the bases. We must move maintenance units and spare parts. It would be four to five days before all of the units are operationally ready. The 26 B–52s will give us heavy strike capability if preemptive strikes begin.

The President: General Wheeler, how do you appraise our actions in light of what effect they will have on North Korea? What I am saying is, is it worth it to have your extra assurance when it may be viewed as a great provocation?

General Wheeler: First I do not think we can take the B–52s away from Vietnam. General Westmoreland faces a very serious situation. In recent cables he has asked for 120 B–52 mission capability per month. We are doing that. We should reach that level by February 1.

It would be imprudent to draw down on Westmoreland's supply of B–52s. He is about to have the most vicious battle of the Vietnam war.

B–52s have an all-weather capability. If other aircraft area unable to fly, the B–52s become very vital in support of our ground forces.

To the larger question, all military schools teach us that military power is in existence to enhance our foreign policy capabilities and to preserve the internal security of the United States.

I think that more military moves would support our diplomatic efforts that are our first order of business. But we should be prepared to move on the other front if the need arises. Some would regard this as a provocation, I am sure. I know the Soviets would. I believe that it will prove to friend and enemy alike that there is determination on the part of the United States to do everything it can on both the diplomatic and the military front if necessary.

Public sentiment does change, but while we are moving on the diplomatic front we must be prepared to do something else if necessary.

Secretary McNamara: We will alert our B–52s. We can get by with not announcing this. By alerting them tonight, we can reduce the lead time.

The President: Buzz, what you are saying is that you do not know what you will be called upon to do but you do know that if we take the B–52s away from Westmoreland that this would be inappropriate. You believe we should put in the others to be ready in the event of an attack.

General Wheeler: That is correct, sir. You will recall that in 1950 the North Koreans moved in artillery and moved across the DMZ. I would not discount the possibility of this happening again.

I would want the B–52s and the fighter bombers to back up the ground forces.

The President: What you would do is have them so they could pulverize the enemy before they got across the DMZ if necessary.

General Wheeler: That is correct, sir. Also they are continuing their infiltration across the DMZ. The most symbolic act of the infiltrators was the attack on Blue House.

President Park said he would stand still for a reasonable time. But I think Park will retaliate if there is another Blue House incident or something of that type. I would like to have my units there in case they are needed. If diplomatic efforts fail there will be pressure to take retaliatory actions against North Koreans. We must be ready to react to what they might do. Although we don't like to imagine it, there could be a restart of the Korean War.

I asked the President to approve moving the units in the soonest possible time.

—We should place the Kitty Hawk in the Japan area in the next four days.

—I would deploy the 26 B–52s.

—I would issue instructions covertly for the movement of the 173 aircraft.

Ambassador Goldberg: These military actions will create a sense of urgency for the U.N. to act. The only time those guys (the representatives to the United Nations) will do anything is when they have to.

Clark Clifford: Buzz Wheeler makes a very logical case. But it disturbs me deeply. I think the President must proceed on the basis of probabilities and not possibilities. I think the North Koreans are not able to mount a massive military activity. They are engaged in harassments.

We should not send fleets of our aircraft to Korea. I think that is wrong. I think this heightens tension and builds it up.

If North Korea is planning something important that could then begin the provocation for us moving. I would get the planes and crews ready here at home. But our moral posture will be better if the North Koreans move first.

I am deeply sorry about the ship and the 83 men but I do not think it is worth a resumption of the Korean War.

The President: We know what we will do if we had these planes out there and if North Korea attacked. What do we do if we get the planes out there and North Korea does not attack? That is something we must consider.

[1 paragraph (1 line of source text) not declassified]

I want to get some of the Joint Chiefs of Staff opinion as to why they believe they need the aircraft there now if we do not expect an attack.

Of course we should authorize Ambassador Goldberg to go to the U.N. and present our case.

Let's meet again tonight at 6:30.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo V, 1:26 p.m. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held in the family dining room at the White House.

2  Document 151.

3 See footnote 7, Document 228.

226. Notes of Meeting 226. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, January 25, 1968, 6:30–7:45 p.m.

SUBJECT

Notes on the President's Thursday Night Meeting on the Pueblo Incident

ATTENDING WERE THE FOLLOWING

The President

Secretary McNamara

General Wheeler

CIA Director Helms

Under Secretary Katzenbach

Secretary Nitze

Clark Clifford

Walt Rostow

George Christian

Tom Johnson

The President: What recommendations do you have?

General Wheeler: We are looking at four or five military possibilities: 1. The placement of mines in the Wonsan Harbor. This would require substantial air action to handle the situation properly and require neutralization of air fields in the area. We would have to destroy the Wonsan military facilities. It is probable that we would require naval aircraft for support.

2. Mine other North Korean ports. We would select two or three important ports. The same problems requiring the need for air support would be present.

3. Interdict coastal shipping. For this we also need heavy air cover.

4. Strike any one of a list of targets in North Korea by air or by air and naval gun fire. Hopefully we will have better photographs of North Korea after a reconnaissance mission tonight.

5. Replace Pueblo with another ship protected by ample air and naval cover.

Anything else would require substantial military action.

The suggestion has been made that we seize North Korean ships. But they have no large ocean going craft. And we do not know where the four small vessels they have are located.

The President: What are we going to do with the aircraft that we plan to send to South Korea. Will they be there for purely defense purposes in case of further incidents?

General Wheeler: They would be there in the event that a decision was made to take reprisal action against North Korea in addition to their defensive value.

Secretary McNamara: If the North Koreans were to release the ship and or the crew in ten to twelve days the only thing we would have suffered would be humiliation. If we decide to replace the Pueblo with the U.S.S. Banner, we will need air support to protect it.

If we do not get the Pueblo back the President would want full air power there to take care of any massive response. In my judgment, mining would be the smallest increment of military action.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: We could keep their shipping and their patrol boats in the Wonsan Harbor.

Secretary McNamara: To do that we must have air cover and naval craft.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: The North Koreans have made gains right away. I believe they regard this action as a low risk effort. They have shown that they can do this. They may underestimate our difficulties elsewhere or place a high value on causing us more difficulties in this area. There is some indication this may be what they want to do. They are seeking to make life much more difficult for us.

There is no evidence (Richard Helms also confirmed this) that the North Koreans want to start another war.

They may be willing to return the crew and the ship. They may get something from the equipment aboard the ship.

But this still leaves us with the fact that they took a tug at Uncle Sam's beard and got away with it. I would put a high probability factor on their returning this ship.

The President: Well, what do we do now?

Under Secretary Katzenbach: I would prefer to see the screw turned on North Korea.

In gradual steps we would move aircraft to South Korea. It makes good sense to move in the fighter bombers for the reasons Buzz (General Wheeler) has given, and also to show the North Koreans and the United Nations the seriousness of the situation.

I would send in a squadron of aircraft tomorrow. Then send in other planes on Saturday and more on Sunday. I do have a question about the B–52's. If you send the B–52's to the area without any public knowledge there is not much punch that this gives to the diplomatic effort. If we send the B–52's to the area with public knowledge that this is connected to Korea it may be too big. This may be too much. But you do increase the potential of the United Nations doing something by sending in the fighter bombers.

The President: What is the practical effect of this?

Under Secretary Katzenbach: I think that will get rid of the issue quicker. By moving the aircraft in gradually you will get more out of it than by doing it all at one time or by not doing it at all.

The President: The incident, Pueblo seizure, may be more than a pinprick. In my judgment this must be coordinated with what is happening in South Vietnam. (Stepped up attacks on U.S. units in Vietnam along with major North Vietnamese and Viet Cong build ups.)

Secretary McNamara: I agree with that, although I have no real evidence of the connection.

I view this situation very seriously. The great danger that we must avoid is that the Soviets and the North Vietnamese will interpret something that we do as a sign of weakness. If we show weakness and are not firm, I think it will prolong the Vietnam war substantially.

Clark Clifford: I would like to view this matter differently. Let us assume for the moment that our only goal is to get the men and the ship back.

What would be the best way to achieve that end?

If we get the ship and the men back without taking substantial military action the President will get credit for restraint.

We may have gotten a hair pulled from our beard. I would be ready to sacrifice that hair because our options are limited at this time.

We must be ready for the next try. We have very few alternatives at this point. So, again I ask what are the best ways to get the ship and the men back.

The President: I see little hope that the United Nations will yield anything productive. We do need to show that this is a very serious matter. We must show to the North Koreans and their brothers that they must avoid the confrontation. We need to show our plan in the United Nations and display some muscle to back up that plan.

Tommy Thompson (Ambassador to Moscow) said the Communist never react well to a show of force. That was not the lesson learned in the Middle East and in the Cuban Missile Crisis. We must not let them misjudge our strength so that they will be encouraged to do this type of thing again. Personally I would like to find some of their ships and do the same thing to them which they have done to us.

What about some other alternatives that we have not discussed such as the South Koreans taking offensive action across the DMZ. The North Koreans have been doing a lot of infiltrating and harassment, so why not reciprocate?

General Wheeler: The ROK are eager to go into North Korea on hit and run raids like those taken into South Korea by the North Koreans. We have exercised great restraint on the South Koreans to the point where the South Koreans will no longer tell our American General the ROK plans.

Under Secretary Nitze: Mr. President, we discussed the fact that the Pueblo threw overboard classified equipment. Another alternative is for us to send a destroyer into the area where the gear was thrown overboard. The destroyer would have divers aboard to bring the gear up. This is completely legal and it is possible that the North Koreans would take action against this vessel. If they did we would be in a good position in the eyes of world opinion to retaliate.

We do not know if they are trying to recover that gear themselves.

The President: I thought we had an intercept that showed that they are trying to recover the material with divers. Isn't that true Walt?

Walt Rostow: That is correct. We had an intercept today which indicated they are diving in the area.

Secretary Nitze: There will be an ox cart mission tonight which should give us some additional information about that.

Walt Rostow: Our alternatives are basically two: 1. Actions to get the ship back.

2. Actions to strike back in retaliation for this ship seizure.

We should search all photographs and look for their ships. Personally I would not be opposed to seizing a Korean ship flying a Polish flag. We should strain for ways to find their ships and determine operational methods to place mines without knocking out their airfields and other facilities used for defense. Of course we must be fully prepared for what counter actions the North Koreans might be prepared to take.

The President: Would you address yourself to the question presented by Clark Clifford: What will produce the ship.

Walt Rostow: A conviction by the North Koreans that they will run into more trouble than it is worth. That will produce the ship.

They think we are strained and tied down in Vietnam.

Therefore a measured show of force is appropriate. I feel we should put in additional air power for the following reasons: A. We need increased air power in the Republic of Korea anyway. This incident dramatizes the deficiency of the aircraft in South Korea. It was surprising that we only had four planes there and that they were “out to lunch.”

B. If this effort fails and we undertake to disgorge the ship, we still need heavy air cover.

The President: The only thing you know is to put more aircraft there. Is that the answer to Clark's question? Thompson says this will make them more entrenched.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: What I believe Ambassador Thompson had in mind was that we should not say “hand over or else.” They are tough little bastards. I do not think Tommy had in mind a series of steps to make North Korea know that we are about to do something and that we mean business.

I think a measured show of force supports our diplomatic efforts. You can tell publicly—I do not think it has been mentioned before—that we are giving South Korea two destroyers. You can move in the B–52's. In my judgment all of these actions support our diplomatic efforts.

We can start by saying that no North Korean shipping will come out of two or three harbors. By blocking them off, we take reversible steps. In other words these are steps that do not require that we take additional steps.

We should not let the North Koreans think that the Security Council is the way we have planned to deal with this. They must know we are prepared to take further actions, military ones if necessary.

The President: You and Bob McNamara work out a schedule of movements for the aircraft to South Korea. What do you say in answer to Clark Clifford's question. What do we do if this is our whole objective.

Secretary McNamara: We must protect ourselves from permitting the North Koreans and the North Vietnamese and the Soviets getting the belief that we are weak. I would go back to Kosygin. I think the Soviets knew of this or if they did not they have enough influence to shape the conduct of North Korea. I would not deal in a belligerent, public way, but I would show them that it is essential to give up the ship and the men.

Director Helms: What is wrong in telling the North Koreans they must get the ship to us by a certain date or face the consequences.

The President: The simple answer to that is that we do not want a war with the Chinese and the Soviets.

General Wheeler: Here is a proposed schedule for movement of tactical air. We are talking about an order of 8 days using forces in West Pac. In the first three days you would have 28 F–104's, 14 reconnaissance aircraft and 28 F–105's.

Two days later you would have the bulk of the U.S. strike force. This would be 28 F–105's, 18 F–100's and 17 F4D's.

After seven days you will have initial combat readiness.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: When will this become public knowledge?

General Wheeler: As soon as the units begin to move out. These things are very easily discernible from the movement of men and equipment.

The President: I do not see what is wrong with sending out the 28 fighters and the 14 reconnaissance planes now.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: I think that is fine.

Secretary McNamara: What you want is a series of movements. I do not think we need to make a decision tonight on this. I would recommend mid-day tomorrow.

The President: I do want to space this out (the movement of aircraft into South Korea) but I want President Park to know that we are going to do this.

Secretary McNamara: We can do this easily.

Clark Clifford: Mr. President, in a discussion we had yesterday at the Department of State I presented a view. Since you were not there I would like to give it here.

I do not think our case with reference to the ship is a strong one. The North Koreans have a better case on where the ship was. They were there. We weren't.

This was a “spy ship”. There is a general feeling in the world that if you catch a spy you do him in. The North Koreans can say that we invaded their waters. We do not have a clear case to support. We must not issue an ultimatum. The odds are they would tell us to go sell our papers. Like blackmail, it is no good if you publicize it. It will become public knowledge we are sending in planes. The North Koreans have indicated something more may be coming. We do want to be prepared and ready for that. I recommend that we approach the Soviets again. I recommend that we go to the United Nations. I suggest that we start a quiet build up. We should send another message to Kosygin.

The North Koreans may conclude they have gotten as much out of this incident as they can. Frankly I can stand a minor set back to our position rather than to take action which may lead us into another war. The capture of a spy ship is not worth us going to war.

The President: Okay, let's get a spaced-out movement.

Secretary McNamara: I will get the orders prepared tonight. We can issue them tomorrow at mid-day.

The President: I ask all present to assemble again at 11:00 a.m. on Friday.2

Under Secretary Katzenbach: We went to the Red Cross and asked them for the release of the ship's crew and also for the return of the body of the dead sailor. I thought we should do this regardless of what other action we are taking.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo VI, 6:30. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson.

2 January 26.

227. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 227. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 1

Moscow, January 26, 1968, 1150Z.

2585. Ref: State 104325;2 Moscow 2579.3

1. I delivered to Gromyko President's message to Kosygin at 12:45 today. After reading message, Gromyko asked me if I had anything to say orally. I replied I had nothing to add to what I had said in my conversations with Kuznetsov, about which I assumed Gromyko was informed.

2. Gromyko said he would, of course, transmit message to addressee, and Soviet leadership and government would be informed of its contents. By way of preliminary comment, however, he said he hoped US Government would take sober position in this matter and not succumb to momentary sentiments which, as also indicated in President's message, now evident in US. Situation, facts as well as consequences, should be weighed very carefully. He said that for obvious reasons he did not wish to discuss at this time possible Soviet answer to message.

3. Stressing that he was now speaking outside context his preliminary remarks, Gromyko expressed deep regret US vessels took such liberties. Asserted US military command apparently sees nothing wrong in US vessels coming close to shores, cities, and installations of other countries. US military command seems to be in habit of disregarding interests other states. For example, Soviets had sent numerous notes to US containing specific data about location, time, and identification numbers US aircraft which had buzzed Soviet ships but in each case US gave standard reply that Soviet information not in accordance with facts. This reduced government-to-government communications to level where they could not be regarded as serious.

4. Repeating I had little to add to what I had told Kuznetsov, I pointed out US concerned about pattern of incidents along DMZ in Korea, with latest such incident having been infiltration 31 North Ko rean agents into South Korea. Coming on top of this, Pueblo incident could not but add to seriousness with which we viewed situation.

5. Gromyko asserted other side had information and facts re infiltration of agents in Korea which were of entirely opposite nature, but he did not wish dwell on this. He concluded by stating President's message would be studied and reply conveyed to us in due course.

6. In response my question when Kosygin due back from India, Gromyko said Kosygin would be in India another two or three days and might stop for day or two in Afghanistan on his way back.

Thompson

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Received on January 26 at 8:46 a.m.

2  Document 224.

3 In telegram 2579 from Moscow, January 26, Thompson informed the Department of State of his scheduled appointment with Gromyko to present the President's message and asked that the matter not be publicized, since the Soviets were “more inclined to be helpful if they are not exposed to the charge of collusion with us or of twisting the arms of their little brothers.” (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

228. Notes of Meeting 228. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, January 26, 1968, 11:08 a.m.–12:02 p.m.

SUBJECT

Notes of President's Friday Morning Meeting on the Pueblo Incident

THOSE IN ATTENDANCE WERE

The President

Secretary McNamara

Under Secretary Katzenbach

General Wheeler

CIA Director Helms

Secretary Nitze

Clark Clifford

Deputy Assistant Secretary Samuel D. Berger

Walt Rostow

Bromley Smith

George Christian

Tom Johnson

Prior to the President's arrival the following agenda was agreed upon: 1. An intelligence situation report by Richard Helms.

2. A diplomatic situation report by Under Secretary Katzenbach.

3. A summary of the military proposals on aircraft movement and other actions by Secretary McNamara and General Wheeler.

4. A discussion of the merits of a Presidential address to the Nation.

5. More discussion on Clark Clifford's question of Thursday, “How best to secure the return of the Pueblo if diplomacy fails.”

Secretary McNamara: We should not plan on any military action in less than seven days.

General Wheeler: That is correct. That time will be required to get all of our units on the ground and make them combat effective.

Secretary McNamara: We should have working sessions periodically to discuss these matters. We may do this without the President. I suggest that we ask the State Department to call these meetings. We should have one a day. Let's work out a system like we had in the Cuban Missile Crisis.2

At 11:00 a.m. the President joined the meeting.

I. Intelligence Situation Report

Director Helms: On the overflight last night, the Soviet and North Korean radar picked up this flight. There was no effort to intercept it although it made repeated photographic runs. We did get photographs. I expect a photographic report from Japan later today.3

[3 paragraphs (7 lines of source text) not declassified]

II. Diplomatic Situation Report Deputy Secretary Berger: The Goldberg text is now being worked on (Goldberg text attached as Appendix A).4

—The Japanese were contacted. They replied that this is a very grave situation.5

—We have no reply as yet about our notice that we would be sending additional B–52's to Okinawa.

—The Indonesians have told their Ambassador in North Korea to urge the release of our ship and crew.6

—The Pakistanis have assured us of their support in the U.N.7 (The President asked if Berger is certain of this. The President said he had a different reading of the text. The President asked “Did he sign on?”) Berger said, not exactly.

—The tenor of most of the replies have been friendly.8 The President asked if there was any report on the nine members of the United Nations Security Council. Mr. Berger said there had been no report on their positions.

Walt Rostow: The Security Council meets at 3:30 p.m.

The President: Let me see the draft of the Goldberg statement.

Secretary McNamara: Has there been a response from Moscow yet?

Under Secretary Katzenbach: Yes, Gromyko was negative. They showed some concern. He was less negative than Kuznetsov. They urge restraint. They said they hope we will not over-react to this.

The President: May I see the cable on the Soviet discussion? (Ambassador Thompson's cable is attached as Appendix B.)9

The President: Is there any chance whatever that this ship was in territorial waters?

Secretary McNamara: It is possible, but the chances are less than 50–50.

General Wheeler: The ship has the best navigational gear we have. North Korea has a rugged coastline. Because of this we can get a good fix by radar. Admiral Moorer has said that it is very improbable that the vessel was even a mile from where it ought to be.

In addition, the intercepts of North Korean radio traffic confirm that the North Korean ships which intercepted the Pueblo were in the same area the Pueblo reported as its location.

Secretary McNamara: The only thing which would have brought the Pueblo inside of the territorial waters was the possibility that they were getting a very good intercept and needed to move closer to get a better product.

The President: Do you have anything more to report on the men and the equipment.

Secretary McNamara: We have nothing more on this.

Director Helms: There is nothing either way.

General Wheeler: There was a North Korean press message which said that the crew should be tried and punished as criminals.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: We interpret this as their response to our calling up reserves.

The President: Do we harass Soviet ships?

Secretary McNamara: Yes, they harass us too. This is almost a way of life on the high seas.

The President: Let's be more careful about all of this.

Secretary McNamara: We will reassess the whole thing.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: I thought there was a case of our buzzing a ship in Haiphong Harbor.

Secretary McNamara: That was a photo reconnaissance mission to see if the ship was damaged as alleged.

III. Military Proposals Secretary McNamara summarized in handwriting his schedule for aircraft movements. (Attached as Appendix C.)10

—Sunday—13

Monday—16 plus 66 from U.S.S. Ranger

Tuesday—66

Wednesday—30

Thursday—24

—Two days later, we will send in 18 aircraft from Vietnam. These are 18 aircraft which are being replaced and will not be sent from Vietnam until their replacements arrive in Vietnam.

The 26 B–52's will bring the total to 347 aircraft including those aboard the U.S.S. Enterprise. We would like a decision on this whole matter today.

This action will leak. We will try to hold it as tightly as possible, but when men and units begin to move the press gets wind of it.

Secretary McNamara reviewed with George Christian the proposed answers to questions concerning the aircraft movements. The President approved the answers. (Attached as Appendix D.)11

Secretary McNamara: We would like to alert the units today for movement.

The President: Is this what you want now General Wheeler?

General Wheeler: Yes sir.

The President: Does State agree with this?

Under Secretary Katzenbach: Yes we do.

The President: Clark, do you agree with this?

Clark Clifford: I have no objection.

The President: What do we say now to the Congress?

Secretary McNamara: Mr. President you have before you a list of authority which we would like to require from the Congress in relation to the Pueblo incident. These are as follows: 1. Authorize the extension of all enlistments, appointments, periods of active duty, and other periods of obligated service of Regular and Reserve members of the Army, Navy, Marine Corps and Air Force.

Reason required—Extension of tours of duty involuntarily is the quickest way to achieve any needed expansion of force strength. Such extension will add 2200 trained personnel per day. This can be authorized by Joint Resolution.

2. Authorize the call of all individual Reservists.

Reason required—Department of Defense Appropriation Act, 1967,12 authorizes the President to order units of the ready Reserve of an armed force to active duty. Authority to call individuals from units is required in order to fill gaps in units on active duty with personnel possessing special skills. Moreover, extension of tours of those presently on active duty would be inequitable unless individual Reservists are subject to call. This, too, can be accomplished by Joint Resolution.

3. Expand South Korean military assistance program by $100,000,000.

Reason required—The MAP request for Fiscal Year 1968 was cut 40%. This made it impossible to expand the military assistance given to South Korea, although such expansion is warranted in view of their troop contribution in South Vietnam and the increased level of harassment by North Korean forces. A supplemental appropriation under the Foreign Assistance Act will permit the funding of destroyers, helicopters and artillery and facilities needed for counter-infiltration purposes, and the necessary modernization to increase the defense capabilities of ROK aircraft, vehicles, anti-aircraft equipment and patrol craft. In addition, it will fund the required increase in ammunition levels.

The President: How many times have we authorized the extension of enlistments and periods of active duty?

Secretary McNamara: Many times.

The President: Get me the number of times we have done it and the reasons for each.

Secretary McNamara: We will do that.

The President: We can only call units now?

Secretary McNamara: This is correct. We can only call units. This request would permit the authority to call individuals from units in order to fill any gaps in units on active duty with personnel possessing special skills.

The President: How many men does this affect?

Secretary McNamara: Roughly 150,000.

The President: How much was cut from the military assistance program?

Secretary McNamara: The Fiscal Year 1968 request was cut 40%.

The President: Nick (Under Secretary Katzenbach) how do we get an expression from the Congress on what our policy should be in regard to Korea? George (George Christian) we must make certain that in the future we notify the Congress before the press announcement is made. There are a few people who are mad because they were not advised of the call up action yesterday.

Secretary McNamara: Mendel Rivers is mad.

The President: Mansfield is also bellyaching about it.

Secretary McNamara: I called Mansfield.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: If you go all the way down the road you need nothing short of a Tonkin Resolution.

The President: The Tonkin Resolution wasn't very effective. Fulbright is against a resolution of any kind. We should discretely show the Congress copies of the mutual security acts between North Korea and the Soviets. I thought we should have had a resolution on the Israel situation. We have a new ball game with the Foreign Relations Committee.

Let's do what we can to bring them along a little bit.

Let's give some thought to how we can get Congress in on it.

We need more than a toast—that is all we have on the Israel situation. If they (the Congress) murder us on Vietnam with all those facts including SEATO and the Tonkin Gulf Resolution, what are we going to do in a situation like this.

Secretary McNamara: I agree. We need strong Congressional support.

The President: I have always tried to put Congress in on the take-off as well as on the landing. If the Dominican Republic means nothing, if the Tonkin Gulf means nothing, what do we do here. We do not want to exercise power and authority without the support and approval of the Congress.

Let's discuss with Senator Fulbright and Senator Russell what ways we should approach this matter.

At some point we are going to be called upon to put up or shut up. I want Secretary McNamara to set up a meeting with Senator Russell and take Buzz (General Wheeler) along with you. Nick (Under Secretary Katzenbach) you do the same with Senator Fulbright and Senator Mansfield. Also I want you (General Wheeler) to get General Goodpaster to go over this with President Eisenhower.13

Get him to ask Ike what is our best constitutional way to proceed.

Paul, (Secretary Nitze) do you have any thoughts on this?

Secretary Nitze: The key here is Senator Fulbright. He wants to put the Executive Branch in a position where they cannot make a move without the approval of his Committee.

The President: Bromley, (Bromley Smith) get me the dates and exactly what we did in the situations leading up to the Dominican Republic and the Tonkin Gulf. Get them to me right away.

Now let us address ourselves to the question of what we do if diplomacy fails.

Walt Rostow: We really cannot do that until we see what happens in the United Nations. In addition we need to get a read-out on photo reconnaissance.

The President: I want you to get your very best dreamers on this right away. Are there no economic sanctions we can take?

Walt Rostow: We will set up a special task force on this.

The President: Get your very best people working on this.

Secretary McNamara: Mr. President, we should remind you of something we pointed out before the President entered. It would not be appropriate to take any military action in less than seven days because of the need to get our units there and get them combat effective.

The President: We also should keep in close touch with the Korean Embassy. Park may be about to blow something and we would be involved.

The President: What about a television address to the Nation?14

George Christian: The point of concern is that the President has said nothing publicly on this matter, although I would not recommend any television now, I would think the President might want to consider dropping something into a speech.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: We must remember that Goldberg is coming up on television for the next two or three days, so there will be plenty of Administration talk.

The President: I want you to give Rusk and Goldberg an outline of what to say in their speeches. All of you remember that we brought those Russian ships in a while back. They paid $60 fine and were freed. Our ship, the Pueblo, was not in Korean territorial waters. We had no time to do anything to prevent it from being towed in in the one- and-a-half hour period. Let's be prepared to answer every question that is being raised by people like Time Magazine and answer them factually.15

George Christian: One of the principal questions was why the ship was not protected.16

The President: This is simple. We cannot provide an Armada over every ship we have. The Russians do not have their ships protected.

George Christian: Another question they are raising is why there was not more air power in Korea.

Secretary McNamara: We do not have planes assigned to protect these types of ships. This is an advantage that the initiator had. They also had MIGs overhead.

General Wheeler: We could pick up six trawlers off our shores today if we wish. They don't protect their ships. This type of thing goes on all the time.

Clark Clifford: If these ships were covered by air, their effectiveness would be reduced substantially.

Walt Rostow: There are probably 50 incidents of harassment each year.

Secretary McNamara: The Pueblo would have been much more prepared if he had been inside territorial waters. The fact that he was unprepared reinforces the fact that he was outside territorial waters in international territory.

The President: All of you should meet regularly and get as well organized in this situation as we were in the Cuban Missile Crisis. Get your best people working on this. Let's not have us charged with failure to deal with the situation properly.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo VII, 11:00 a.m. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room at the White House. The time of the meeting is from the President's Daily Diary. (Ibid.)

2 On January 26 an interagency Korean Working Group and a State Department Korean Task Force were formed and headed by Berger. (Memorandum for the Korean Working Group, January 26; ibid., National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Miscellaneous, Vol. I)

3 On January 29 the Directorate of Intelligence issued a memorandum containing a preliminary assessment of information gathered by a Black Shield flight over North Korea on January 26. An analysis of the photographs showed “no unusual air or naval deployments,” but “North Korean surface-to-air missile defenses appear to be in a high state of readiness.” The overflight photographed the Pueblo in Wonsan Bay. The ship had no visible damage and was guarded by three patrol boats armed with Komar missiles. (Ibid.)

4 Not printed; the text of Goldberg's January 26 statement is in Department of State Bulletin, February 12, 1968, pp. 194–198.

5  Document 222 discusses the approach to Japanese officials. Ambassador Johnson subsequently met with Ushiba to review Korean developments. Johnson was informed that Miki would contact the Soviet Ambassador in Tokyo to express his government's concerns about North Korean actions. (Telegram 4998 from Tokyo, January 25; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 15–1 KOR S) In a January 30 letter Sato responded to President Johnson's message by expressing his own fears and concerns about the situation in Korea and his commitment to cooperating with the United States to settle the Pueblo crisis and North Korean guerrilla actions. (Telegram 108777 to Tokyo, February 2; ibid.)

6 In telegram 4279 from Djakarta, January 26, Ambassador Marshall Green informed the Department of his meeting with Indonesia's Minister of Foreign Affairs Adam Malik, who promised to contact immediately “his ambassador in Pyongyang instructing him to inform NK authorities of Indonesia's concern and to urge immediate release of Pueblo and crew in order to prevent situation from deteriorating further.” (Ibid., POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

7 Reference appears to be to President Johnson's letter to Pakistani President Ayub Khan and the reply thereto. Johnson's letter requested that Ayub instruct his UN Ambassador, who was also President of the Security Council, to support “a simple resolution of the Security Council expressing concern about the grave situation, calling for strict observance of the Armistice Agreement, and requesting the immediate release of the United States crew and vessel.” (Telegram 104475 to Rawalpindi, January 25; ibid.) In reply, Ayub stated that “Ambassador Shahi is in touch with other members of the Security Council and we earnestly hope that consensus will emerge amongst the members of the Council on the best means to meet the situation.” (Telegram 2969 from Rawalpindi, January 26; ibid.)

8 The Department of State sent telegrams to all Ambassadors informing them of the facts surrounding the Pueblo incident and Blue House raid and asking that they request their host government to express support for the United States by, but not limited to, approaching the USSR and, where appropriate, North Korea. (Telegrams 104818 and 104819, both January 26; ibid.) By the evening of January 26, when a summary of responses received thus far was given to him, the President noted “we have too few replies and our Ambassadors don't seem to have much clout. Please follow thru for reports from all posts.” (Memorandum from Smith to the President, January 26; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ia, Part B [through January])

9 Reference is to Document 227.

10 Not printed.

11 Not printed.

12  PL 89–687, October 15, 1966, 80 Stat. 980–998; the Appropriation Act of 1968 actually covered the fiscal year ending June 30, 1968, however. See PL 90–96, September 29, 1967, 81 Stat. 231–249.

13 See Document 239. Memoranda of other briefings as well of Rusk's comments to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on January 26 are in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. I, Part B (through January) and ibid., Vol. Ib, Part A (beginning February). In a letter to Rusk on February 1 Fulbright posed 20 questions on the Pueblo situation. A substantive, all-encompassing series of reports replying to those questions was sent to Fulbright on March 20. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

14 See footnote 6, Document 223.

15 The President met with Hugh Sidney of Time magazine and Jack Horner of the Washington Star in the Oval Office that evening from 7:30 to 8:45 p.m. for a confidential, unattributed discussion of the Pueblo crisis. (Notes of the President's Meeting, January 26; Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo Backgrounder)

16 General McKee, Commander of the Fifth Air Force, stationed in Japan and responsible for responding to Pueblo's distress calls, undertook an investigation and concluded that “no air cover and no strip alert was provided because none was requested.” The Fifth Air Force was not notified of the ship's mission at the time the mission was approved nor upon execution of the ship's orders. Only a few intelligence and operations officers had any knowledge of the mission and they and other Fifth Air Force personnel were not prepared to respond during the seizure of the Pueblo. (Telegram from 5AF to CINCPACAF, January 25; ibid., National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. I, Part A [through January])

229. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson 229. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 26, 1968.

SUBJECT

What We Are Doing About the Pueblo

The following is a brief description of what we have under way on the Pueblo:

On the Diplomatic Front: —Reactions to our representations abroad are still coming in. We are sending you our analyses of them as soon as they are prepared. (I have already sent you 15 and will send you more in the morning.)2

—The Japanese have suggested that we agree to the formation of a fact-finding commission made up of the USSR, Japan and an undetermined third country. They propose that this commission determine the facts in the Pueblo case and make recommendations for resolution. We see many flaws in the proposal (e.g. it doesn't handle the problem of North Korean infiltration into South Korea).3

—We have persuaded the Swiss and the Swedes (who, along with the Czechs and the Poles, make up the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission) to make inquiries about the status of the Pueblo crew. We have gone to the Czechs and the Poles to see if they will agree to go along with the Swiss-Swedish approach.

—At our request, the International Red Cross has agreed to make inquiries about the Pueblo killed and injured. The IRC has also agreed to ask for the return of the bodies of the dead, but feels that it can't yet ask for the return of the crew. That will be the next step.4

—We are examining the pros and cons of another MAC meeting. We will have a recommendation for you on this tomorrow.

—We are studying another appeal to Communist countries with diplomatic representation in North Korea. If we feel there is a chance that any of them can influence Pyongyang we will go back at them again.

—We are looking at the merits and demerits of sending a special Presidential emissary to capitals that might exercise some influence on the North Koreans. We will have a recommendation for you in a day or two.

—We are considering whether we can put indirect pressure on the North Koreans (e.g. getting others to cut their trade).

—Buzz Wheeler will report tomorrow on about a dozen possible military actions we can take directly against North Korea (none of these now look very promising).

—I have another group trying to come up with assorted proposals of a less provocative nature than air strikes, etc.

We are looking into the feasibility of some action particularly directed against North Korean units in North Viet-Nam.

In the UN: —Goldberg will begin consultations tomorrow on a possible resolution. We can use this as a tactic—if we want to—for prolonging Security Council consideration.

—It was clear from the debate today that the Soviets have no taste for an extended debate. If we want to keep things going in the UN we will have to avoid coming to a vote on any resolution (since this would mean a Soviet veto).

My strong recommendation is that we keep the issue alive in the Security Council for a while. If the debate is closed off without a satisfactory result, it will mean heavy pressure on you to take other steps.

On the Intelligence Front: —Dick Helms is studying possible ChiCom attitudes and reactions to various U.S. steps against North Korea. He also will report tomorrow on the location of the North Korean merchant and fishing fleets.5

—The preliminary results of our intelligence collection effort over Wonsan are in. We have pictures of the Pueblo which seems to indicate that no external damage has been done to the ship. We can't tell, however, what equipment has been removed. There is no evidence of salvage operations at the point where the Pueblo was seized.

Public and Congressional Relations:

—We are preparing additional materials for you on how best to handle our public and Congressional relations.

I also have given several groups the task of coming up with proposals on how best to influence the USSR and Eastern Europeans. There have been several indications today that the Soviets—whatever their public utterances—are beginning to take the matter seriously. We are looking for ways to keep pressure on the Soviets.

(Note: We have just received a report—on which you will get more details in the morning—that an Eastern European source here says that the North Koreans will release the Pueblo crew on Monday and then scuttle the ship. We are now assessing the reliability of this information.)

Nicholas deB. Katzenbach

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. I, Part B (through January). Secret. Attached to a January 26 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson in which he noted that Katzenbach “seeks to convince you that things are in somewhat better shape than you may think; and—basically, he is right.” The memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

2 Memoranda from Katzenbach to the President, undated and January 30, updating the responses to the demarches are ibid. Responses were also recorded by the Korean Task Force in daily situation reports. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3 Earlier that day the Japanese Ambassador met with Rusk and gave him a paper containing the proposal. On January 29 he discussed the proposal in a meeting with Katzenbach. The proposed approach was also the subject of discussion between Ambassador Johnson and Japanese officials in Tokyo. Memoranda of conversation, cables, briefing papers, and similar documentation on this topic, January 26 to 31, are ibid.

4 Documentation detailing U.S. approaches to the International Red Cross and the latter's contacts with North Korea are ibid.

5 The Office of National Estimates prepared two memoranda, both January 26, on the Korean situation that examined possible courses of action to end the Pueblo crisis and confront North Korean aggression. “Possible Developments in the Korean Situation” discussed three options for dealing with the situation: 1) continue exerting diplomatic pressures while advancing military preparations; 2) retaliate militarily; and 3) develop a new U.S.-ROK approach involving selective retaliation against North Korea. “Communist Reaction to Certain US Actions” noted that both the Soviet Union and Communist China had thus far refrained from direct involvement in the Korean situation. The analysis concluded that, although both nations would be alarmed by direct U.S. military activity against North Korea, neither would retaliate directly unless their territorial security were seriously threatened or breached. The paper cautioned, however, that U.S. military threats were unlikely to achieve an early resolution of the Pueblo crisis and could risk expansion of hostilities. (Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC History, Pueblo Crisis, 1968, Vol. III, Day-by-Day Documents, Part 3)

230. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 230. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 1

Moscow, January 27, 1968, 1458Z.

2604. 1. Following is our translation of Kosygin's reply to President's message.2

2. Begin text. Dear Mr. President: I have received the text of your message which was handed by Ambassador L. Thompson to our Minister of Foreign Affairs on January 26, 1968, concerning the incident involving the American naval intelligence vessel Pueblo near the shores of the Korean People's Democratic Republic.

3. Allow me to say with the utmost directness that we cannot share the interpretation of events which is presented by the American side. Information available to us attests to the fact that the American naval intelligence vessel Pueblo was detained by Korean authorities not in international waters but in the territorial waters of the KPDR while carrying out certain intelligence operations. This is the main thing, it is here where the entire essence of the affair lies, and therefore the responsibility for the incident falls entirely on the American military command, which acted contrary to the generally accepted norms of international law protecting the inviolability of the territories of states and their territorial waters.

4. But since this is so, it is the US which must take steps to find ways of settling the incident and, in any event, not do anything that could add fuel to the fire. You yourself expressed in your message the conviction that the interests of preserving universal peace would not be served by increased tension in that area.

5. However, how can this be reconciled with the fact that during the past few days in the US the situation is being heated up, irresponsible voices calling for a “return strike” against the KPDR and calls for the use of arms and force are being heard? Those who make such statements are apparently little concerned about what all this can lead to.

6. How the American military look at the principles of international law, and in particular the principle of the freedom of navigation, is well known, if only by the fact that US military aircraft are buzzing systematically Soviet and other vessels on the high seas. We have repeatedly drawn the attention of the US Government to the fact that this is fraught with the possibility of military incidents, but the buzzing operations have continued to this day. Recently even more serious cases have taken place where American aircraft subjected Soviet merchant vessels to bombing and strafing. And, incidentally, a very calm attitude, to put it mildly was then demonstrated in the US with respect to these facts, although they involved human losses and major material damage.

7. But now, when an American naval vessel has been detained because it penetrated foreign territorial waters, a noisy campaign is being developed in the US, which, judging by everything, has the support of the American Government. Otherwise, how can one understand the report that a Seventh Fleet detachment consisting of the nuclear carrier Enterprise, destroyers and other vessels has been ordered to move in the direction of the KPDR?

8. The Soviet Government believes that in connection with the incident which has arisen near the KPDR coast, it is most important to analyze the situation soberly and not to succumb to emotions which can lead one to where perhaps he does not even intend to go.

9. You, Mr. President, have expressed a desire that the Soviet Government respond to your anxiety in connection with this incident. In our view, the shortest and the most reliable way for settling it is not to allow precipitous actions, and this would create a more favorable atmosphere.

10. We are convinced that the promptest possible settlement of the situation would be in the interest of all sides. Such settlement must be based, of course on complete respect for the sovereignty and independence of the Korean People's Democratic Republic. Any attempts to apply methods of pressure with respect to the KPDR can only complicate the possibilities for a settlement.

11. We have informed the Government of the Korean People's Democratic Republic of your message.

12. Respectfully, A. Kosygin. January 27, 1968. End text.

Thompson

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Top Secret; Flash, Nodis. Received on January 27 at 10:50 a.m.

2 The reply was given to Thompson by Gromyko, who dismissed the veracity of U.S. military statements declaring the Pueblo was in international waters when captured and cautioned that U.S. threats to North Korea could be counterproductive. (Telegram 2605 from Moscow, January 27; ibid.)

231. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 231. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 1

Moscow, January 27, 1968, 1500Z.

2606. Ref: Moscow 2604, 2605.2

1. I think we can take some encouragement from fact that despite Kuznetsov's first statement to me that Soviets would not act as intermediary, Soviets in fact have transmitted two messages to Pyongyang. I am also struck by Kosygin's statement that Soviets believe quick settlement of incident is in the interest of all sides.

2. Gromyko gave every appearance of being convinced that incident took place in territorial waters. If we could tell Soviets that we are prepared to make available to them copy of tape recording of report of Korean subchaser reporting its position this could dispose of that part of the argument, although I doubt Soviets would accept such offer and would say such tapes could easily be faked.

3. While possibilitiy exists that Soviets were party to this affair, my judgment, based on their handling of the problem up to now and the general situation, is that they were not. They are clearly concerned over the way the matter is blowing up which tends to limit their freedom of action. Their distrust of our military is certainly genuine.

4. Anything we can do to convince them that our purpose is simply to settle the incident and get our men and ship back would be helpful. For example, if we could find a way to let them know, perhaps in any reply President may make to Kosygin, that we have taken steps to calm down South Koreans, this would be useful. It would also increase Soviets possibility to pressure North Koreans if we could put Enterprise out of the area or at least from the vicinity of Wonsan. I think we must take Gromyko's warning to me seriously.

Thompson

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Received January 27 at 11:14 a.m.

2  Document 230 and footnote 2 thereto.

232. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 232. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, January 27, 1968, 1720Z.

3702. Ref: A. Seoul 3696;2 B. Seoul 3697.3 Country Team Message.

1. Shortly after midnight Jan 28, Swiss member NNSC (Barbey) telephoned following information, which he had received from Communist member NNSC, to senior member UNCMAC:

Between 2000 and 2100 hours January 27 the Communist members of NNSC met with MG Pak Chung-kuk, senior member KPA/CP/side of Military Armistice Commission. Pak requested them to transmit following official and unofficial messages from him to senior member UNCMAC. The messages, in Korean, were translated into English by KPA, then taken by Polish and Czech NNSC members to Swiss and Swedish members. Official message follows: “Govt of North Korea thinks that solving question of ship and crew is impossible when made by threatening or using force. If the United States will try to use force to free the ship, KPA will answer with the same means and it is risk that instead of freeing the crew they would get only bodies. It is quite possible to solve this problem if USA will acknowledge that the people of the ship are prisoners of war and if US will show willingness to negotiate or discuss in a normal way when one side would like to have prisoners back.”4

2. The following unofficial message was given to Pole and Czech obviously for transmission also: “Now the Captain recognizes his criminal acts …5 The crew are in very good condition. Although they acted as enemies in our coastal waters and committed a crime, those who are wounded are under normal medical care. The body of one killed is preserved. Further details about the situation of the crew members could be obtained through direct contact between both sides.”

3. Comment by Swiss member: This is interesting in that only two days ago Pak told his NNSC members “Even if not in territorial waters the ship was acting against us.”

4. Comment: Most unusual feature of foregoing is that Pak chose to use NNSC as channel. We can only surmise that Communist members NNSC had earlier passed request for info on crew members to him, despite statement to contrary to Swiss and Swede (Ref A). Experience with Pak at MAC indicates he would not have taken this action without instructions from Pyongyang.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–14 KOR/UN. Secret; Flash; Exdis. Repeated USUN.

2 Telegram 3696 from Seoul, January 27, discussed a suggestion by the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission that Admiral Smith request information about the health and welfare of the Pueblo crew through the Joint Duty Officers at Panmunjom. All NNSC members would also submit a message, sent in their capacity as “reps of countries which have traditionally dealt with victims of international conflicts,” requesting similar information. (Ibid.)

3 In telegram 3697 from Seoul, January 27, the Embassy reported the views of the NNSC toward the potential resolution of the Pueblo crisis through negotiations with North Korea. The Swedish and Swiss members of the commission, based on a conversation with the Communist members, concluded that the North Koreans could be prepared to discuss the crisis through the UN structure at Panmunjom and appeared to expect an official apology, perhaps with the intention of humiliating the United States. (Ibid.)

4 When drafting a reply to Kosygin's message, Rostow received and forwarded a copy of this cable to the President. With reference to Pak's comments suggesting the crew be returned as prisoners of war, Rostow commented that that approach could be “the quickest track,” but would require pacification of the South Koreans by keeping some of the recently transferred aircraft in the ROK and by increasing U.S. funding of anti-infiltration measures to improve ROK security. He further advised the President: “Sir: This is the break. The problem is how to do it with maximum dignity.” (Memorandum from Rostow to the President, January 27; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ia, Part A [through January])

5 Reference is to Bucher's alleged confession broadcast by Radio Pyongyang on January 25.

233. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 233. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, January 28, 1968, 0152Z.

106065. Ref: Seoul's 3702.2 Following is text of reply to be made by Senior MAC Member: “1. I have received the message which you (Major General Pak Chung-kuk, Senior North Korean Member of Military Armistice Commission) sent me through the channels of the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission.

2. My reply is as follows: The policy of the United States Government with respect to the S.S. Pueblo and its crew was publicly stated when the President of the United States on January 26 said, 'We shall continue to use every means available to find a prompt and peaceful solution to the problem.'3

3. The crew of the S.S. Pueblo are United States Naval personnel, acting under orders of the United States Navy. Two of them are civilian scientists, specialists in hydrographic work. You have captured these men by force of arms. At the very least, they are entitled to the protection of the Geneva Conventions of 1949, to which you subscribe.

4. I am relieved to receive information through unofficial channels that they are good condition, the wounded are receiving normal medical care, and that the body of the one who died is preserved.

5. It has been suggested that further details could be obtained through direct contact between both sides. I therefore request that the names of the injured and dead be provided us through the Joint Duty Officer, and I request an immediate meeting of the Senior Members of both sides to discuss and resolve this matter promptly. We are agreeable to either a private or open meeting.”

7. Use Nodis Cactus in this series.

Rusk

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus. Repeated to USUN. Drafted at the White House, where it was cleared by the President; cleared by Berger and Walsh; and approved by Katzenbach.

2  Document 232.

3 The statement is from the President's televised address to the nation; see footnote 6, Document 223.

234. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 234. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, January 28, 1968, 0208Z.

106066. Ref: State 106065.2 Further instructions follow: 1. In meetings with North Korean side of MAC you should make business-like, dispassionate presentation of US positions. In answer to any North Korean harangue or propagandistic argumentation, you should give calm and factual response, setting forth US views plainly and firmly.

2. North Korean side may press argument that Pueblo was in territorial waters. You should respond with following points: a. Pueblo under US Naval orders to stay at least 13 nautical miles from coast and thus would not enter any waters that North Korea claimed as territorial sea;

b. At time when Pueblo was hailed by North Korean submarine chaser, Pueblo radioed her position as 39–25.2 North Latitude 127–55 East Longitude—a position more than 15 nautical miles from nearest North Korean territory, Ung Do Island;

c. At exactly the same time, North Korean submarine chaser Number 35 radioed to shore its position as 39 degrees 25 minutes North Latitude 127 degrees 56 minutes East Longitude—a position approximately one mile further East and seaward from that reported by Pueblo;

d. At time of boarding, North Korean vessels reported the position as further East, at 39–26 North Latitude 128–02 East Longitude.

3. North Korean official message said, “It is quite possible to solve this problem if USA will acknowledge that the people of the ship are prisoners of war.” We are not sure what they mean. This may be intended as an admission that the Pueblo crew was engaged in warlike activity. Or it may be intended as a ploy to bargain for the return of North Koreans. Accordingly our language avoids specific reference to prisoners of war, and you should avoid phrase or acknowledgment, and try to minimize issue, simply repeating that they were taken by force and are at least entitled to the protection of Geneva Conventions of 1949. If this point proves troublesome, you should say these are highly technical and legal matters, and you would like clarification of what they mean, so as to study matter further.

4. North Korean official message refers initially to “question of ship and crew” but later to “willingness to negotiate or discuss in a normal way when one side would like to have prisoners back.” US position, of course, is that both vessel and crew are to be returned and you should seek to deal with both together. However, there is obviously a priority in physical return of crew from North Korean custody and, realistically considered, arrangements for return of crew could be more rapidly carried out than necessarily more complicated arrangements for return of vessel.

5. If North Korean side should refer to prospect of criminal trial or penalties for crew members, you should point out that no basis exists for prosecution and that any such action would be contrary to Geneva Conventions of 1949 and threats this nature not helpful in search for peaceful solution.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus. Repeated to USUN. Drafted by Meeker; cleared by Berger, Rostow, and Walsh; and approved by Katzenbach.

2  Document 233.

235. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 235. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 28, 1968.

Mr. President:

The attached cable from Ambassador Porter indicates clearly his problem with our proposed procedures so far as Park is concerned.

As indicated to you yesterday we have a problem of reassuring Park and the South Koreans on the infiltration problem. By leaving some of the aircraft in Korea and increasing military aid—notably, if we are going to get our extra division for South Vietnam.

Secretaries Rusk and McNamara will have been informed and be ready to discuss a reply by 9:00 AM.

We will shortly send up to you State's proposed reply to Porter which suggests: 1) go immediately to Park without an interim message to the North Koreans; 2) tell him our strategy is to take these issues one at a time; 3) indicate specifically our willingness for later meetings on the question of infiltration and increased military aid.

W. W. Rostow 2

Attachment 3

Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, January 28, 1968, 0923Z.

3706. Country Team Message. Ref: (A) State 106065;4 (B) State 106066;5 (C) State 106070;6 (D) USFK Message UK-50285 DTG 261115Z.7

1. We deeply concerned over adverse impact procedure suggested Refs (A) and (B) would have on US/ROK relations. As we have reported, ROKs from President on down are convinced that our actions and statements since Pueblo incident simply do not recognize extreme gravity of threat to internal security and political position of ROKG represented by Blue House raid and North Korean determination to increase subversive effort.

2. We have not informed ROKG of exchange between ourselves and North Korea through NNSC members. Despite security precautions we cannot keep this from them for very long. We have already received anguished approach from Foreign Ministry voicing suspicion that we are attempting to contact NK directly at other locations, notably Warsaw, and that we therefore intend to confine negotiations to retrieval of Pueblo and crew. We have ample evidence that suspicions are also growing at highest levels that once we succeed in obtaining release of ship and crew, we will withdraw force augmentations and leave ROK problem in status quo ante Pueblo with no improvement in President Park's political or security problems. We have had broad hints that ROKs are talking among themselves of possible withdrawal ROK armed forces from operational control CINCUNC and, because of concern over reopening of hostilities here, return of ROK troops from Vietnam. We do not believe they are serious, but fact that senior ROKs imply such consideration is indicative of psychological climate we must deal with here. Should ROKs learn that we have requested meeting of senior members MAC solely to discuss Pueblo incident, as suggested Refs (A) and (B), without parallel effort on intrusion problem, results could be explosive.

3. Moreover, whatever subject matter, believe it would be highly inadvisable to express willingness to hold open MAC meeting. Presence of press and other witnesses at open meeting would impel Pak to put on propaganda show and attempt to place US in most humiliating light possible.

4. Accordingly, urgently request we be authorized to follow procedure outlined below: (A) Immediately send KPA/CPV senior member first four paras of reply contained Ref (A) plus para 5 ending after words “joint duty officers.” Such reply is currently being translated and prepositioned for immediate delivery by secure means. By limiting this reply to request for information on condition of crew members, we would also provide NNSC opportunity to follow through with letter they suggested to us yesterday (Seoul 3697).8

(B) Ambassador will seek soonest possible appointment with President Park to inform him of dealings which have already taken place through NNSC and of request for information on crew by senior member UNCMAC. Ambassador will state that senior member UNCMAC is also requesting a private senior member meeting to discuss problem of obtaining release of Pueblo and crew and to impress on North Koreans in most forceful terms gravity of situation posed by continuing North Korean infiltration. If President insists that UNCMAC senior member demand guarantee from North Korea that there will be no further intrusion, Ambassador will respond that it probably impossible to obtain. However, to ease President's very real concerns, request Ambassador be authorized if necessary to inform him that USG will do following: (1) Retain substantial proportion of force augmentation in and near Korea until such time as developments indicate infiltration threat and its attendant political and psychological problems materially lessened.

(2) To provide tangible evidence that we are doing something directly for the ROKs, USG will airlift available CIGCOREP items as requested in Ref (D), which USFK is passing separately directly to Dept.

(3) Acknowledge firm commitment on spring delivery first destroyer, which heretofor has been tied to additional dispatch of ROK troops to Vietnam. We are under no illusions that these items, if agreed, would entirely eliminate pressures on US arising from Park's internal political position. They may ease pressures for time being, however, if carefully publicized.

(C) Senior member UNCMAC will then send separate message to senior member KPA/CPV side requesting private senior member to senior member MAC meeting. Request update guidance contained Ref (B).

4. Ambassador will raise problem of ROK attendance at UNSC (Ref C) at time he makes approach mentioned para 4(B) above.

Porter

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968. Secret; Nodis; Cactus. The memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

3 Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus. Repeated to USUN.

4  Document 233.

5  Document 234.

6 Telegram 106070 to Seoul, January 28, instructed Porter to inform the ROK Foreign Minister, or if necessary Pak himself, that ROK insistence on appearing before the Security Council could be used to divert attention from the Pueblo seizure and Blue House raid to a debate on invitations to both North and South Korea. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 23–7 KOR S/UN)

7 Not found.

8 In telegram 3697 from Seoul, January 27, the Embassy reported on the NNSC's views of resolving the Pueblo crisis. Although it contained no specific reference to a letter, the telegram noted that the Communist members of the NNSC suggested negotiations could be arranged by means of “messages through Joint Duty Officers of Panmunjom” or through a private MAC meeting. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–14 KOR/UN)

236. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg) 236. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg)1

Washington, January 28, 1968, 11:38 a.m.

Goldberg: [The recording of this conversation begins at this point.] which I think ought to be at night and not during the middle of the day, 'cause I think, you know, people look at it. Advance a proposition of this type, you say that—you have said to the American people that you want this settled by diplomatic means, if possible. You have also said that the ship and crew must be returned, and you adhere to that statement. Now, you are prepared, if the ship and crew are returned promptly, to then submit the—you would say, that we are satisfied on the basis of incontrovertible evidence, which has been now made public, that this ship was in international waters. Nevertheless, you are prepared to submit the entire matter, after the ship and crew are returned, to the International Court of Justice and abide by the results. If our case is not what we said it was, we would make appropriate reparations to them. If our case was as we said it was, they should make appropriate reparations to us. It would seem to me that such a statement from you—they'll turn it down, Mr. President. Although in one instance—I've been researching the precedents over the weekend—there was a situation in the Corfu Channel case where Britain and Albania got into a problem about intrusion upon international waters and where the Albanians mined the Corfu Channel. And they agreed at that time it should go to the Court—the British ship was damaged—and the Court ordered the Albanians to pay damages. Now, there is great virtue—you know, our public and the world opinion believes very much in the judicial process. All fair-minded people think, “Submit matters to courts and courts decide it.” A proposition like that put by you in a solemn declaration to the American people and to world opinion would, I think, have a tremendous impact. Anybody who would then say that you were not acting with restraint, etc., could not say it. This is a far better proposal than [Senator] Mike Mansfield's silly proposal that even though the ship was in international waterways we ought to lie to get our men back. That's just asinine. [The President can be heard chuckling in the background.] But for you to put a proposal saying that “You return our men and the ship; however we will undertake—we will put the case to the International Court. We're prepared to do it promptly upon the return, and we will abide the results of that decision.” Now there's a Russian on the Court, so they can't say the Court's stacked against 'em—and a Pole. But on the whole, the Court is pretty—not badly disposed.

President: How many on the Court?

Goldberg: Let me see—

President: Give me a number.

Goldberg: Fourteen, I think. I haven't got the exact number, but I could easily get it for you. It isn't bad from our standpoint. It's got Latin Americans, it's got the Australians, it's got British judges, its got—we've got a good judge in Phil Jessup. I don't think we would do badly. And our evidence, the one we have been developing, is good evidence.

President: Where does this Court sit, in Geneva?

Goldberg: In The Hague. And we would have to invoke the Court. They sit whenever their jurisdiction is invoked. And we would, you could say, we would ask the Court as a matter of urgency to make this determination.

President: Did you talk to Rusk or Nick about it?

Goldberg: No, I have not yet talked to anybody, 'cause I didn't want to start anything without—

President: I think it's worthy of pursuing. I wish you would talk to 'em2 or I'll talk to 'em later in the day. I think that would be very good. I think you did well up there. Now, what do you do tomorrow?

Goldberg: I'm—as far as I'm concerned, if we can not get some agreement, which I doubt we can get, I'm going to kind of wind up this exercise. I'm not going to put a resolution forward, which we, you know, would be vetoed. That isn't going to help us. And push the Russians to a veto. So that, my view would be that I would—we've done, I think, what we ought to do down here and that is we have stated our case and now the responsibility is on the Council to come up with a—some help.

President: What are they gonna do?

Goldberg: Not a damn thing, just between us. They'll fiddle around. But I'll know better today. I'll see the Russian today and see if I can get a reading from him that's any different from what Tommy has got in Moscow. I'll put it straight to him, “Do you fellas want to defuse the situation? Then you ought to put your weight to a simple”—what I have in mind is to say to him, “You don't have to have a resolution. Let's get the President of the Council to propose that there be—the ship and so on be returned and say the Council will be prepared to carry on further to consider the matter, and so on.” But, I know as I read the telegrams I doubt that the Russians would agree to anything. And then we'd let it be known that this is the reason why they can't do anything. I don't want to risk a resolution. See, we got a good vote on inscription, and I think it's much better to let it be where everybody is trying to use some—individually—some diplomatic pressure—

President: What'd you lose, three votes?

Goldberg: On the resolution itself?

President: On the inscription, yeah.

Goldberg: On the inscription we just lost three votes—Russia, Hungary, and Algeria. Now, that's a pretty good posture to leave it in. I wouldn't want to lose support as we go down the line. So that—but, I'll have a better reading. I'm gonna send all the—

President: Talk to Nick or Dean. Let them get into this. We're going to have to do something when you get through there, and we sure don't want to be—we don't even have our people out there. We couldn't do anything if we wanted to militarily, so we're gonna have to do something in between.

Goldberg: That's right. And this would—of course, the best avenue out there—I don't know whether you saw this—I prodded our people to respond quickly. The best avenue out there to get our boys back is this Neutral Nations Supervisory Committee.

President: Yeah, they're working that carefully.

Goldberg: Yes. We got 'em working now. Their—those—that consists of the Swedes, the Swiss, the Poles, and the Czechs. And we sent a wire last night to get them working. They—the—see, the—I—it's very important if you haven't seen the message—you might ask Walt to get it for you—to see that the North Koreans sent a message through that commission.

President: Yeah, we read it and we replied.3

Goldberg: You read it?

President: Yeah, and we replied.

Goldberg: I didn't know. There's so much traffic. And you saw the reply?

President: Yeah, yeah.

Goldberg: Yes. That's the best avenue—

President: We worked on it all afternoon.

Goldberg: Yes. Well, I should have realized that you'd be on top of that.

President: Here's one they're just trying to get out to Seoul now in reply to some of their worries. They just sent it in while you called. [At this point, the President read the entire text of a draft telegram to Seoul.]4

Goldberg: I think that's very good. I have—

President: I see nothing inconsistent with it—with what you suggested. Looks like its fits in pretty well.

Goldberg: It fits in very well.

President: You do that, and I'll be back in touch with you.

Goldberg: Thank you.

President: You talk to them.

Goldberg: And I hope to see an Ambassador coming in to see me, and I'll follow the same line.

President: Thank you. Good bye.

Goldberg: Thank you.

1 Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of Telephone Conversation between President Johnson and Goldberg, January 28, 1968, 11:38 a.m., Tape F68.01, PNO 2. Secret. This transcript was prepared by the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume.

2  Goldberg discussed the matter with Rusk, prompting Meeker and Sisco to set forth the advantages and disadvantages of taking the matter to the Court in a memorandum to Rusk and to the President. (Memorandum from Meeker and Sisco to Rusk, January 28, with attached memorandum from Rusk to the President; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3 See Documents 232 and 233.

4 The draft consisted of paragraphs 1–12 of Document 237. The draft telegram along with a transmittal memorandum from Rostow to the President, January 28, is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus I, Cactus State Cables, January 28, 1968 to February 10, 1968)

237. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 237. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, January 28, 1968, 2055Z.

106085. Ref: Seoul's 3706.2

1. We fully understand nature of problems and believe we can meet all of them with following approach.

2. It is apparent that North Koreans now realize full possible consequences of their actions and that Soviets have almost certainly told them to defuse situation. Easiest way for them to immediately ease acute tension and anger is to return Pueblo crew, and possibly vessel. It is imperative in ROK and our interest that nothing be done to interfere with this and that we make it as easy as possible for them to get off hook. To raise assassination and raider problem as you suggest at same meeting will only complicate and delay solution to all our problems.

3. The North Koreans will probably talk tough and try to humiliate us and ROK. If they do we should let them rant and ignore it. The velvet glove approach is the best, for there is a steel fist in it, and the North Koreans know it. We should not call their attention to it or make any threats, or at this juncture even call excessive attention to the gravity of the situation. They know how grave it is. We should be business like and non-contentious.

4. We expect the first round of talks will produce the release of the crew. Admiral Smith should try obtain vessel as well. The North Koreans may ask UNCMAC to sign a receipt for the men, as they did in the helicopter case, on which is written confession of guilt that they were engaged in espionage and violated territorial waters.UNCMAC should not be drawn into polemics, and only state quietly and repeatedly that North Koreans have their view of matter and we have ours. He is not authorized to sign a statement of the kind they are asking for.

5. If they insist on apology we should reply all our data indicate no violation. If after crew is released and we talk with Bucher and other crew members we find that the vessel was within the territorial waters claimed by North Korea we will make this fact public.

6. You can say to Park that as soon as the men are released, or if the release is long-delayed, announcement will be made of our intention to keep augmented forces in the area in view of North Korean campaign against the ROK. Also you may tell Park we are considering substantial additional MAP for the ROK to strengthen their anti-infiltration and military forces. We will also announce that two destroyers will be provided Korea, with date for delivery of first. You can tell Park that we will airlift available CIGOREP items as practicable, and will give this program same priority as we give Viet-Nam.

7. Para 6 is for Park alone and must not be published in any way.

8. We would think that when these announcements are made they will give ample assurances to Park and his military leaders and people who are concerned and interested. These announcements will be accompanied by request by UNCMAC for further senior level meetings with North Koreans to press insistently for an end to the North Korean violations in the DMZ and infiltration.

9. President Park is a military man, wise and a realist, and the approach to him should be made in these terms. The enemy is about to retreat from one of its exposed positions. When we take that we will move on the next ones.

10. You should see Park soonest and outline relevant parts of above strategy emphasizing this represents President's own views on how next moves should be made. Admiral Smith's message should be held for time being. If meeting with Park results in his concurrence or acquiescence, Admiral Smith should proceed to deliver message to NK MAC. However, if Park strongly objects our approach you should come back with Flash message.

11. On message to be sent to NK MAC, revise para 5 as follows: “5. It has been suggested that further details could be obtained through direct contact between both sides. I therefore request that the names of the injured and dead be provided us through the Joint Duty Officers. Further I request an immediate meeting of the Senior Members of both sides to discuss the modalities for resolving this matter promptly.”

12. We suspect that North Koreans will want private meeting initially, and perhaps throughout, and under cover of that say we insisted on private meeting where we confessed our sins. It should be made clear in initial contact that we prepared to agree to either open or closed sessions whichever they wish.

13. There are great domestic problems and interest in this situation as well as those of world-wide implication. We are sensitive to the Korean problems and have gone very far to meet them but we cannot permit ourselves become satellite of ROK.3

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus. Repeated to USUN. Drafted by Berger; cleared by Rostow, McNamara, Rusk, and Katzenbach; and approved by Walsh. A draft version was approved by the President and read by him in its entirety during a phone conversation with Goldberg, who also approved its contents; see Document 236.

2 See the attachment to Document 235.

3 Printed from an unsigned copy.

238. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 238. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

Washington, January 28, 1968, 2104Z.

106086. For Ambassador Only.

1. It seems obvious from your meetings with Gromyko and others that Sovs regard official contacts on Pueblo case awkward and even annoying because of inevitable attendant publicity. Same considerations would apply to contacts with charge here.

2. Nonetheless, it is essential we remain in close communication with Sovs to stress gravity of situation. While we are hopeful success diplomatic approaches, it is always possible that at later juncture we may wish to warn them of actions we may be compelled to take in order to obtain release of men and vessel. Purpose then would be to insure that Sovs understand limited objectives such action and thus avoid miscalculation by other side.

3. Hot line is, of course, secure private channel, but we believe this would be inappropriate for warnings of impending action as indicated para 2 since Sov prestige would be engaged and they would feel compelled respond. Its use subject daily inquiry here and confirmation would escalate public concern.

4. Accordingly, we now giving consideration to establishment, at appropriate time, of clandestine channel on Scali-Fomin pattern used during Cuban missile crises. Helms has proposed we use Kulebiakin, top KGB official in US as well as Dep Sov UN PermRep. Our spokesman would be reliable non-official, perhaps Wm. S. White, who would be carefully controlled and authorized inform Kulebiakin he acting on precise instructions and at specific request of Secretary on behalf of President if this deemed necessary in light existing circumstances.

5. We do not believe necessary or appropriate officially to inform Sovs in advance of establishment of contact. We can assume knowledge of contact will be relayed by Kulebiakin through his channels to top Sov officials. At some later point, it might be desirable for you to convey quietly to Gromyko your knowledge that channel exists and is operative.

6. Would appreciate your views by opening of business Monday (EST)2 on desirability such move and its timing, and if you concur in need, on modalities as set forth paras 4 and 5.3

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by Malcolm Toon, Country Director, Soviet Union Affairs; cleared by Helms at CIA and Read; and approved by Katzenbach.

2 By January 29 at 8 a.m. EST.

3 Printed from an unsigned copy.

239. Memorandum for Record 239. Memorandum for Record1

Washington, January 29, 1968.

SUBJECT

Telephone conversation with General Eisenhower, 27 January 1968

As requested by General Wheeler on 26 January, I talked by telephone with General Eisenhower on the 27th. General Wheeler had asked me to raise with him, at the President's request, several key questions concerning the North Korean seizure of the Pueblo.

The President was concerned over problems that might face him if he were impelled at the end of diplomatic efforts concerning the Pueblo to take some kind of military action. The two key questions would be: What actions could be taken; how should the Congress be associated with these actions (the experience in the Dominican Republic and in Vietnam is pertinent). In presenting these questions to General Eisenhower I stressed that the discussion was entirely confidential and that he was in no sense being put “on the spot”.

His initial comments were exploratory and tentative. Later he offered specific suggestions. He first asked if North Korea has much maritime trade. I told him it was limited but that they do a good deal of fishing. He then asked if any thought was given to a quarantine, commenting that this would be about the least provocative of any military action and that, if it did not suffice the Congress would then have to consider stronger action. He thought it was important to act “while the iron is hot” and while the Pueblo affair is fresh in peoples' minds. He said we should be careful not to demand or threaten anything that we can't back up. Next he raised the possibility of bombing the bridges over the Yalu. I pointed out that these lie on the border with Red China, and that this action would tend to be a challenge to the Chinese. I suggested that there might be critical points on the communications routes south of the Yalu. He commented that a key question is whether we would be prepared to use atomic weapons, particularly since these would give assurance of destruction of bridges, for example, and could be utilized in places where no civilian losses would be involved.

General Eisenhower said that if he were sitting in the President's place he would have the staffs consider every possible thing that might be done, not excluding anything out of hand, as a basis for top level consideration and decision. He commented that he doesn't see much danger of a nuclear holocaust arising over this affair. (I had previously mentioned to him the treaties of the USSR and the ChiComs with the North Koreans.) He thought that the Russians and the Chinese would be guided by their own interests.

After further discussion he said his idea would be to take action generally as follows and generally in the order indicated: a. Quarantine

b. Strengthening of defense arrangements along the DMZ (possibly including some patrolling into North Korea).

c. Attack of some critical targets along the North Korean main lines of communication.

d. Movement of U.S. air reinforcements into Korea; action to bring the whole command in South Korea to a feasibly high state of readiness; ground units should be brought up to strength, but without bringing in additional major units.

He did think that the plan to take these actions should be spelled out to the Congressional leadership. It could be pointed out that some of them at least could be initiated on the President's own authority but that, in a matter of this kind it is important to have the Congress associated with the President, and that this is why he is consulting them. The Congressmen should be asked to keep specific details confidential, although the general intentions would of course become known.

Finally, General Eisenhower said that we should do everything possible to press for action on the diplomatic front and in the U.N. Security Council, and should even ask for a special session of the General Assembly if we thought anything useful could be achieved. He would intensify the bombing in Vietnam to a maximum at this time, and let it be known that this step up was related to the North Korean incident.

He concluded by asking me to convey to the President his personal hope for the President's success in this matter.

G
Lieutenant General, U.S. Army

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Eisenhower, Dwight D. Secret. The memorandum indicates that President Johnson saw it.

240. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 240. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 1

Moscow, January 29, 1968, 1045Z.

2612. State 106090.2

1. I delivered Secretary's message to Gromyko twelve noon today. He read it in my presence. After I had replied negatively to Gromyko's question if I had anything to add orally, Gromyko said message would be studied carefully and perhaps replied to thereafter. However, he said he could say today that if US interested in settlement, it should not exert pressure on North Korea, for such pressure prevents and impedes settlement. He said he would not exclude the possibility that if there were no pressure, something would be done to reach settlement. Thus, he repeated, if US wished settlement, it should abandon pressure. If US prestige involved in this matter, so is North Korean. As Soviets had said earlier, absence of pressure would improve atmosphere.

2. Gromyko then repeated point he made to me January 27 that US should not take at face value its information regarding location of vessel. Soviets knew for sure that Pueblo had violated North Korean territorial waters. There was no doubt about this in Soviet mind. Referring to Secretary's statement in letter that vessel had not entered NK territorial waters, Gromyko said perhaps Secretary not fully informed. He asked me to inform Secretary that Soviets had no doubt whatsoever that Pueblo had entered NK territorial waters. He urged US to face facts as that would help reach solution. Once having made a statement, US should not insist on repeating it ad infinitum. Such line of argument weak and not helpful.

3. I said I did not know what Gromyko had in mind in referring to US pressure. Noting we were acting with restraint, I pointed out that other side was talking about putting crew on trial as criminals, and our public opinion was aroused. We had taken up matter through diplomatic channels and also in Security Council. As to vessel's location, I noted we had tapes and other evidence. However, if Soviets had some different information, other than North Korean statement, we would be grateful for it.

4. Gromyko commented he did not exclude possibility of giving us copy of explanation of circumstances of incident written in captain's own handwriting. He was not, however, sure he would get a copy, but if he did he would give it to us.

5. Gromyko then pointed out that his remarks should be understood in the context of earlier Soviet statements that USSR could not be an intermediary in this case. However, since US turned to Soviets, they told us their point of view and their estimate of situation. Soviets would not like us not to pay close attention to their views.

6. I assured Gromyko that we wanted to settle this affair peacefully and quietly. We did not want to create difficulties for other side. I assured him that we would consider his remarks very carefully. I also assumed Soviets would want to give close study to Secretary's message.

7. Gromyko then referred to Secretary's comments about violations of US territorial waters by Soviet ships and said he did not remember incidents cited by Secretary. However, those were different cases and it was difficult to say if there was any analogy between them and the present case.

Thompson

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

2 In telegram 106090 to Moscow, January 28, Rusk sent a letter to Gromyko reiterating that the Pueblo was seized in international waters, outlining international law covering the treatment of warships in territorial waters, listing Soviet violations of U.S. territorial waters and the action taken in those instances, stressing U.S. intention to resolve the Pueblo crisis peacefully, and requesting Soviet intervention to achieve that end. The letter also included a detailed chronology of events leading up to the seizure of the ship and an offer to provide tapes made of North Korean and U.S. radio communications concerning the Pueblo incident. (Ibid.) According to a January 28 memorandum from Rostow to the President, Johnson saw a copy of the letter. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Department of State Cables, Vol. I)

241. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and Secretary of Defense McNamara 241. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, January 29, 1968, 8:41 a.m.

McNamara: The second problem2 is we're flat on our ass with any reaction plan. There's just no question about it. And I've got to accept that as a problem and be prepared to justify our position. And these are the two major matters that I've got the lawyers working on. I will, as you suggest, get Cy[rus Vance] further this morning to look at the detail. He's gonna be here at least through noon, because I think he said he's lunching with you or the group today. In any case, I fully agree with you on this. Now, as to time—how we do it and when—Buzz Wheeler and I are scheduled to appear before the Senate Armed Services Committee Thursday morning3 at 10 o'clock on the 1969 Defense Program and Budget. And my guess is we won't even get a word out of our mouths before they say, “The hell with that. We want to talk Pueblo.” So I have had in mind that I would have to be prepared by Thursday morning. As a matter of fact, I was thinking of calling Russell4 today and asking him, without suggesting that the Pueblo would come up, asking him how we would like to handle the start of the hearing Thursday, because I'm sure they'll want to talk Khe Sanh and Pueblo and only incidentally '69. And I thought Buzz and I should be prepared for both Southeast Asia and Pueblo in great detail by Thursday morning.

President: I don't think there's any doubt about that. [Here follows discussion of the situation in Vietnam and of arrangements for a meeting among President Johnson, McNamara, and the Joint Chiefs later that day.]

McNamara: You might talk about Khe Sanh without digging too deeply into the Pueblo, because they themselves [the Joint Chiefs], frankly, don't know all I know about the Pueblo yet.

President: Who's responsible for this then, the Navy? Who gives them the assignment?

McNamara: Well, let me just tell you as little as I know now, which isn't all the story by any means. The proposal initiated with the Commander-in-Chief of the Pacific Fleet around the, I think it was the 17th of December, if I recall the date correctly. Then it went into—and he, he listed what he wanted to do.

President: Is that the fella—who is that? Where's he stationed?

McNamara: He's stationed in Honolulu, but, in turn, that came up from a lower level to him, and I haven't got the lower—at least I haven't seen the lower level papers yet.5 Then he gave it to Admiral Sharp, and Admiral Sharp turned it into the Chiefs around the 23rd of December, and the Chiefs reviewed it. These things are handled on a relatively routine basis.6 They reviewed it, and then it became part of what's called the Monthly Schedule of Reconnaissance Activities,7 and that then went, between the 23rd of December and I would guess the end of the month—I haven't the exact date yet—to the 303 Committee, on which sits the Deputy Secretary of Defense, Paul Nitze, Dick Helms, Walt Rostow, I think Nick—I'm not—a State Department representative, in any case. The 303 Committee has to approve every one of these actions, and it approved this one.8 So, I, myself, I feel personally responsible for the mission, because either my deputy or I approves every one of these things. So it was approved properly,9 but it was a poorly conceived mission. That's my conclusion. Now this part of it I haven't gone all over it with the Chiefs yet, because some of this I got yesterday, and I was in here but they weren't. I will, of course go over the whole thing and I'll go over the whole paper with the Chiefs before Buzz and I have to testify.

President: Well, I would sure get my best explanation, because—Now what's the [The tape ends abruptly at this point.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of Telephone Conversation between President Johnson and McNamara, January 29, 1968, 8:41 a.m., Tape F68.01, PNO 4. Secret. This transcript was prepared by the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume.

2 A fragment of McNamara's comments prior to this point—“I dare you approach. That's one problem.”—was recorded during the phone conversation.

3 February 1.

4 Senator Richard Russell, Chairman of the Armed Services Committee.

5 According to a retrospective study of the seizure of the Pueblo, the ship's operational plan originated from the staff of Rear Admiral Frank L. Johnson, Commander, Naval Forces Japan, under whose authority the ship, being assigned permanently to Yokosuka, fell. Johnson “personally made the initial determination that risk would be minimal since Pueblo would be operating in international waters during the entire operation.” After approving the proposed mission, Johnson forwarded it to Admiral John J. Hyland of CINCPACFLT, who, in turn, approved and submitted it to Admiral Sharp, CINCPAC. Sharp also approved and sent the proposal to the Joint Chiefs of Staff on December 23, 1967. When doing so, Sharp adopted Admiral Johnson's view that risk to the ship and mission would be minimal. (National Security Agency, The Capture of the USS Pueblo and Its Effect on SIGINT Operations, United States Cryptologic History, Special Series, Crisis Collection, Vol. 7, 1992, pp. 29 and 33–34)

6 Before the JCS could take any action and before the proposal could be sent further, however, the mission required approval of the Joint Reconnaissance Center Staff, consisting of a representative from each branch of the military, the DIA, the NSA, the Department of State, and the Secretary of Defense. Neither the JRC nor JCS reviews altered the initial minimal risk assessment associated with the mission. (Ibid., pp. 33–34)

7 The JRC prepared for submission to the JCS the monthly schedule on or about the 23d of each month. It was in book form and contained broad information about all missions scheduled for the coming month. On Wednesday, December 27, the JCS received the monthly schedule for operations slated for January 1968, as did each branch of the Armed Forces, the DIA, NSA, CIA, and Department of State. Rather than discuss the monthly schedule at a routinely held, formal Friday meeting, each Chief approved release of the schedule by his Operations Deputy. After their own meeting, the Operations Deputies on Friday, December 29, the schedule was given to and approved by Nitze. (Ibid., pp. 34–35)

8 The 303 Committee also granted civilian approval for the monthly schedule on December 29, noting that the mission held the possibility that the ship would encounter difficulties and potentially serious harassment. (Ibid., p. 36) NSA analysts also notified the JRC and JCS on December 29 of the potential for provocation by the North Koreans, mentioning as well that they had no evidence to suggest such harassment would occur outside the 12-mile territorial boundary. (Ibid., pp. 37–39 and 177–178)

9 Given the holiday season and the absence of key officials from Washington, deputies and substitutes handled much of the review and approval process. (Ibid., pp. 34–39)

242. Report on Meeting of the Advisory Group 242. Report on Meeting of the Advisory Group1

Washington, January 29, 1968.

ADVISORS PRESENT

Messrs. George Ball, McGeorge Bundy, Henry Cabot Lodge, Cyrus Vance, and General Maxwell D. Taylor

OTHERS PRESENT

Secretary Rusk, Under Secretary Katzenbach, Joseph Sisco, Samuel Berger, Director Richard Helms, W.W. Rostow, and Bromley Smith

Having been fully briefed by the Secretaries of State and Defense yesterday, Sunday, January 28 (except for Mr. McGeorge Bundy),2 the group met at noon to consider the operational alternatives immediately ahead of us and, perhaps, further down the road. The meeting opened by bringing them up to date with the latest word of the Panmunjom contact and Gromyko's reaction to Sec. Rusk's message.

It was universally agreed that we should make no further diplomatic or military moves, beyond those already undertaken and possible action under paragraph 11, until we could form a judgment as to whether the Panmunjom contact might be fruitful.

The first substantive issue addressed was whether and at what stage the President might offer arbitration via the World Court, or some other “suitable international tribunal” after the men and the ship were returned. After examining the problems posed by the World Court formula (implicit recognition of North Korea as a state) and the precedent represented by the RB–47 in 1960, it was agreed that some such offer might well be made if the Panmunjom exercise doesn't work or is bottlenecked.

The group then examined the following 11 possible courses of action.3

1. Advising Soviets of actual or possible military moves. In the light of Tommy Thompson's cable, it was agreed we should not proceed now with an informal contact, although we might consider in the future the use of the hot line with the proviso about the press, laid down by Thompson.4 In general, it was judged, however, that communications with the USSR were in pretty good shape.

2. Conduct airborne reconnaissance. It was agreed that for the next several days no recce of North Korea should be conducted; if it were judged that recce was desirable at a later time, Black Shield, rather than Drone, photography was recommended.

3. Sail USS Banner into area where Pueblo was seized. For the time being it was felt unwise to put the Banner on station.5 When the incident has been settled, it was agreed the U.S. would wish to assert its rights in international waters off Wonsan Bay. Depending on the situation at that time, we might wish to assert our rights in that area via an armed vessel—perhaps a destroyer—rather than via a communications monitoring ship like the USS Banner.

4. Action to recover crypto material jettisoned from the Pueblo. It was agreed that the recovery of the crypto material jettisoned from the Pueblo was an almost impossible task which would put no significant pressure on the North Koreans. Therefore, it should not be undertaken.

5. Mine Wonsan Harbor. The proposal presented involved 17 sorties dropping 83 mines. The operation would have to be repeated as necessary to insure full denial of harbor use. It was agreed that the impact of this operation on the North Korean economy and on North Korean military capabilities would be minor. The prospects of recovery of the Pueblo and the crew might be impeded. Air combat over the area would be likely; and the risk of escalation would increase if mining were maintained over a protracted period.

6. Seize North Korean vessels. Although our intelligence does not yet give us a firm basis for seizing North Korean vessels on the high seas, it was pointed out that should the men and the ship—or even the ship alone—not be returned, the seizure of North Korean vessels from the high seas was a punishment that fitted the crime; that is, the North Koreans had violated the rules governing behavior in international waters and could be legitimately denied access to international waters. It was agreed to explore this suggestion with further staff work directed to establish what North Korean vessels might be accessible to seizure on the high seas.

7. Selected air strikes on North Korea. It was agreed that such strikes would be an act of retaliation; large forces required for success might give the appearance of large-scale hostilities initiated by the U.S.; it would be unpopular internationally; and would diminish the prospects for early release of the Pueblo and its crew.

8. Raid across the DMZ . As with respect to 7, above, such punitive operations were judged to be risky, capable of leading to unsought sustained hostilities, and counter-productive with respect to the return of the Pueblo and its crew.

9. Naval blockade of Wonsan. The military and economic effects would be limited; the risks of escalation would be high; once undertaken, we would be committed for an indefinite period to inconclusive, politically awkward, and potentially escalatory operations.

10. Free World economic pressures on North Korea. The Free World's trade with North Korea is limited. And the impact of increased controls of trade and shipping with the Free World would, therefore, be small. With respect to a total embargo on trade with North Korea, we would certainly meet important opposition from France, the United Kingdom, Japan, and West Germany. Taken together, the small scale of the inconvenience involved and the political and diplomatic difficulties within the Free World make this line of action unattractive, on present evidence.

11. U.S. bombing practice in South Korea. This suggestion, from a member of the group, was examined as an additional contribution to a sense of seriousness about the U.S. military build up in the area. Although it was thought that, in general, our present build up offered a satisfactory background for diplomacy, it was agreed that the technical possibility of this line of action should be staffed out and we would take a further look at it.

At lunch today (January 29, 1968) with the President, the group examined with the President certain lines of action that might be taken up with Congress at a future time. In particular: —Provision to the President of the right to extend the period of enlistment;

—The maintenance in the area of forces sufficient to give the South Koreans a sense of security and provision of sufficient additional military aid so that they go forward with their plan to provide an extra division to the struggle in South Vietnam.

—It was the universal judgment of the group that we should keep our eye on the major objectives in this crisis:

—Get the men of the Pueblo and, if possible, the ship itself re- turned;

—Keep the confidence of the South Koreans and, especially, their willingness to provide an increment of force in South Vietnam;

—Avoid a second front in Asia.

W. W. Rostow 6

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Walt W. Rostow, Material re: Vietnam and Pueblo, January–February 1968. Top Secret. Prepared on February 1.

2  Katzenbach submitted a brief memorandum to the President on the briefing, informing him that all members agreed that the course currently being followed held a possibility for success. They also felt it unwise to take “highly visible and provocative action” or to implement military operations in North Korea at this time. (Ibid., Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. I, Part B [through January])

3 A brief analysis of each option prepared by the Korean Working Group is ibid., Files of Walt W. Rostow, Pueblo and Vietnam, January–February 1968. Katzenbach also provided the President with a copy of the papers. (Memorandum from Katzenbach to the President, January 29; ibid., Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ia, Part B [through January]) Intelligence assessments of potential North Korean responses to various U.S. actions were completed as well. (CIA/DIA/State memorandum, January 28; ibid., Vol. I, Part B [through January]; INR memorandum, undated; Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, NK Seizure of USS Pueblo, INR/OD, January 1968)

4 Not further identified.

5 A telegram from CINCPAC to the JCS, January 28, cautioned that the proposal to station the Banner off the North Korean coast “could be considered by North Korea as threatening in nature and at a minimum, provocative.” Accordingly, CINCPAC advised postponing the operation until military reinforcements ordered to South Korea and the Sea of Japan were in place, even though deploying the Banner would be delayed until or later than February 2. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. I, Part A [through January])

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

243. Notes of Meeting 243. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, January 29, 1968, 1:04–1:40 p.m.

SUBJECT

Notes of the President's Meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff

[Here follows brief discussion of the situation in Vietnam.]

The President: What about the charge that we called up the reserve because of Vietnam and not Korea?

Secretary McNamara: That is not true. We do not need the reserves for Vietnam. In fact, I believe we will demobilize the reserves after Korea.

The President: I sure like the way in which you announced the movement of the aircraft. (The aircraft movement announcement was kept secret in terms of numbers and in terms of the units sent.)2

General McConnell: 56 land-based aircraft have already arrived in South Korea. There are 68 planes on carriers. This is roughly 125 already available in South Korea. We will move in 30 more tonight. 29 more are in route.

The President: How many aircraft do we need in South Korea to handle the situation?

General McConnell: The North Koreans have 450 planes. We need at least an equivalent number in South Korea.

The President: Well, I want all of you to know that you have had complete freedom on this matter. But you have got to be ready. I think all of you should be prepared to explain why, if the ship captain needed planes and they were not there, why it was. They were not there because it was not prudent from a military standpoint for them to be there.

General Wheeler: That is correct, Mr. President. I have General Brown sorting out all the facts. There are several reasons why no planes were sent. This includes the location of the ship, the time of day, the inclement weather and the fact that there was superior enemy air power in the area.

General McConnell: We had only 24 fighters in Japan. There are 70 enemy fighters that were in the area around Wonsan.

The President: Well, say that. (When asked or when the question is raised about why no aircraft were sent to support the ship.)

The President: How many Navy ships do we have doing intelligence work like this?

Admiral Moorer: About 30.3

The President: What about the question, Why didn't we escort this vessel?

Admiral Moorer: It would be a provocative act. We could not accomplish the mission. It would take all the entire Navy to escort them.

The President: I think you should set up an independent board to investigate this whole matter to head off any investigations by the Congress or other groups. Have you checked this Gulf of Tonkin incident theory?

Secretary McNamara: Yes, sir.

The President: I think you should take the orders, explain them, and justify them. I do not have a log of this incident yet which is satisfactory to me. Everybody is looking for a scapegoat, and you had better get the facts.

General McConnell: Commander Bucher did not know he was in serious trouble in time to do anything anyway.

The President: Well, say it.

General Wheeler: We would have been in a fine fix if we had sent planes up there. We probably would have been in a war.

The President: You should go up to Congress with all of your guns blazing. Give them the facts before they have time to question you on them. I thought Senator Stennis handled himself very well yesterday. Did anyone talk with him before he went on the air?

General Wheeler: General Brown talked with Senator Stennis.4

[Here follows discussion of the situation in Vietnam.]

The President: What can we do if diplomacy fails?

Secretary McNamara: We have ten items put together by State and Defense to suggest for consideration.

The President: What is your guess on the possibilities of the North Koreans turning our men and the ship loose?

Secretary McNamara: The odds are more like 60–40 in favor of turning them loose.

The President: I think we should look at what we have learned from this. Let's look at what our intelligence ships are doing and determine if that is what we want them to be doing.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo, VIII. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room.

2 On January 28 the Department of Defense issued a statement that the United States was “taking certain precautionary measures to strengthen our forces and to reinforce our tactical air capabilities,” mentioning only that “certain units” had been “alerted for possible movement.” The statement was reportedly intended as a reply to an article in The Las Vegas Review-Journal that identified specific units affected by the alert. (The New York Times, January 29, 1968)

3 In January 1968 approximately seven U.S. Navy ships were engaged in intelligence-gathering operations; cf. McNamara's comment in reply to the President's inquiry, Document 244. (NSA, The Capture of the USS Pueblo and Its Effect on SIGINT Operations, United States Cryptologic History, Special Series, Crisis Collection, Vol. 7, 1992, pp. 9–13; NSA, Technical Research Ships, 1956–1969: An Historical Study, United States Cryptologic History, Special Series, No. 2, undated, passim)

4 A memorandum of the discussion between Brown and Stennis on January 26 is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo, Vol. Ib, Part A (beginning February).

244. Notes of Meeting 244. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, January 29, 1968, 1:40–3:25 p.m.

SUBJECT

Notes of the President's Luncheon Meeting With Senior American Advisors

The President: How many intelligence ships do the Soviets have compared with the U.S.?

Secretary McNamara: It depends on how you count them. The Soviets have 15 to 20. We have five.2

The President: There should be an independent investigation of this incident and all of the complexities involved by a good panel. I would suggest Admiral McDonald, George Ball, General Ridgeway, an Army General, and a good Naval Admiral.3

General Wheeler: I would recommend a later commander in career than General Ridgeway. I would suggest General Taylor.

The President: Before I select a lawyer I always look at the jury. We should have a man who will appeal to the various elements that will be judging us.

The GI Bill of Rights is educating 400,000 and enabling 200,000 to buy houses. (The President was reading from a proposed message to the Congress on Veterans which will be sent up on Tuesday.)

Secretary McNamara: Time Magazine said the reservists who were called up had good morale. Newsweek said many of them were grumbling.

George Ball: I have seen a cynical assertion that the reserves were called under the pretext of Korea but for actual use in Vietnam.

Secretary McNamara: That is untrue. We have 361 planes going to South Korea without pulling any away from Vietnam or Southeast Asia or Western Europe.

If we get the Pueblo and its crew back, we will de-activate the reservists in all probability. The Joint Chiefs of Staff agreed with this in a meeting we have just completed.

The President: There is no need to call up the reserves for Vietnam. In fact, General Westmoreland would rather go without reserves in Vietnam. We called the reserves to substitute in this country for units which are being sent to South Korea. Of course we could call up reserves at anytime without Korea if we wanted.

Walt, would you review where we stand with my outside counselors who are here today?

Walt Rostow: We have discussed three principal issues. Then we went through the ten military alternatives and added at least one suggestion.

We reported to the group that we have put our position in writing to the North Koreans at Panmunjom.

We have discussed the Rusk letter to Gromyko . In [reply to] it, Gromyko said he knew for sure that we had entered Korean territorial waters because the ship's captain had said he had entered territorial waters in his own handwriting.4 We do not believe he did. But we cannot deny it because we do not have the captain's log.

The President: On that point, are we reasonably sure that we are right? What are my odds?

Secretary McNamara: The odds are three to one that we are right. We do not believe the commander got into territorial waters. We know both from our own messages and from the messages of the North Koreans that he was seized outside territorial waters. The captain's orders were clear. The conditions were precise. But as Nick Katzenbach has said, even if he did go into North Korean waters the action which the North Koreans took is not a very appropriate one.

Secretary Katzenbach: The evidence is quite good and quite strong that the detention was [not] made in territorial waters. We have a fix on the Pueblo at 8:30 when he was 25 miles out. He must have been outside of that area several hours before.

Secretary Rusk: The ship was on radio silence. We do not have the log. The captain broke radio silence the day before and broke it when accosted by the North Koreans.

Secretary Katzenbach: We still would not know for sure if the ship had gone into territorial waters. We do not believe that it did. It would not show on the ship's log unless the captain had something special to report. Otherwise he would log items as he regularly does three times a day.

Walt Rostow: What Gromyko has said is that the North Koreans have it in the captain's own handwriting that he did violate territorial waters.

The President: We do know at the times he gave fixes that he was not in territorial waters and could not have gotten there.

We should leave ourselves a loophole until we know precisely what happened. We do know what his orders were.

Clark Clifford: If we see something down the road which is attractive, we may want to leave ourselves a little room for a minor admission if that is what they want for return of the ship and the men.

Secretary Rusk: We gave him instructions not to go inside of the 13 mile limit. We must keep in mind there might have been a navigational error of one mile on our side and one mile on the North Korean side. If you assume for a moment that both made errors, that could place the ship 11 miles from shore. We still could not accept their claim of being only 7 miles away.

The President: All of you should get together and have your very best legal minds work out what we should say.

Secretary McNamara: I have five lawyers working on this now. We should have a defense briefing by tomorrow night.

The President: Let's make our own study to review the facts, ask all the questions and then present this information to the committee.5 We must make sure we don't do more damage with our own speeches.

Secretary Rusk: A public announcement of our own investigation would throw doubt on our own position.

The President: What about a private investigation?

Secretary Rusk: That is fine.

Secretary Katzenbach: This would be a broad investigation, not just limited to the position of the ship.

The President: Yes, that is right. It would answer all the questions which are being raised. I suggest all of you get together and decide on an impartial board. I would put on it Admiral McDonald, George Ball and General Mark Clark.

Secretary Rusk: Mundt said you had no business having the ship there anyway.

Walt Rostow: What about the questions of putting the problem before the World Court. Each side could select an arbitrator and let the President of the World Court select a third name.

There are ten items for possible military action:

1. Airborne reconnaissance.

The group is against this. The photographic coverage has been excellent from the Oxcart and Black Shield missions.

For the moment we do not need it. The group is against the use of drones. To have one shot down would be very bad.

2. The build-up of aircraft in South Korea.

The group thinks this action is good and that we need it to back up our diplomatic efforts.

3. Replacing the Pueblo with the U.S.S. Banner.

The group feels we should not carry this out now. After the matter settles we may want to re-establish our position under international law and replace the Pueblo with an armed vessel.

4. Send divers to get the crypto gear.

The group felt this was a fruitless effort which would not pay off. To do this would require armed escorts and risk a possible confrontation.

5. Mining Wonsan Harbor.

This would require 17 sorties. It might lead to more trouble. It would not hurt them much.

Secretary Rusk interrupted to say that many of these alternatives had been deferred pending contacts with the North Koreans and contacts through the United Nations. The Secretary predicted there would be a meeting.

6. Seizure of North Korean vessels.

This action would be taken only if we were to determine that the men and the ships would not be returned promptly. This idea has certain appeal. McGeorge Bundy liked this as a sanction for them and to encourage them to let this ship and men go.

There is a difficulty on this, since it is unclear which ships to pick up and their value.

7. Selected air strikes over North Korea.

This was felt to be excessive. This would require a very substantial air engagement and would heighten the conflict.

8. Raids across the DMZ.

The group felt this to be too risky.

9. A naval blockade.

The group felt this to run a high risk of retaliatory action and we do not know when the blockade would end.

10. Application of free world economic pressure.

Korean trade is not great with the free world. We would have trouble getting many of the countries such as Japan aboard.

Walt Rostow said consideration was being given to advising the Soviets of actual or possible retaliatory action. Ambassador Thompson recommended against this.

It was generally agreed that no further reference to any use or non-use of the hot line should be made by George Christian or any other briefing officers.

Walt Rostow said that Ambassador Lodge had raised the question of having bombing practice in South Korea using bombing ranges there.

Rostow said the build-up that we are undertaking there now is impressive both to North Koreans and to the other countries involved.

Cyrus Vance: I would recommend further reconnaissance flights, particularly more Oxcart missions over the DMZ to determine any possible build-up of North Korean forces.

Walt Rostow: The group also considered the type of statement the President might want to make. We will have a draft by the end of the day.

The President: I want to say as little as I can. That three-minute statement last week was re-assuring.

Goldberg thinks that the U.S. people and the world believe in a decision by a court.

After we run out all of our moves in the United Nations, we must consider if we are willing to go into an international world court. There, we could submit all of our evidence. They could submit theirs. Goldberg thinks we should [be] prepared to do that.

George Ball: There are problems with a world court. It recognizes North Korea as a state. But we should consider the use of an impartial tribunal.

The President: Shouldn't we answer all these questions about our being spread too thin?

George Ball: I think Admiral McDonald can do this.

Cyrus Vance: You cannot submit this matter to a tribunal until you see what happens at the meeting in Panmunjom.

The President: I want you (Vance), and Mac Bundy to give me a statement to make in case there is one which should be made.

Secretary Rusk: This group is paralyzed because of the Panmonjom conference. They needed to know what will come out of that before they can make any kind of statement.

The President: I still want Bundy, George Ball and Cyrus Vance to get me a statement on what I might say, if anything.

McGeorge Bundy: You have a promising pair of contacts in the Soviets and in North Korea. I would say that my diplomats are at work and I am not going to say anything right now.

If you look at the courses available they are very unattractive. No one ever thought a small power such as North Korea would take offensive action against a major power in a situation such as this.

Any warfare will pin these boys in rather than get them out. We are too big a power to start a war over this. The punishment of picking up their ships fits the crime.

You do not know what happened precisely in the ten days the Pueblo was on station. As long as the commander is in hock you will not know. I would not be making any statements about the number of planes which we have moved to South Korea. Somebody will ask, O.K., what are you going to do now that you have them here?

Secretary Rusk: In terms of parallels the shooting down of the RB–47 in 1960 is the closest. It took seven months to get those two fliers back.

General Taylor: You never know exactly what the motives of the North Koreans are in this matter. If it was to embarrass us, they have done that. If it was to inflict a loss on our intelligence, they have done that.

They may be seeking to cause trouble with our allies. They may want to interrupt the flow of Korean aid to Vietnam.

We should make every effort to keep South Korean plans going as scheduled in sending supplies to Vietnam.

The President then read a memo from a distinguished American. (The President later identified this as General Eisenhower.) This memo outlined what courses this “distinguished American thought were offered to us.” (That memo is attached as appendix A.)6

Clark Clifford: Any way you look at it this incident is a loser. We cannot come out even. We must cut our losses. I doubt we will ever want to use any one of the ten military alternatives. Of course one can never know what the exact situation was unless we talk with the captain. We must make some kind of disposition of the matter.

I believe consideration should be given to the idea of going to the world court. There are nine members on it, and they have some members friendly to them. In conclusion we end up having taken some sort of a bump. The next time they try it, let's be ready to give it back to them.

Secretary Rusk: Let's look at how we formulate this court matter.

Secretary Katzenbach: I am inclined to think the President should have the Leadership in.

The President: I am having the Leadership in for breakfast tomorrow.

Secretary Katzenbach: I do not think we should ask Congress for anything before we get all the facts.

Secretary McNamara: Within the next 72 hours we will announce an increase in our military aid to South Korea. This will show the North Koreans the price they will pay for this incident is heavy.

The President: Walt, will you take the questions we are getting asked most often and have them answered for me? We will tell them that we are still exploring the diplomatic alternatives; we do not want to add to our problems. We will have General Wheeler explain the military pitch. Secretary Rusk will discuss the diplomatic moves.

Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge: This situation has a lot of qualities of a kidnapping case. If you use force you kill the victim. We do not want to kill the boys or open up a second front. The reason I talked about bombing maneuvers in South Korea was to raise the feeling of awe.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo, IX. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting took place in the family dining room at the White House.

2 See footnote 3, Document 243.

3 On February 3 Ball reported to the President that a committee composed of himself, General Clark, and General McDonald had begun work and asked about the President's wishes for additional members. The President explained to Ball, “I just want you and an Army man—I want an independent State Department man, a diplomat, with some international background, United Nations background, and negotiations background, and I want an Army man that's got some background with Korea, and I want a Navy man knows something about ships, and somebody that doesn't report to me.” Ball suggested adding “a retired Air Force General who knows something about Korea” and informed the President that General Wyland had been recommended by Wheeler. The President agreed to the addition and told Ball he would check Wyland out and get back to him. The President also told Ball, “I sure do appreciate your doing this, George.” Ball responded, “I am very happy to, Mr. President.” (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of Telephone Conversation between President Johnson and Ball, February 3, 1968, 11:14 a.m., Tape F68.02, PNO 2)

4 See Document 240.

5 Reference is probably to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, to which a lengthy, substantive report was sent on March 20; see footnote 13, Document 228.

6 See Document 239.

245. Editorial Note 245. Editorial Note

On January 29, 1968, Director of Intelligence and Research Thomas L. Hughes sent to Secretary Rusk intelligence reports analyzing the Soviet, Communist Chinese, and world reaction to the seizure of the Pueblo. “The Emerging Soviet Line on the Pueblo Incident,” Intelligence Note No. 75, concluded that Moscow adopted a public posture of noninvolvement, but also sought to diffuse the issue and prevent tensions from escalating. (Attached to a memorandum from Rostow to the President, January 30; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. I, Part B [through January]) The analysis of Communist China's response, “Peking on Pueblo: Relatively Cool,” concluded that, since relations between China and North Korea were strained, the Chinese had remained detached from and had adopted a low profile toward the crisis. “Initial World Reaction to the Pueblo Incident,” presented the Communist and non-Communist reactions and briefly summarized the country-by-country response of the nations within each ideological orbit. (Intelligence Notes No. 78 and No. 76 respectively, both January 29; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

246. Information Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 246. Information Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 29, 1968, 6:30 p.m.

Mr. President:

Secretary Rusk asked Joe Sisco to come and talk to me about the following:

1. The Secretary General, through Ralph Bunche, has suggested that the Security Council, by means of SC “consensus,” call on Thant to provide good offices. This same proposal has been transmitted by the Secretary General to the USSR simultaneously through Nesterenko. Goldberg is unaware how much prior discussion, if any, the Secretary General has had with the Soviets.

2. Thant proposes that the attached “consensus”2 be adopted by the Security Council. As you note, the Secretary General would “be invited to take the initiative and offer his good offices in whatever manner he may consider appropriate and helpful.” This would be said in the context of reducing the prevailing tension and finding an acceptable solution. If the consensus is adopted, the Secretary General would send Deputy Foreign Minister of Rumania, Mircea Malitza, to Pyongyang. Thant has already discussed this proposal with the Rumanians who are agreeable to sending Malitza on this mission.

3. Secretary Rusk has already told Arthur Goldberg that: —he agrees that we could not oppose this kind of a proposal if it develops in the context of the Security Council discussions;

—however, we need time to see how the direct contacts at Panmunjom go to assure that such an initiative at the UN not cross with our efforts at Panmunjom;

—he react positively to the Secretary General, but tell him candidly that we do need time and that we do want to see how the bilateral contact progresses before making any final determination on the desirability of a UN intermediary going forward;

—if the UN intermediary is sent to Pyongyang, he should discuss with the Secretary General the possibility of sending someone else to the Republic of Korea and to the United States to also discuss this matter.

You may wish to discuss this matter with Secretary Rusk on the telephone and consider it further at tomorrow's lunch.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. I, Part B (through January). Confidential.

2 Not printed.

247. Editorial Note 247. Editorial Note

Between January 29 and January 31, 1968, the United States and North Korea established the foundation for face-to-face discussions on the fate of the U.S.S. Pueblo and its crew, after the UN Senior Member of the Military Armistice Commission submitted two messages from the U.S. Government to the North Korean Senior Member. The first message responded to information received from the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission, and the second requested an immediate private meeting between the Senior Members of each side. (Telegram 3755 from Seoul, January 30; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US) In response the North Koreans agreed to private meetings between the two principals and proposed that each side be assisted by an official translator and a liaison officer. By mutual agreement the meetings were held in the conference room of the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission in the Joint Security Area at Panmunjom. (Telegrams 3744 from Seoul, January 29, and 3794 from Seoul, January 31; both ibid.)

After receiving a message from Rear Admiral Smith suggesting a meeting of the two Senior Members on February 1, the North Koreans countered with a proposal offering to meet on February 2 at 11 a.m. local time. Since a “delay of at least one day is customary communist tactic,” Rear Admiral Smith accepted the alternate date. (Telegram 3826 from Seoul, February 1; ibid.) The closed meeting convened in the Neutral Nations conference room and was limited to four persons on each side: the senior member, an interpreter, an assistant, and a junior liaison officer. (Telegram 3856 from Seoul, February 1; ibid.) The Department of State notified Ambassador Thompson in Moscow and Ambassador Johnson in Tokyo of the details of the meeting and transmitted the text of a statement indicating that, since North Korea had rejected working through the United Nations to resolve the Pueblo crisis, the United States was prepared to handle the issue through the Military Armistice Commission at Panmunjom. (Telegram 108288 to Moscow and Tokyo, February 1; ibid.) Ambassador Porter notified the Department of State of his intention to inform President Pak of the upcoming meeting. (Telegram 3832 from Seoul, February 1; ibid.)

248. Notes of Meeting 248. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, January 30, 1968, 1:08–2:50 p.m.

SUBJECT

Notes of the President's Foreign Affairs Luncheon

THOSE ATTENDING THE MEETING WERE

Secretary Rusk

Secretary McNamara

Clark Clifford

CIA Director Helms

Walt Rostow

George Christian

Tom Johnson

Secretary Rusk: What was the President's reaction to the Leadership meeting this morning?2

The President: I thought we did very little good, very little harm. General Brown was not a good briefer. He does not speak with authority. We need to take the toughest questions we get and answer them with authority with Senator Dirksen and Congressman Ford.3 We should say we have gone to the United Nations and to other nations with this matter and that we intend to go to Panmunjom. Military power will not get these men back, but we should list a few of the military alternatives to show them how unattractive they are.

Senator Edward Kennedy says the Vietnamese government steals about 50% of each dollar. He is about to release a report outlining corruption in Vietnam.

To what do you attribute the confession by Captain Bucher, General Wheeler?

General Wheeler: The North Koreans could have used drugs. They probably gave him something to copy and required him to write it out in his own hand. This may have been a deal to get the ship and the men released.

The President: What about the possibility of this Officer having turned?

Secretary McNamara: The possibilities are very small. We have made a thorough check of his background. There is very little instability in his background.4

General Wheeler: There is some worry at the United Nations that the Soviets are ready to surface portions of the ship's log showing it to be in territorial waters.

The President: Is it typical of the Soviets to be so firm on a thing such as this (Soviets have charged several times that the ship was inside territorial waters)?

Secretary Rusk: The Soviets will say something knowing the facts to be to the contrary.

The President: I am jittery about the possibility of error. This Officer doesn't look like the normal, prudent, alert Officer I would have handle Air Force One if it were on alert. We must always bear in mind the possibility that we are in the wrong.

Clark Clifford: What is our position if we are wrong, Dean?

Secretary Rusk: If we are convinced we are wrong, we would probably exchange a statement of regret.

The President: If we do not get the men back, what then?

Secretary Rusk: Even if the ship were to be found to have trespassed territorial waters, the North Koreans still had no right to do what they did.

The President: Where are we diplomatically?

Secretary Rusk: North Korea has accepted in writing our message. No date has been set for a meeting. North Korea has made no public statements on this, which is encouraging.

We do not know what will happen at Panmunjom. At the United Nations Ralph Bunche asked Ambassador Goldberg for permission to use the good offices of the Secretary General to send a Rumanian to North Korea. We advised Bunche that this did not bother us in principle.5 The Soviets may turn us down. The North Koreans said it was not the United Nation's business.

Gromyko has asked for a gesture to reduce pressure and the challenge. He suggested that we might want to send the Enterprise southward. I do not really see where this would accomplish much.

Secretary McNamara: The Joint Chiefs would want to leave the Enterprise on station. The Air Force is now working on a plan to expand the landbased air power.

Walt Rostow: We may want to tell the Soviets we beefed up air power in the South not only because of the Pueblo incident but because of increased infiltration and the attack on Blue House. We could tell the Soviets that since they have a security pact with the North Koreans they may want to interest themselves more in this matter.

General Wheeler: (Talking to Walt Rostow.) Somebody should talk with Drew Pearson about that article he had.6

Walt Rostow: (To General Wheeler.) Nobody is advising the President, to my knowledge who has been trigger-happy.

General Wheeler: Personally, I find none of the military courses of action particularly attractive.

Walt Rostow: We first had a message from the Soviets out of New Delhi that we should pretend that we had violated territorial waters.7

Clark Clifford: What if we say the ship strayed by accident into territorial waters?

Secretary Rusk: We must look to the best facts of this matter. Even if the ship were in territorial waters it was not proper to seize it.

CIA Director Helms: Throughout the history of Soviet law, their interpretation of what is espionage is considerably different from our own. In Soviet law, walking down a particular street or looking at a certain installation is espionage per se.

[Here follows discussion of the situation in Vietnam.]

Secretary McNamara: The independent panel will meet this Thursday, Friday and Saturday to review the Pueblo situation. George Ball will chair it. Admiral McDonald and General Mark Clark will meet as the other two members. Paul Nitze will coordinate it.

General Wheeler: General Clark is a hardliner whom you can count on.

The President: Should we have Senator Stennis and Congressman Rivers down for a briefing?

Secretary McNamara: Yes I believe this would be useful. I would also have Congressman Bates and Senator Margaret Chase Smith.8

Director Helms: Congressman Rivers is more antagonistic than anyone.

Secretary Rusk: Who was on the Bay of Pigs investigation?

Secretary McNamara: General Taylor, Bobby Kennedy, and Allen Dulles.

[Here follows discussion of developments in Vietnam and potential problems in the Middle East.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo XI, 1:00 p.m. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held at the White House. The time of the meeting is from the President's Daily Diary. (Ibid.)

2 Notes of the President's Meeting with the Democratic Leadership, January 30 from 8:30 until 10:06 a.m. are ibid., Pueblo X.

3 The President met with Dirksen and Ford that evening from 6:04 to 7:55 p.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House. (Notes of the President's Meeting with the Republican Leadership, Senator Dirksen and Congressman Ford, January 30; ibid., Pueblo XII)

4  Helms furnished McNamara, Rostow, and Rusk with a copy of a CIA report, January 30, entitled “A Psychological and Political Analysis of Commander Bucher's Statements.” The report examined not only the content of the alleged confessions made by Bucher, but also Bucher's personal background, naval career, and anticipated responses to stressful situations. (Ibid., National Security File, Intelligence File, Pueblo, January 1968)

5 In light of the newly opened MAC channel, Goldberg requested that Bunche delay submitting the Secretary General's proposal. In pursuing the matter further, however, Goldberg learned that the Rumanian response had been negative, thus creating the need to restructure an approach to the North Koreans through the Secretary General's good offices. (Telegrams 3553, January 30, and 35178, January 31, from USUN, New York; both National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

6 Not further identified.

7 Not further identified.

8 Notes of the President's Breakfast Meeting with Congressional Leaders, including those named here, and with Policy Advisors are in the Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Pueblo XIII, which also contains a substantive memorandum from the JCS to the President discussing the failure to dispatch U.S. aircraft to assist the Pueblo. At the meeting, which was held in the White House on January 31 from 8:40 to 10:15 a.m., the Congressional leaders were briefed on the situation not only in Korea, but also in Vietnam.

249. Telegram From the Joint Intelligence Committee to the Central Intelligence Agency 249. Telegram From the Joint Intelligence Committee to the Central Intelligence Agency Source

London, January 31, 1968, 1250Z.

* [Source: National Security Agency, Center for Cryptologic History, Historical Files, Box 3, IV Pueblo—Attach and Seizure, Non-NSA Records. Top Secret; Trine. 3 pages of source text not declassified.]

250. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 250. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, February 1, 1968, 1552Z.

108281. 1. We do not know what North Korean Senior Member may propose as terms for release of Pueblo. We guess that it may be signing of receipt similar to helicopter case. On that you have guidance …i.e. that you have no authority to sign statement. You can also say that soon as we have access to the crew, we will make an investigation. And if the facts should prove contrary to our data that the Pueblo was at all times in international waters, we shall express regrets.

2. Admiral Smith should keep emphasizing accepted international law and procedures for any warship that infringes territorial waters. We are sending you relevant texts septel to be sure you have them.2

3. Should they make bargaining gambits such as exchanging prisoners of war, or ask for reduction of US forces in South Korea, etc. you should listen but say you have no authority to discuss these matters.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Cactus. Repeated to the White House. Drafted by Berger, cleared by Read, and approved by Katzenbach.

2 See Document 251. Telegram 108367 to Seoul, February 1, contained detailed information relative to legal issues affecting the seizure of the Pueblo. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

251. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 251. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, February 1, 1968, 1904Z.

108338. 1. If NK MAC proposes you sign receipt comparable to that given by UNCMAC for helicopter pilots Stutts and Voltz in May 1964, suggest you counter with following arguments: a. Facts on helicopter pilots were quite different, and that case is no precedent for proper handling of this one.

b. Our side recognized that pilots had entered airspace over territory under control of your side and landed in North Korea; there was no dispute about these facts.

c. Case of Pueblo is quite different. Your side has asserted vessel was in territorial waters of North Korea at time of seizure. Our information, based on reporting of positions not only by Pueblo but also by NK vessels participating in seizure, shows Pueblo was more than fifteen nautical miles seaward from nearest NK territory—Ung Do Island. In our view there is no possibility Pueblo was in territorial waters at time of seizure even if such waters were measured as extending twelve nautical miles from coast, as claimed by some countries.

d. Our side will, of course, conduct further inquiry into facts of incident once crew have been released and we have access to information they can provide.

2. You should not agree to or sign any receipt or other statement except unconditional release. You should refer any NK proposals to Washington for instructions and propose another meeting.

3. At this stage it is impossible to foresee development of exchanges in Panmunjom. We will need to review developments as they occur. Our tentative thinking on some possibilities, FYI, is as follows: a. One possible course might be form of receipt in which positions of both sides are accurately reflected as to Pueblo facts. We might agree to formulation of NK position proposed by them, so long as it is clearly stated to be theirs. Our position might then be set forth along following lines: “According to our data, USS Pueblo, a commissioned war vessel of the United States Navy, was in international waters at the time of its seizure by North Korean naval units, at a distance of more than fifteen nautical miles from the nearest point in North Korean territory.” This for your information and not to be put forward without further instructions.

b. Also for your info and not to be put forward: It is altogether unlikely NK MAC would be interested in having receipt embody any statement as to what either side would do on basis of further inquiry into Pueblo incident following release of crew. However, if they should propose statement to effect that US will make some kind of amends if it is later determined, after crew and vessel released, that Pueblo was in the territorial waters, we could agree to balanced statement along following lines: “If further investigation should disclose that the Pueblo was in the territorial sea of North Korea, US Govt would express its regret and give assurance against recurrence of incident. If further investigation should disclose that the Pueblo was in international waters, North Korea would express its regret and make appropriate reparation.”

NK side will not, of course, accept anything like this, but balanced statement would be appropriate counter to any NK proposal on subsequent steps.2

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Cactus. Repeated to USUN. Drafted by Meeker; cleared by Berger, Walsh, Sisco, and Rostow; and approved by Katzenbach. According to a copy of the telegram in the Johnson Library it was also cleared by President Johnson. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus I, Cactus State Cables, January 28, 1968 to February 10, 1968)

2 Printed from an unsigned copy.

252. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson 252. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson 1

Washington, February 1, 1968.

SUBJECT

Impartial Settlement of Legal Issues Involved in the Pueblo Seizure

You asked for our thoughts on possible US proposals for impartial fact-finding or legal settlement of the Pueblo case. Listed below are several proposals, which could either be advanced here or by Arthur Goldberg in New York.

Frankly, I doubt that the North Koreans would accept any of the proposals. Nor would the Soviets permit the Security Council to act affirmatively on them. But there might be some advantage to demonstrating confidence in our own case, while challenging the North Koreans to put up or shut up.

However, I think we should hold up on any proposals until we see the results of the talks now going on in Panmunjom.

If we do decide to go ahead with one of the proposals, we must make it clear that our willingness to proceed is dependent on the prior release of the crew and ship. To do otherwise would give the North Koreans an excuse for refusing to release either vessel or crew until the investigation or adjudication is completed.

Proposals

—A US statement that we would welcome an impartial fact-finding or adjudication of the legal issues raised by the Pueblo seizure. We would state at the time of the announcement that we are prepared to accept and carry out the findings and recommendations made by an impartial tribunal. If the tribunal finds against us, we will make appropriate amends; if it finds in our favor, we expect North Korea to do the same.

—An arbitral tribunal. For example, we could propose a three-member tribunal consisting of one arbitrator named by the United States, one named by the North Koreans, and a third named by agreement. (If no agreement, the third member would be named by the President of the International Court of Justice.) The tribunal would be empowered to reach its decisions by majority vote. (A single arbitrator or a panel named by the UN Security Council are possible variations on this theme.)

—The Security Council itself undertakes an investigation under Article 34 of the United Nations Charter. This proposal, of course, would be subject to veto but—assuming no veto—the Council could establish an investigating body which would be veto-free.

—The Security Council asks the International Court of Justice for an advisory opinion. We would state our readiness to cooperate fully in the proceedings and to carry out the findings of the Court. We would insist that North Korea indicate that they would be prepared to do the same. (This would be preferable to proposing that the case go to the ICJ for adjudication, since an advisory opinion avoids the issue of North Korean recognition.)

Nicholas deB. Katzenbach

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret. Drafted by Meeker and Berger and redone in Katzenbach's office.

253. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 253. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 2, 1968, 0405Z.

3863. 1. We are maintaining close contact with highest ROK levels in effort to calm recurrent fears that Pueblo crew aspect of problem with North Koreans will soon be settled, leaving ROKG only unsatisfied party. Presidential Secretary General informed me this morning that ROKs interpret NK statement that UN machinery not acceptable but NK prepared to use MAC at Panmunjom to mean that NKs are prepared to make concessions on Pueblo and crew. This led to usual discussion of aftermath, if ROK supposition proves to be correct.

2. PSG expressed uneasiness about this morning's meeting but was reassured by scenario related State 108330,2 particularly our desire to have ROKG issue statement confirming that meeting arranged after consultation with them and that they completely informed and in close touch with USG these matters. In addition to stress on fact that MAC machinery being utilized to deal with aggressive NK actions against ROK, I said they could take line with press if necessary that private meetings on this or that aspect of problem might be held from time to time and that USG and ROKG confer in this connection. He said they would issue statement to above effect after hearing from us (or by other means) that Pyongyang had announced fact of meeting.

3. During conversation with PSG this morning he brought out fact that ROKs have done substantial amount of military planning. I avoided discussion on this by saying we still very much in diplomatic stage of our effort and that present not good time for discussion of military aspects. I reminded him that we were pleased to have President Park's assurance that there would be no unilateral reaction by ROKs. Lee Hu-rak said he understood but time may be approaching for serious discussion of military matters.

4. While they have thus far been amenable to intensive persuasion and have accepted our tactics, it will be apparent to you that desirability of military action against NKs runs persistently through their thoughts and utterances.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Cactus.

2 Telegram 108330 to Seoul, February 1, provided guidance on media responses, should North Korea make an announcement or broadcast about the MAC meeting. (Ibid.)

254. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 254. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 2, 1968, 0741Z.

3878. 1. Following is summary of MAC Senior Members meeting held at Panmunjom between 1100–1158 hrs local February 2. Full text follows septel.2

2. Begin Summary. RAdm Smith opened with brief prepared statement. Said he had called meeting to discuss serious situation resulting from fact DPRK has possession Pueblo and crew. Said US position is that ship did not enter NK territorial waters until after it was seized and that crew committed no crime whatever. Recognized that US and NK positions differ. Said this situation completely without precedent. Stressed interests of both sides would be served by immediate return of crew and early return of ship to US custody. Expressed hope that meeting would result in agreement in principle on return of ship and crew as soon as physical arrangements can be completed.

3. In response to repeated demands from Pak that Smith say all he had to say, Smith made following additional points: (A) Time would be saved if neither side mentioned confessions, admissions, punishments or apologies.

(B) Repeated several times that he had come to request return of ship and crew, names of wounded and dead.

(C) Explained at some length why Pueblo case is unprecedented and difference between it and helicopter incident. In accordance guidance received, pointing out that ship had violated no laws, that it was not under UNC command but was unit of US Pacific Fleet, and that there no violation to admit, as was case with helicopter.

(D) Set forth international law aspects in accordance guidance contained State 108367,3 emphasizing that even if Pueblo had been in NK waters, proper procedure would have been to escort it back to international waters as is practice followed between US and USSR.

4. As it became obvious Pak would not respond until he had exhausted efforts to draw Smith out, latter began insisting that Pak make statement to which he would reserve right to reply. Pak responded that Pueblo crew are aggressors and criminals dispatched to NK territorial waters for aggressive purpose as made clear by their confession. Stated that thanks to humanitarian measures of DPRK, wounded are receiving medical treatment, dead body of one crew member has been preserved, and all remaining members are in good health without any inconvenience. Said it unnecessary to cover up or explain away criminal act. Smith denied commission of criminal act, noting that ship had not fired back, had offered no resistance, had violated no law. Said “criminal act” could only be descriptive of North Korean actions.

5. After further exchange Smith asked Pak to suppose that KPA vehicle in JSA or other neutral area were suddenly seized by UNC, taken South, and its crew were made to confess that truck was South of DMZ. Said he supposed in such case North Koreans would wish to have truck back. Such situation was analogous way we feel about Pueblo.

6. Pak, after obvious pause for editing, then read prepared statement in which he said Smith had merely attempted cover up plain fact of aggression and that US had deliberately dispatched armed spy ship to NK territorial waters, which constitutes most flagrant violation of Armistice Agreement. Claimed North Koreans have in their hands all the material and human evidence to prove US committed act of aggression. Said matter can in no way be solved by US proposal to meet solely for purpose of rejustifying criminal act. Said if US really wants to solve matter it must change stand and attitude in addressing subject.

7. Pak continued that “I have not yet been instructed” to inform US side of names of dead and wounded. He then concluded prepared statement by proposing recess this meeting and saying Smith “will be informed” of date for next meeting.4

8. Smith rejoined that he could provide much more proof than he already given that ship was in international waters if such would be useful at this time. Pak rejected this offer and repeated Smith would be informed later of next meeting.

9. Comment follows.5

Porter

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus II, Cactus Seoul Cables, January 29, 1968 to February 9, 1968. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus. Rostow sent this telegram to President Johnson under a covering note of February 2, stating that the North Korean representative “was obviously instructed to stonewall until the U.S. position was revealed. This looks like a slow track at the moment.” Porter made a similar point in his comments on the meeting in telegram 3892 from Seoul, February 2, also attached to Rostow's February 2 note. Rostow's note indicates that the President saw the telegram. (Ibid.)

2 A complete, verbatim text of the meeting was transmitted in telegram 3890 from Seoul, February 2; corrections are in telegram 3913 from Seoul, February 3. (Both in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3 See footnote 2, Document 250.

4  Porter commented on Pak's approach in telegram 3892, February 2, “By tantalizing us in this manner, by offering prospect of further meeting and information which he knows we badly want, North Koreans probably seeking to string this affair out for variety of purposes which will be apparent to Dept., but which here in Korea include enhancing opportunities for friction between ourselves and ROKG.”

5 Reference is to telegram 3892, see footnote 4 above.

255. Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk 255. Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, February 2, 1968.

SUBJECT

UNC-North Korean Meeting on Pueblo Incident

[Here follows a summary of the February 2 meeting, see Document 254.]

Comment:

4. Our initial judgment of the first meeting is as follows: a. The North Koreans were expecting that we would say what we did, but we were less certain what they would say.

b. The North Koreans did not make any explicit demands or threats (e.g., exchange for prisoners held in the south, threats to try the Captain and/or the crew, reduce pressure on them, etc.), other than alluding to the necessity that we admit that we engaged in “espionage,” violated territorial waters and the Armistice Agreement.

c. The atmosphere of the meeting was businesslike and apparently without the usual heavy-handed North Korean insults.

d. So far the North Koreans have refrained from announcing this initial meeting. (The greatest danger of press leaks seems to be in Seoul.)

5. In sum, we believe the meeting went about as well as could be expected. The North Koreans did not, at least at this stage, raise the ante to include other demands, but they might well do this in the future. They took care to keep this channel open while retaining the initiative in calling another meeting. This does not foreclose our asking for another meeting.

6. We have asked Seoul for their views of how to approach the next meeting and what to say at the meeting, and are working on our own scenario. Our guess is that the North Koreans will give us 24 to 48 hours to study what they said before suggesting the next. That meeting might perhaps narrow the issue, so we would expect a third or fourth meeting before we see clearly where we are. It is conceivable they may want to drag this out, although the Task Force still feels that they want to release the men soon in order to get the heat out of the situation.

7. I have sent a cable asking Admiral Smith to request through the Joint Duty Officers at Panmunjom the names of the injured and dead.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis; Cactus. A copy was sent to Katzenbach, Rostow, Read, Helms, and McNamara.

256. Memorandum From Alfred Jenkins of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) 256. Memorandum From Alfred Jenkins of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, February 2, 1968.

SUBJECT

Next Korean Moves

Berger and Doherty were encouraged by the first meeting, saying that the North Koreans obviously wanted to keep the door open. I am not. It was completely negative. Berger feels that the North Koreans find themselves in a box and want a fairly prompt out. I think nothing of the sort. I think they will want to prolong the series of meetings because: —the status quo is a victory for them;

—prolonged meetings without result will greatly exacerbate our relations with ROK (already worrisome);

—for further exploitation of ship and crew;

—enormous prestige from keeping the United States on the hook longer;

—the Soviets have reportedly predicted to the North Koreans that our reaction to the Pueblo seizure would be mild and so far the North Koreans may feel that this has been the case, despite our show of force, hence safe to prolong;

—in addition to prestige arising from keeping us on the hook, there is also prestige arising from “equality” in bilateral talks under less than UNC auspices.

We must carefully watch people at State who tend to think of next steps at Panmunjom chiefly in terms of valid arguments. It is important to remember that we tend to talk from Aristotelian, syllogistic logic, whereas the North Koreans think only in terms of Communist dialectic “logic.” That difference was never more apparent than from the verbatim account of last night's meeting. The entire meeting was completely in character.

I do not believe we will budge these people short of a careful, reasoned raising of the temperature. However, I think it probable that we should wait 48 hours after the last meeting to see whether there will be a prompt second meeting at which we can take their temperature better. We could not expect any reading from this first encounter. We should not wait much longer before applying a little more heat—political (Soviets—Mac Toon working on letter) and military (several studies in progress, should get two tonight).2

Al

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part A (beginning February). Secret; Nodis; Cactus.

2 A draft letter to Kosygin from President Johnson was prepared in the event that the North Koreans adopted a totally negative attitude in negotiations at Panmunjom. (Ibid.) Throughout February the Department of Defense explored various military options, including air strikes and use of nuclear weapons, with the Pacific military command. (Ibid., Military Cables, Vol. II, February 1968 to March 1968; ibid., Korea, Vol. V; and ibid., NSC History, Pueblo Crisis 1968, Vol. VII, Day-by-Day Documents, Part 13) A February 2 memorandum from Berger to Katzenbach discussed additional military options. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

257. Paper Prepared by the Department of State 257. Paper Prepared by the Department of State1

Washington, February 2, 1968.

DEVELOPMENTS BEYOND THE NEXT MEETING IN PANMUNJOM

The North Korean representative at the February 2 meeting implied the possibility of release for the Pueblo and crew if the United States were to accept the North Korean version of the facts and acknowledge that an act of aggression had occurred involving a US violation of the Korean Armistice Agreement. The North Koreans might also press for an apology and an assurance that there would be no repetition. Release might be obtained if the United States were prepared to sign a statement or receipt incorporating the above elements.

Our scenario for the next meeting has been prepared for the purpose of setting forth fully the US position. We do not suppose that it will induce any release by North Korea. It contains one forthcoming element, in the form of a proposal to hold a US investigation and to express regret publicly if that investigation bears out the North Korean version of the facts. There are a number of other moves that can be made by the two sides in subsequent meetings.

The North Koreans, for example, may peel off various of the elements from their package. Or they might propose that any release be in exchange for North Koreans held prisoner in the ROK. They might conceivably agree to release of the officers and crew while retaining the vessel. Or they might agree to release of the officers and crew minus the captain, whom they might wish to hold for a further period as they did in 1967 with the captain of a Japanese fishing vessel.

Other North Korean positions are also conceivable, and should surface in the next meetings.

The following are some of the positions that the United States could consider with a view to release of the Pueblo crew: 1. We could consider release accompanied by a statement declaring that we would make a full investigation of the charges brought by North Korea, that the results of the investigation would be notified to the North Koreans, and that the North Korean authorities reserve all their rights in this matter.

2. Another possibility would be a balanced statement of the positions of the two sides as the immediate prelude to release of the crew (and vessel); such of the North Korean positions as they insisted upon could be included, and our basic positions would be stated.

3. We could certainly consider a release accompanied by a statement omitting any mention of either side's positions and saying instead that the release was based on humanitarian grounds.

4. We could propose an impartial fact-finding or determination on disputed issues, to take place after the release of the crew (and vessel); our proposal would embody the following elements: (a) If the determination were in favor of North Korea, the United States would be prepared to express regret;

(b) If the determination were in favor of the United States, North Korea would make appropriate reparation.

5. Still another variant would be release accompanied by a statement that the decision to effect release was made by North Korea without prejudice to its right to demand satisfaction.

6. Still another possibility would be a statement recounting that the Pueblo had been taken into custody by North Korea on January 23 and that release was being effected on the understanding that the United States would ensure that its vessels do not enter into the territorial sea of North Korea. [This statement would be phrased in a way that could not properly be interpreted as an admission of guilt.]2

7. We might want to consider, as a move to be made by the United States at some point, the withdrawal of naval units currently operating south of the 38th parallel, if such an action would be decisive in obtaining release.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part A (beginning February). Secret. Attached to a February 3 memorandum from Read to Rusk transmitting this and five additional papers covering other potential courses of action, including possible adjudication and arbitration, sending a Presidential letter to President Pak, making another advance to the USSR, and assessing third country approaches to the Soviets.

2 Brackets in the source text.

258. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 258. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

Pueblo Seizure—Possible Military Options

Attached are planning papers on four courses of action involving military pressure in North Korea.2 None of these should be contemplated for employment in the current phase of negotiations. They should be reserved for possible use after the current negotiations at Panmunjom have clearly failed.

1. Air Reconnaissance over North Korea.

2. Sailing Banner into area where Pueblo was seized.

3. Seizing a North Korean vessel.

4. Limited blockade of North Korean naval vessels.

5. Polish ship.

6. Reprisal.3

Number 3 has been cleared in the Korean Working Group; the others are still in various stages of clearance.

Discussion:

It is clear to me that each of these contemplated actions involves risks. The numerical order in which they are listed above indicates a descending order of preference in terms of combining minimum risk and maximum pressure.

1. Air Reconnaissance over North Korea is probably first in order of preference, confined to the use of Black Shield. It would appear to the North Koreans either as a form of pressure or as a threat of more forceful action to come. They would not know which and this would increase their anxiety. The risk of loss is low. The North Koreans would resent but probably not publicize our intrusion into their air space unless they shot down a reconnaissance aircraft.

2. Sailing Banner along the North Korean coast with an escorting force demonstrates our right and our willingness to do what we were doing when Pueblo was seized. We believe the risk of North Korea seizing the Banner is zero; the risk of their attacking it with aircraft or missiles is low. The presence of the escorting force and the knowledge (or suspicion) that U.S. forces are prepared to react quickly to an attack on Banner would tend to deter such an attack and make the North Koreans apprehensive. Despite the escort, however, there is a risk of attack by aircraft or missiles with a possibility that Banner would be sunk. Like the other courses of action listed, it does not offer much prospect of producing the return of Pueblo and crew, but it does increase the pressure and tension in the area.

3. The seizure of a North Korean naval vessel is more risky since it would probably be opposed by North Korean air and naval forces. It would be a dramatic demonstration of our concern and determination, but it would probably not greatly increase our bargaining power in obtaining release of Pueblo and crew; in fact it would probably reduce prospects of this. And unless we had exhausted the machinery of the United Nations, our action could be properly denounced as illegal.

If we wish to seize (or sink) a North Korean naval vessel, our best chance might come during a fracas resulting from enemy attempts to harass or sink Banner.

4. A limited blockade of North Korean naval vessels would quickly become a “set-piece” operation on our part. North Korea could watch it, determine the pattern, and pick the time and place for offensive action. If they decided to do it, they could, almost certainly, sink an important US naval vessel, such as a destroyer. We stand to lose much more than we gain by undertaking actions which leave the initiative for counter-action to the enemy. There, in his own backyard, we cannot afford to maintain enough force to prevent a determined counter effort from succeeding. Even though we doubt that he would risk it, we shouldn't repeat the Pueblo incident, on a larger scale, by giving him the option of striking us again at a vulnerable point.

Recommendation:

1. Air Reconnaissance. Low key reconnaissance would be designed to achieve needed information and concurrently keep the opposition guessing as to our next move. This effort, limited to that reconnaissance which we really need, and which the enemy will think is compatible with a genuine military need, should be seriously considered. It should be of a nature designed to minimize the probability of loss.

2. Sailing Banner. If we conclude that we must do something visible at this time, sailing of Banner is probably as good as any other visible action.

If we do it, we should do it low profile, with little or no visible force. A combat air patrol should be a safe distance away, in order of 50 miles, where it could intervene if required but where it would be less likely to create an incident. The surface escorts should be well over the horizon, clearly out of sight of any vessels approaching Banner but able to intervene.

We shouldn't undertake the operation at all unless we were prepared for some significant consequences: a. If North Korea sinks or seriously damages Banner, we should be prepared to count this as an “Act of War.”

b. We should have plans in being, and have made a decision, in advance, to make a suitable military response to the sinking or serious damaging of Banner.

c. These plans should include such actions as neutralization of the North Korean Air Force.

3. Seizing a North Korean Naval Vessel. As the attached detailed planning indicates, this course is dangerous. We might fail; we might suffer heavier losses than the enemy in the process. We probably should not undertake this action unless we are looking for a small fight and wish to use this action to cause one.

4. Limited Blockade of North Korean Naval Vessels. This action is not recommended. It would be costly in resources, would be unlikely to help retrieve the ship and crew, and leaves the US vulnerable—NK could pick the time and place and hope to sink a significant US vessel such as a destroyer. It is unlikely that North Korea would do this; however, if it happened, our legal position for retaliation would not be particularly good and we would have suffered another blow to our prestige.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib. Part A (beginning February). Top Secret. A handwritten notation on the memorandum indicates it was received on February 3. Although the memorandum is on Department letterhead and is unsigned, presumably it is from Rusk.

2 Not printed.

3 The memorandum bears Rostow's handwritten notations. Next to course of action 1, Rostow wrote: “good sense—marginal.” Next to number 2, “risks less likely.” Rostow wrote in numbers 5 and 6. The former referred to seizure of a North Korean vessel under Polish flag of convenience.

259. Report Prepared by the Ball Committee 259. Report Prepared by the Ball Committee1

Washington, undated.

BALL COMMITTEE ON THE USS PUEBLO INCIDENT

Terms of Reference

A. Purpose

1. Establish the facts and circumstances of the Pueblo incident.

2. Assess what criticism (if any) can fairly be made of planning, instructions, and conduct of the mission.

3. Submit findings and recommendations, in the light of this incident, regarding future surface intelligence collection operations.

B. Procedure

1. Review all facts bearing on the Pueblo incident: (a) the justification for the mission and the manner in which the decision was taken;

(b) operating instructions under which the Pueblo sailed, including their adequacy and clarity;

(c) communications systems available to the Pueblo and how they were used in relaying information through the chain of command to Washington;

(d) adequacy of interagency arrangements for monitoring approved aerial and ship reconnaissance operations, particularly with respect to continuing political assessments of sensitive reconnaissance operations;

(e) command, control and coordinative arrangements for the Pueblo.

2. In this connection, review established national requirements for peripheral reconnaissance of foreign countries, and particularly North Korea, by U.S. naval ships, and procedures for determining and approving the missions to be undertaken to meet these requirements.

3. Assess the adequacy of the emergency assistance arrangements provided intelligence collection vessels, to include consideration as to whether such vessels should be escorted and/or kept under continuous surveillance by other U.S. forces.

4. Take into account relevant international law and the practice of intelligence gathering countries such as the Soviet Union.

C. Timing

The Committee should report as soon as possible, and in any event no later than February 9.

Attachment

Possible Lines of Inquiry

The President asked the following specific questions: 1. Why was the Pueblo on the mission?

2. Why wasn't the Pueblo escorted?

3. Why did the Pueblo delay in requesting assistance?

4. Why didn't the Navy respond faster?

5. Why didn't the 5th Air Force respond before the ship was towed to Wonsan Harbor?

The following questions have occurred to the Committee staff: 1. Why was there no automatic destruction equipment on the Pueblo?

2. Why was the ship designed with minimum defensive capabilities?

3. Why was this system of missions held so close to a hostile area?

4. Why wasn't there at least an air alert for the mission?

1 Source:Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Ball Committee Briefing Book, February 1968. Confidential. The principal members of the committee were George Ball, Chairman, Admiral David McDonald, General Mark Clark, and General Laurence Kuter. An identical copy of this document, without the attachment, bears a typewritten notation “Revised 2/3/68,” and a memorandum for the record shows that the initial meeting of the committee to discuss its organization and terms of reference was held on February 3. (Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Pueblo, Envelope marked “Hold for Mr. Ball”)

260. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 260. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 1

Moscow, February 3, 1968, 1910Z.

2682. 1. Gromyko called me to Foreign Office at 9:15 tonight and handed me message from Kosygin to President containing relatively mild complaint at concentration our naval forces off Korea. Translation follows in septel.2

2. I said since message addressed to President I wished make only two personal observations. First was that I understood our vessels were located off South and not North Korea and I understood Enterprise had never come within two hundred miles of Wonsan.3

3. Second was that I had pointed out to him before the Pueblo was not the only recent incident in this area and I mentioned specifically the thirty-one infiltrators who had attempted to kill the President of South Korea. Naturally this had made the South Koreans somewhat nervous.

4. Gromyko said a hundred miles or so didn't change situation, there were mutual charges about incidents along DMZ and aircraft carriers were of no use against infiltrators. I replied that the point was South Koreans were legitimately concerned that these incidents might presage some further actions by North Korea.

5. I asked Gromyko if he had any information on last meeting at Panmunjom. He said he had only brief report but understood our representatives had agreed to meet again.

Thompson

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus.

2 Transmitted in telegram 2683 from Moscow, February 3. (Ibid.)

3  Thompson made a similar point during a discussion with the Soviet Ambassador to the United States, Anatoli F. Dobrynin, while the latter was in Moscow. He reported that Dobrynin expected that the Pueblo crisis could be resolved provided that the United States “took no further action to increase tension” and warned that the “threat of force made Soviet intervention difficult and if force were actually used Soviet Union would have to react.” Dobrynin also thought it unlikely that the North Koreans would settle the matter without demanding an apology from the United States. (Telegram 2672 from Moscow, February 3; ibid.)

261. Memorandum From the Department of State to President Johnson 261. Memorandum From the Department of State to President Johnson 1

Washington, February 3, 1968.

SUBJECT

Second Meeting at Panmunjom

The meeting will be held at 7:00 p.m. tonight, our time, 9:00 a.m. February 4, Korea time.2

We have sent Admiral Smith a detailed statement for him to make.

He will again ask for the names of the injured and wounded.

The North Korean chief effort we think will be to use the alleged confession of Lieutenant Harris which they issued yesterday to support their case that the vessel was in territorial waters. This confession includes several references to violations and one specific latitude-longitude position inside their waters.

We are sending a special guidance to Admiral Smith to handle this “evidence”.

The minimum condition the North Koreans are going to attach to the release of the crew and possibly the vessel is beginning to take shape. What they seem to be shooting for is a signed statement by us admitting the vessel violated their waters. They may initially attach other conditions, such as espionage, hostile and provocative acts, but might settle for the single admission.3

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Bundy.

2 The North Koreans asked for a meeting on February 3. The U.S. principals countered with the later time and date, which were accepted, because of preparational and logistical problems created by the short notice given by the North Koreans as well as uncertainty as to the latter's motives for suddenly requesting a meeting. In addition, as Porter noted, requesting a delay of at least 1 day after having received an invitation was standard procedure when scheduling MAC meetings. (Telegram 3917 from Seoul, February 3; ibid.) A chronology of events in Washington the evening of February 2 and Seoul at the corresponding time was sent to President Johnson. (Memorandum from Katzenbach to the President, February 3; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part A [beginning February])

3 When informed of the meeting, President Pak asked only that the United States adopt a “strong posture” with the North Koreans. (Telegram 3904 from Seoul, February 3; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

262. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 262. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, February 3, 1968, 0242Z.

109693. 1. Subject to your views, we envision following scenario for next mtg: You should open with statement along following lines:2

“At our meeting on February 2 your side made several statements. I now address myself to these.

You characterized the USS Pueblo as an 'armed spy ship.' The Pueblo is a commissioned ship of the US Navy. It carried three 50-caliber machine guns. These were kept covered. They were not fired when the Pueblo was being seized by North Korean patrol boats. We have made quite clear that the Pueblo was on an intelligence collection mission in the Sea of Japan at the time of its seizure by North Korea. Intelligence collection by vessels of this type is a standard and accepted practice in the world today. The USSR, for example, has intelligence collection vessels stationed at the present time off the coasts of many countries, including Korea. Are you suggesting that neighboring countries have a right to seize vessels of this kind?

At the meeting of February 2 you charged that the mission of the Pueblo constituted an 'act of aggression' by the United States. The Pueblo was engaged in a mission that is accepted by the navies and governments of the world, and it engaged in no hostilities against anyone, including North Korea. The carrying out of its mission on the high seas cannot possibly be characterized as an aggressive action. Are you suggesting that Soviet intelligence-collecting vessels on similar missions are engaged in acts of aggression?

You stated that the mission of the Pueblo constituted 'the most flagrant violation of the Armistice Agreement requiring the cessation of all hostile acts in Korea and respecting the waters, respecting the demilitarized zone and waters contiguous to the demilitarized zone and to this land.' The Pueblo engaged in no hostilities at all. What provision of the Armistice Agreement did the Pueblo violate? Paragraph 12 of the Armistice Agreement provides that—

'The Commanders of the opposing sides shall order and enforce a complete cessation of all hostilities in Korea by all armed forces under their control, including all units and personnel of the ground, naval, and air forces, effective twelve (12) hours after this Armistice Agreement is signed.'

The Pueblo was not engaged in hostilities. The Pueblo reported it never uncovered its guns. It never offered any threat to anyone.

Your statement appeared to refer also to paragraph 15 of the Armistice Agreement, which reads as follows:

'This Armistice Agreement shall apply to all opposing naval forces, which naval forces shall respect the waters contiguous to the Demilitarized Zone and to the land area of Korea under the military control of the opposing side, and shall not engage in blockade of any kind of Korea.'

The expression 'the waters contiguous to the Demilitarized Zone and to the land area of Korea under the military control of the opposing side' could, under no interpretation, extend beyond 12 nautical miles from the coast.

I come now to the crucial question of where the Pueblo was.

You have said that the United States Government 'purposefully infiltrated your armed spy ship Pueblo into our territorial waters.' Your version of where the Pueblo was does not square with the facts as we know them.

The Pueblo had strict orders to remain at all times at a distance more than 13 nautical miles from the nearest point in North Korean territory, in order to avoid any possible incident. We have no reason to believe the orders were not obeyed.

Where was the Pueblo on January 23, 1968? At 1000 hours Korean Standard Time the Pueblo reported its position as 39–24 N 127–59 E. Two hours later, when the Pueblo had been circled and threatened by North Korean submarine chaser No. 35, her position was 39–25.2 N 127–55 E. No. 35 radioed its position at exactly the same time (1200 hours) as 39–25 N 127–56 E. All these positions are more than 15 nautical miles from the nearest point in North Korean territory, Ung Do Island.

The Pueblo reported being boarded by North Korean personnel at 1345 hours. It radioed its position then as 39–25 N 127–54 E. Five minutes later North Korean submarine chaser No. 35 reported its position as 39–29 N 128–08 E.3 These positions also are clearly more than 15 miles from the coast.

These are the facts as known to the United States: A commissioned warship of the US Navy, carrying out an accepted and legitimate mission, engaged in no hostilities, and offering threat to no one, was seized in international waters. As your side must be aware, the rule of international law is that warships on the high seas have complete immunity from the jurisdiction of any state other than the flag state.

Even in the case of a warship that has entered territorial waters, the coastal state is not entitled to assert any jurisdiction over it other than to require the warship to leave the territorial sea if the warship does not comply with regulations of the coastal state concerning passage through the territorial sea and disregards a request for compliance.

Let me emphasize here that this is the practice regularly followed by the United States. For example, the Soviet ship Barometer came within 2.8 miles of Puerto Rico on April 7, 1965 while maneuvering to remain near US Naval forces. On October 23, 1965 the Soviet ship Arban entered US territorial waters off San Pedro, California. And again on December 6, 1966 the Soviet ship Teodolit violated US territorial waters on three separate occasions. In each of these cases the United States observed the plain rules of international law in requesting departure of the ship in question without attempting to assert any other jurisdiction over it.

You have stated that the Pueblo was within the territorial waters of North Korea. All our evidence shows that it was on the high seas. You have stated a right to seize a foreign war vessel within your territorial sea. We contend international law gives no such right. These are serious points of contention that should be resolved. Yet, they need not be resolved before the release of the Pueblo crew and the return of the vessel. We are seeking a peaceful settlement of this matter by direct negotiation through the established machinery of the MAC. We ask for immediate release of the crew and return of the vessel.”

2. General Pak may then assert that obvious way to resolve this disagreement is for US to accept North Korea's version of facts. In support of this, he may surface alleged confession of Commander Bucher or other evidence (such as purported ship's log) for purpose of sustaining North Korea's allegation. You can meet this as follows:

“You have referred to an alleged confession from the commander of the Pueblo [and other purported evidence].4 Because this alleged evidence conflicts with the data available to our side, we cannot be expected to accept it unless it is verified by the captain and crew of the Pueblo. Without the availability of Commander Bucher and his crew, we would have no way of satisfying ourselves as to the value of what you present as evidence.

I can assure you that after the release of the crew and the vessel we will, of course, conduct an inquiry, and we will inform you of the results of that inquiry. If we find that the Pueblo was in fact in North Korea's territorial sea contrary to all our present information, we will be prepared so to acknowledge publicly and to express our regret.

Allegations made in this room as to the location of the ship will not resolve this disputed issue. Does your side have any proposals for a peaceful resolution of this issue? We are prepared to receive your proposal now or at our next meeting, which I propose to be held on February __.”5

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Meeker; cleared by Berger, Sisco, and Walsh; and approved by Katzenbach. The President saw a copy of the telegram. (Memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson, February 3; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus I, Cactus State Cables, January 28, 1968 to February 10, 1968)

2 Additional contingency guidelines were also issued to cover several topics thought to have a remote possibility of being raised by the North Koreans, such as news leaks in Seoul and proposals to bring crew members to a MAC meeting. (Telegrams 109716 and 109752 to Seoul, both February 3; both National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3 After receiving an inquiry from the Embassy in Seoul concerning these coordinates, the Department of State issued a correction reading: “Five minutes later North Korean submarine chaser No. 35 reported its position as 39–26N and 128–02 E. At the same time it reported Pueblo's position as 39–23N and 128–02E.” (Telegram 3911 from Seoul and telegram 109717 to Seoul, both February 3; ibid.)

4 Brackets in the source text.

5 In reply the Embassy in Seoul recommended omitting any reference to a specific date for the next meeting. Porter explained that “normal MAC practice is not to set date for next session in current meeting, and in this instance next meeting would be dependent on when North Koreans prepared present their proposal.” The U.S. side could call the next meeting, if the North Koreans delayed doing so. The Department of State agreed. (Telegram 3912 from Seoul and telegram 109721 to Seoul, both February 3; both in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

263. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 263. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 4, 1968, 0355Z.

3925. Subj: Summary of Panmunjom Meeting February 4.

1. Pak opened by referring to Smith's prepared statements at previous meeting, saying that some points were not clear and that therefore he had a few questions.

2. His first question referred to Smith's request for meeting in atmosphere free from compulsion (see Seoul 3890 for Smith's exact words).2 Deliberately using words “free from compulsion” out of context, Pak stated that discussion would indeed have to be conducted in an atmosphere free from compulsion but that coercive atmosphere has been created by US side. He made point that US side had sent Pueblo into their territorial waters and had not apologized, but had instead threatened NK by armed forces. Specifically, US had concentrated vessels of the Seventh Fleet, including nuclear-propelled carrier Enterprise, in vicinity NK territory. (Pak's interpreter said in English “in our territorial waters”; Pak's statement in Korean, however, differs from this version. We are carefully checking language.)3 Pak referred also to introduction numerous fighters and bombers to ROK, issuance of standby orders to US troops and puppet ROK army thereby keeping them in state of complete combat readiness.

Pak asked whether he could understand that Smith's reference to atmosphere free of compulsion implies that US will eliminate atmosphere of compulsion that it has created. Pak then referred to fact that at 261st MAC meeting Jan 24 Smith had failed to apologize for great criminal act and instead made a coercive statement demanding immediate return Pueblo and crew, and had reserved right to demand compensation.4 Pak asked whether he could understand that Smith's statement at last meeting (Feb 2) implies that Smith denounces these coercive statements.

3. Stating that he was making his second inquiry, Pak referred to fact that Smith had stated at Feb 2 meeting that Pueblo not under command of CINCUNC, but was unit of US Pacific Fleet, and that Pueblo case was without precedent. Pak asked whether he could understand that this means case is to be dealt with as matter between two sides—DPRK and USA. He added that if this understanding is correct and US side appoints representative of USA, NK side would also appoint representative of DPRK.

4. Pak concluded his presentation by adding that if Smith not prepared to answer these questions now, “he may answer later.”

5. Smith responded that questions Pak had posed contained many technical issues which Smith will refer to appropriate authorities for guidance.

6. Smith then stated that he had additional information to give Pak, whereupon he read into record text of numbered para one of State 1096935 modified as follows: a. Number of machine guns on board Pueblo changed from three to two; b. Mistranslation of Pak's statement regarding mission of Pueblo constituting a most flagrant violation of Armistice Agreement was corrected to reflect language contained in Seoul 3913;6 c. Paragraph dealing with position of Pueblo at time of boarding was changed to read as follows: “five minutes later the Pueblo reported being boarded by North Korean personnel at 1345 hours. Five minutes later North Korean submarine chaser no. 35, in company with the Pueblo, reported its position as 39–26 N, 128–02 E, even farther from the nearest Korean land.”

7. Pak replied with standard language about futility of trying to explain away aggressive acts which have already been made clear. He then added that this case cannot be solved in this manner.

8. Indicating that he did not wish to discuss matter further, Pak stated that he had raised serious matters at this meeting and that if Smith will study seriously and provide answers, he would be prepared to hear them. He ended by remarking, “Let's conclude and meet later to have a talk.”

9. In response, Admiral Smith again requested information regarding names of Pueblo dead and wounded, to which Pak responded that as he had stated at last meeting, he had not yet got any mission to inform Smith of them. He reiterated suggestion to meet again and have talk. Smith then said “I agree” and meeting concluded.

10. Comments: A. NK side made notable effort to be polite and was cooperative during meeting. There was no sign of irritation over absence of US apology, such as was evident at Feb 2 meeting.

B. Pak and his interpreter took great pains to insure that there was no misunderstanding of wording. Their most significant statement had been carefully prepared in advance.7

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Nodis; Cactus.

2 According to telegram 3890 from Seoul, February 2, Smith said: “I have requested this meeting in order to discuss with you in an atmosphere free from compulsions created by publicity the very serious situation which results from the fact that you have possession of the United States Ship Pueblo and also its crew.” (Ibid.)

3 The verbatim text of the February 4 meeting quoted Pak as saying, “the nuclear-propelled carrier Enterprise in (toward) our territorial waters.” (Telegram 3927 from Seoul, February 4; ibid.)

4 The verbatim text of Smith's remarks on January 24 was transmitted in telegram 3608 from Seoul, January 25. (Ibid., POL 27–14 KOR/UN)

5  Document 262.

6 Telegram 3913 from Seoul, February 3, corrected errors to the verbatim text of the first Senior Members MAC Meeting. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

7 Based on North Korean comments made at the meeting, the Department of State instructed the Embassy to submit a written request to the North Koreans for information on dead and wounded crew members. (Telegram 109841 to Seoul, February 4; ibid.)

264. Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk 264. Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, February 4, 1968.

SUBJECT

Pueblo—Policy Issues Raised at Second Meeting of Senior Representatives

I.

1. At the Second Meeting of Admiral Smith and General Pak, the North Korean side put forward two principal demands: a. The US should “eliminate the atmosphere of compulsion it has created” by concentrating Seventh Fleet and US air power in the vicinity of North Korea.

b. Since the Pueblo was not under CINCUNC, the matter of Pueblo's seizure should be dealt with on a government-to-government level, i.e. by representatives of the US and the Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea (DPRK).

II. “Elimination of Compulsion”

2. The North Korean statement about eliminating the “atmosphere of compulsion” is clearly a demand for the withdrawal or reduction of our military buildup in the Korean area. It raises two kinds of questions: a. What do we say at the next meeting?

b. Can we and should we agree to make any changes in the disposition of US forces in the area as a token of our “sincerity” and our desire to get down to business?

3. The first question is a matter of tactics for the next meeting. The second question is more fundamental.

What we Say

4. In raising this question General Pak has twisted Admiral Smith's words at the first meeting of the Senior Members. Admiral Smith had referred to our desire for a meeting to discuss the Pueblo case in an “atmosphere free from the compulsion of publicity.” This distortion should be pointed out at the next meeting. It should then be emphasized that if there is an atmosphere of tension and a buildup of military forces in the area, it is because of increasingly aggressive acts by the North Korean armed forces such as the infiltration of spies and saboteurs, the raid on the ROK Presidential palace and finally the seizure of the Pueblo. If North Korea exercises restraint vis-a-vis the ROK and if it releases the Pueblo and crew, tensions will be reduced, and the US will be able to draw appropriate conclusions and act accordingly.

5. At the next meeting also, we should repeat our request for the names of the dead and injured, suggesting that if the North Korean authorities are unwilling to make even this small and compassionate gesture they cannot be serious about reducing tensions.

What we Do

6. Meanwhile we should be considering what to do after the next meeting. Pak complained that the US has threatened North Korea by sending the Seventh Fleet (including specifically the Enterprise) into the vicinity of North Korean territory, by introducing “numerous fighters and bombers” into the ROK, and by placing US troops and the ROK army in a state of complete combat readiness.

The following actions should conceivably be taken to evidence our desire to get things moving: a. Move Enterprise task group south to East China Sea.

b. Withdraw Enterprise and at least part of Enterprise task group from the area.

c. Move some or all of remaining naval units south.

d. Return some tactical air units from ROK to Okinawa or Japan.

Our view is that the simplest and safest initial gesture would be moving Enterprise task group south. This movement would probably be made known almost immediately to the North Koreans by the USSR. Such movement could be made without operational difficulty and without placing our forces too far away to be useful or threatening. Such moves would be less visible to the ROKG and easier to explain than withdrawal of air units from the ROK or a standdown of the Eighth US and ROK armies.

When to Do It

7. The main question is whether to make a gesture of withdrawal in the current phase, i.e. while the North Koreans are still building their case, releasing confessions and stating conditions, or to wait until they have put everything on the table, the issues are further crystallized, and some action may be needed to break a deadlock and prevent negotiations from coming to a stop.

Recommendation

Issue orders to the Enterprise task group to begin steaming south but delay execution of the orders until after the next meeting, when a final decision on this action would be taken.

III. Raising the Level of Negotiations

8. At the February 4 meeting General Pak referred to Admiral Smith's statement (at the February 2 meeting): “and additionally the ship was not under the Commander-in-Chief of the United Nations Command.” Pak asked whether this meant that the case is to be dealt with as a matter between the two sides—the DPRK and USA; if this understanding is correct and the US side appoints a representative of the USA, the North Korean side would also appoint a representative of the DPRK.

9. The North Koreans appear to have picked up the UN Command point in order to make a bid to raise the level of discussion on the Pueblo to government-to-government. In addition to the general objections we would have to any such shift, it would pose two special problems with the ROKG:2 a. The issue of recognition and status for Pyongyang.

b. Separation out of the Pueblo seizure to be dealt with on a higher level than the MAC, to which the ROK's problems are relegated.

10. We believe that at the next meeting in Panmunjom Admiral Smith should clarify his statement to assert that while in the US military command structure the Pueblo was not under CINCUNC, it was nevertheless part of the forces in the area of the United States, it was there in pursuance of the efforts of the CINCUNC to maintain peace, and it is the United States which provides the unified command of United Nations forces for Korea pursuant to the United Nations Security Council resolution of July 7, 1950. Admiral Smith would then go on to say that he, as Senior Member of the MAC on the UN Command side, represented the United States Government fully in regard to matters involving military forces related to peace and security in Korea. He would also recall the position taken by the North Korean side that the MAC was the appropriate forum for discussing the Pueblo seizure. A suggested statement is attached.3

11. The North Koreans might nevertheless persist in its demand for appointment of government-level representatives to deal with the Pueblo. If they should, we would then have to consider whether we would want to meet them part way on this issue by a device such as (a) giving Admiral Smith another hat as special US representative, or (b) sending an additional US Government representative to Panmunjom to sit with Admiral Smith and take part in discussion on the Pueblo; any such representative should be auxiliary to Admiral Smith and not independent of him, and the talks should remain in the MAC framework at Panmunjom. (In this connection, you may be aware of Arthur Goldberg's suggestion, made yesterday, that a lawyer be sent from Washington to work with Admiral Smith and assist him in the discussions.)

IV. Tactics

12. The failure of the North Koreans to provide the names of our injured and dead at this second meeting should be hit hard at the next meeting. We have asked Admiral Smith to put in a request through the Joint Duty Officer immediately, and also to consider using the good offices of the NNSC members in their private capacities in view of their offer to do this if we failed to obtain any information at the first meeting.

13. If we have not received an answer before the third meeting, Admiral Smith should open with an insistent demand for their names as a token of their good faith in these negotiations. They have, in effect, asked us for the withdrawal of the Enterprise as a token of our good faith. If they are not prepared to make the simple gesture, we certainly should not make the very visible larger one.

14. This second meeting is rather ominous, and we should consider sending the letter to Kosygin if we are still on dead center after the third. The letter would say that we have gotten nowhere in these meetings. The North Koreans whose activities produced the present state of tension continue to say it is we who are threatening. Kosygin has asked for restraint. We have exercised restraint. As a further gesture, and depending on how we assess the third meeting, we might tell him we are moving the Enterprise south.

15. It is our turn to ask for the next meeting. If we are ready with our instructions by 5:00 p.m. today (7:00 a.m. Monday, Korea time), we could ask for the meeting for 4:00 p.m. Monday, Korea time. The North Koreans would then either have to accept or propose a later time, hopefully Tuesday.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret.

2 In telegram 3973 from Seoul, February 5, the Embassy reported growing dissatisfaction with the U.S.-North Korean meetings at Panmunjom within the ROK. National Assembly leaders and political spokesmen saw the secret talks as an affront to the ROK and an infringement of its sovereignty and complained that President Pak was not informed about the meetings in advance. In an editorial, the government-owned newspaper Sinmun portrayed the negotiations as “'tantamount to betrayal' of ROKG since it not consulted in advance and because North Koreans treated as equal.” The article repeated President Pak's comment that the ROK did not have unlimited patience in dealing with North Korea, called for a withdrawal of ROK troops from Vietnam, recommended the ROK regain operational control of its military, and “urged ROKG to take independent retaliatory action, if necessary.” (Ibid.)

3 Not printed.

265. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 265. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, February 4, 1968, 2201Z.

109854. Ref: State 109842.2

1. Following are texts of statements recommended for use by Admiral Smith at next meeting of Senior members.

2. Believe Smith should open with statement as follows on North Korean accusation that we have created atmosphere of compulsion:

Begin Verbatim Text:

a. At the last meeting you said that the release of the crew and vessel Pueblo should be discussed in an atmosphere free from compulsion. Let me repeat that the US Government seeks a peaceful solution of this matter. You have stated that our side has created an “atmosphere of compulsion.” Admittedly, there is an atmosphere of tension in this area, but that atmosphere is related to actions by North Korea. Account must be taken of increasingly aggressive actions by North Korean armed forces such as the infiltration of spies and saboteurs across the DMZ over the last 14 months, the raid on the Presidential palace in Seoul, and finally the seizure of the Pueblo.

b. There is, therefore, a direct way to reduce tensions and eliminate the “atmosphere of compulsion” to which you refer. The armistice agreement must be faithfully observed. The North Korean Government should release immediately the Pueblo and its crew. Tensions would be reduced and the United States would be able to draw the correct conclusions. End Verbatim Text.

3. Smith should then repeat demand for names of dead and wounded if they have not already been given. We simply cannot understand why the North Korean side persists in refusing simple humanitarian request of this nature. Refusal without reason aggravates tensions.

4. In response to North Korean effort to get us to put discussions on govt-to-govt level, Smith should use following carefully prepared language:

Begin Verbatim Text:

a. General Pak at the meeting of February 4 referred to my earlier statement that the Pueblo was not under the command of CINCUNC, that it was a unit of the US Pacific Fleet, and that the case was without precedent.

b. First, let me recall what I actually said on the question of precedent. These were my words: “The action of North Korea in seizing the ship was completely without precedent, and it was illegal because the ship was in international waters, …”

c. Obviously, I was referring to the fact that seizure of a warship in peacetime in international waters, in contravention of international law and accepted international practice, is quite unprecedented.

d. Next, let me clarify the place of the Pueblo in the US military command structure. I stated that the vessel was not under the command of CINCUNC because the line of command for the vessel ran from the US naval command in the Pacific rather than through CINCUNC. The Pueblo was, of course, a commissioned ship of the United States Navy, and as such a part of the armed forces of the United States. The need for the Pueblo's presence in the Sea of Japan arose from increased tensions in Korea caused by the actions of your side, and was in support of the mission of the forces on our side which is to maintain peace and security in the area.

e. As for my position as Senior Member of the MAC on our side, I am here as the representative of the United States Government and authorized by USG to discuss Pueblo matter.3

f. Finally, your side has already recognized that the MAC machinery is appropriate for discussion of the Pueblo seizure. Your side has done so in the statements of spokesmen and in the action of holding the meetings we have had. Accordingly, we do not see what special representatives could do in these discussions that you and I cannot do. If your side has anything specific in mind, would you elaborate? End Verbatim Text. 4

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6, KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Doherty; cleared by Berger, Walsh, Meeker, Steadman, and Sisco; and approved by Katzenbach.

2 Telegram 109842 to Seoul, February 4, advised the Embassy that the Department of State was preparing responses to the two North Korean demands made at the last meeting. (Ibid.)

3 In telegram 109876 to Seoul, February 5, the following was substituted for this paragraph: “As for my position, I am the Senior Member of the MAC on our side and I represent the United States Government with full authority to discuss the release of the U.S.S. Pueblo and its crew.” The Senior Member was instructed to make clear his position as representing, but not as a representative of, the U.S. Government in this matter. (Ibid.)

4 In telegram 109856 to Seoul, February 4, the Department of State further advised that, should the North Koreans ask if the U.S. demand for an apology and compensation had been withdrawn, Smith should refer to his previous statements and reiterate the demand for release of the ship and its crew. (Ibid.)

266. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 266. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 1

Moscow, February 5, 1968, 0020Z.

2684. Ref State 109851.2

1. I believe Soviets who want Koreans attend Budapest meeting and who consider their own prestige engaged by our show of force will not bring strong pressure on North Koreans unless we tell them we are withdrawing our recently added naval forces from the area. From my recent talk with Dobrynin 3 I am sure there is strong division here between civilian and military leaders and on issue of this kind very unlikely Presidium would overrule military. If President could tell Kosygin he was taking his advice Soviets would bring most intense pressure on Koreans but of course effectiveness cannot be guaranteed. If however, Koreans failed in such circumstances to return ship and crew and we took forceful action believe Soviets would not intervene.

2. If this cannot be our policy present text is fine.

3. Although I realize South Koreans want reassurance, Gromyko is right in saying our ships ineffective against infiltrators. Removing our additional forces would certainly cause Soviets to press North Koreans to reduce this activity and almost certain lack of Soviet support would prevent any bigger adventures.

Thompson

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis.

2 In telegram 109851 to Moscow, February 4, Rusk sent Thompson the draft text of a proposed letter from President Johnson to Kosygin. (Ibid.)

3 See footnote 3, Document 260.

267. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 267. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 5, 1968, 1045Z.

3970. Subj: Summary of Panmunjom Meeting, Feb. 5.2

1. RAdm Smith opened meeting by reading verbatim text of statement contained para 2, State 109854,3 concerning atmosphere of compulsion. Before reading his statement, Smith passed to Pak two copies in both English and Korean. Pak and his advisor read statements intently while Smith was speaking.

2. Pak, reading from prepared statement, responded that at Feb 4 meeting Smith had given explanation distorting facts to make it appear that Pueblo had been in international waters and crew had committed no crime. Said charge Smith had just made had nothing to do with Pueblo matter and reserved right to express position in future. Referring again to his Feb 4 statement about compulsive atmosphere having been created by US side, Pak advised Smith to answer later after seriously studying his statement. He then requested answer to his second question at Feb 4 meeting (whether case was to be dealt with as matter between DPRK and USA, since Smith had stated Pueblo not under UNC command and case was without precedent).

3. Smith responded by again requesting names of Pueblo crew who are dead and wounded.

4. Pak, again reading prepared statement, contended that purpose of these contacts is to arrange means of discussing matters related to Pueblo case. Said that if Smith wished to solve matter “practically”, it proper that representative from both sides appointed by DPRK and US should meet among themselves. He again requested clear answer to his question in Feb 4 meeting in this connection.

5. Smith, saying he would address that subject shortly, then read prepared statement referring to fact that he had requested info on names of Pueblo dead and wounded by written and oral means without result, ending with statement that US simply cannot understand why NK persists in refusing simple humanitarian requests of this nature; such refusal, without reason, aggravates tensions.

6. Smith, stating he was responding to Pak's second question at Feb 4 meeting, read verbatim text of statement contained para 4, State 109854, as amended by State 109876.4 As with first statement, Smith provided Pak copies in English and Korean, which were again avidly read.

7. Pak replied after long lapse, during which he made extensive penciled changes in his prepared text and combined latter with notes he had made on written copy of Smith's statement. He said that Smith in his last statement had stated he represents Govt of US in handling Pueblo case. Asked whether he could understand that US side admits Pueblo case is matter to be handled by DPRK and US and that Smith represents US Govt.

8. Smith rejoined that he did not feel he could improve on statement he had just read, which prepared by US Govt.

9. Pak, after deleting several lines and making brief addition to prepared statement, said he noted “your acknowledgment” that Pueblo case is matter to be handled by DPRK and by US Govt and that Smith represents US Govt. Asked whether Smith agreed with this understanding. (Foregoing was spoken very slowly and deliberately by interpreter.)

10. After repeating statement about his inability to improve on words given him by US Govt, Smith stated that “I will agree that I am acting for US Govt.” After reviewing his statement, Smith added that he saw nothing in statement which states that US Govt will deal directly with DPRK as such.

11. Pak responded with notation of fact that Smith had stated he represents US Govt with full authority to deal with Pueblo case. He suggested conclusion this meeting and “Let's have a talk when we meet again.”

12. Smith said that before concluding he wished make additional point. He then read prepared statement containing suggestion that future meetings be held at 1400 hrs (as suggested State 109852).5 Smith then said he had given Pak replies to his questions of previous day, that he had nothing further, would await Pak's reply, and suggested recess. Pak stated he noted what Smith had said. Meeting recessed at 1631 hrs.

13. Comment: Meeting was very businesslike. Pak was obviously unhappy over what Smith said but remained polite. Obvious that his principal interest, for which he was well prepared, was to attempt to lead Smith into statements to effect that this was govt to govt negotiation. Both sides left door open for further sessions, and we expect that Communist side will shortly call next meeting. Pak did not in any way indicate awareness of contents Rusk/McNamara Meet The Press interview.6 It is possible that knowledge of contents of this interview had not been passed to him prior to meeting, or that Pyongyang is still studying its implications.

Porter

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus II, Cactus Seoul Cables, January 29 to February 9, 1968. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus. Attached to a February 5 memorandum from Rostow to the President in which Rostow characterized the meeting as “inconclusive” and suggested a prompt decision be made “about the Moscow message in the light of Tommy's cable.” See Document 266. Rostow's memorandum indicates the President saw the telegram.

2 A complete, verbatim text of the meeting is in telegram 3974 from Seoul, February 5. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3  Document 265.

4 See footnote 3, Document 265.

5 Dated February 4. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6, KOR N–US)

6  Rusk and McNamara appeared on the television news program on February 4. An unabridged transcript of the broadcast is in Department of State Bulletin, February 26, 1968, pp. 261–272.

268. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 268. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

Washington, February 6, 1968, 0003Z.

110351. Literally Eyes Only for the Ambassador from the Secretary. Deliver soonest to Kosygin if possible following message dated February 5, 1968, from President to Kosygin:

“Dear Mr. Chairman:

I can tell you very simply why additional U.S. military forces are in the area of South Korea and the Sea of Japan.2 For many months infiltration from North Korea across the Demilitarized Zone has been increasing. There were about 50 incidents initiated by the North Koreans in 1966; there were almost 600 in 1967. We have reports that there were some who were trying to persuade North Korea to open a so-called second front. We are fully aware of the threatening public statements made by the leaders of North Korea themselves, including the recent statement by Premier Kim Il-sung that— 'We must accomplish the South Korean revolution, unify the fatherland in our generation, and hand down a unified fatherland to the coming generations. We must quickly make all conditions ripe for the realization of the unification of the fatherland.'

Recently two events occurred within a few days of each other which we were forced to take with the utmost seriousness. A North Korean mission of specially trained officers was intercepted in Seoul with orders to assassinate President Park, the American Ambassador, and their families. Second, a vessel of the U.S. Navy was seized in international waters in an action which is almost literally without precedent in modern times and which violated a rule of law in which you and all other maritime nations have a great interest. This act has deeply stirred and outraged the American people. Surely you need not look beyond these developments to understand why we felt it necessary to augment our forces.

Quite frankly, we do not know what North Korea has in mind. We do know what we have in mind; namely, that North Korea will not be permitted to direct its military forces against South Korea and that American flag vessels are not to be seized on the high seas.

As far as the Pueblo matter is concerned, you and I seem to agree that a prompt settlement is in the common interest. This can only mean, of course, the prompt return of the Pueblo and its crew. We see no reason why this action could not be taken within the next two or three days through the channels now established at Panmunjom.

If the ship and its crew are promptly returned, it is obvious that tension in the Korean area would be sharply reduced and the forces there could then assume a more normal posture. We must, of course, continue to watch and take seriously any continued acts of infiltration directed against the Republic of Korea.

I am glad to have your candid views. On the assumption that you and I agree that we want peace in that area and that we will both work to that end, I can tell you that I have directed that there be no further build-up of our air and naval forces at this time. In addition, I am directing one of our aircraft carriers and accompanying vessels to move somewhat southward.

Sincerely, Lyndon B. Johnson”

Septel follows on developments at Panmunjom.3

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis. Drafted by Rusk; cleared by Read, Rostow, and McNamara; and approved by Rusk.

2 With the exception of this sentence, this and the following two paragraphs of the letter were sent to Porter, who was instructed to read the text to Pak alone and to stress that the information was being passed in strictest confidence. (Telegram 110350 to Seoul, February 6; ibid.)

3 A summary of the fourth MAC meeting was sent to Moscow in telegram 111562, February 7. (Ibid.)

269. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 269. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 1

Moscow, February 6, 1968, 1515Z.

2708. Ref: State 110351.2

1. I delivered the President's message to Kosygin at 3 p.m. today.

2. Upon hearing translation of message, Kosygin asked me to convey his thanks to President. At same time he wanted me to tell President that it was difficult for him to understand this situation. When a vessel got into territorial waters of other nations, matter should be resolved in accordance normal procedures. As US itself had said, Soviet vessels, although admittedly they were fishing vessels, had intruded in US territorial waters. US had seized vessels, put captains to trial, and levied fines which USSR then paid. Similar incidents had taken place in Norwegian territorial waters, but Soviets again used diplomatic channels, apologized, paid fine and settled matter. In no instance had the Soviets dispatched their naval vessels although, in case of Norway, there was powerful Soviet surface and submarine fleet in vicinity. In every instance Soviets had sought settle incidents through diplomatic channels without raising tensions and without creating possibility of conflict. On other hand, US reacted to Pueblo seizure by dispatching aircraft carriers and other vessels, which indicated that there were many hotheads in Pentagon who needed tranquilizers. Kosygin said time had passed when threats worked or when great powers could simply flick their fingers and have smaller nations do what they wanted them to do. It was in desire to put Pueblo incident in proper perspective that he had said in New Delhi that this was local conflict which should be settled by two parties concerned.

3. Referring to President's mention of infiltration, Kosygin asserted infiltration going in both directions and merely reflected natural desire Korean people for reunification their divided country. If US were divided, we would also have infiltration in both directions. In any event, area was close to Soviet territory and Soviet Union could not but be concerned about increased tensions and possibility of incidents there. He reiterated that it better to work through diplomatic channels through exchange of messages, etc., and not to resort to show of force.

4. This connection he noted Soviets had not dispatched their fleet when recently US destroyer collided with Soviet merchant vessel. In this case too, US decided not even to apologize but rather to argue that Soviet vessel was at fault. At sea, there were certain rules to be abided by and if they were violated, apology was in order. Fortunately, Soviet vessel was damaged above rather than below water line, otherwise it would have sunk.

5. I pointed out we had delivered a note to MFA yesterday in which we described circumstances of collision and indicated fact that our destroyer had right of way under international regulations. Kosygin countered by asserting our case not convincing and we simply trying protect our captain by stretching the truth. Soviets dealt with their captains committing similar violations quite differently: they demoted them and deprived them of ship command.

6. Reverting to Pueblo incident, I pointed out that while incident cited by Kosygin involved Soviet fishing vessels, Pueblo was a naval vessel. There was difference between procedures for handling fishing vessels and those regarding naval ships. There had been cases where Soviet naval vessels intruded in US territorial waters, but we merely asked them to leave and did not seize them. As Kosygin knew, our position was that Pueblo had been seized in international waters. However, even if it had intruded into North Korean territorial waters, proper procedure should have been to ask it to leave rather than seize it. I then pointed out that coincidence of recent events in Korea, such as North Korean plan for assassination of President Park and our Ambassador and Pueblo seizure, created great concern among South Koreans who did not know what to expect next from North Korea. I also pointed out that we were trying to use diplomatic means to secure release of Pueblo and its crew, and expressed hope that meetings at Panmunjom would soon bear fruit.

5. [sic] Kosygin said he thought discussions at Panmunjom were proceeding normally and should be continued. Direct US-North Korean talks much more useful than intercession by third party. He felt that Panmunjom meetings apparently gave some satisfaction to both US and North Korea.

6. When I reiterated my hope for prompt successful outcome those talks, Kosygin said Soviets also interested in prompt settlement of incident since there were enough conflicts in world already and there was no need to have a new one.

7. Kosygin then raised Middle East and Vietnam, which reported separately. At end of meeting I asked him what he proposed to give to press about our meeting. He said that, as last time, he would issue statement that he had met with me at my own request, with no indication of subjects discussed.

Thompson

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis.

2  Document 268.

270. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and George Ball 270. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and George Ball 1

Washington, February 7, 1968, 9:59 a.m.

Ball: I think we're going to complete this report we're making this morning, finish preparation of it. I went over it with Bob and with Dean2 last night, and we're classifying it very highly, so it will be in the nature of a report to you, and we're also putting a special classification on it to keep it quite secret, so that you can use it as you want. But, on the whole, I think that we've come out with an agreed report that indicates that we ought to perform these missions in a somewhat different fashion in the future, that we probably shouldn't send them into waters of this kind without protection, and so forth. I wondered if you would like me to come over for five or ten minutes and just run through it before we finally put it to bed.

President: I sure would. I had two folks that I kind of wanted to—'cause they'll have to live with it some—to talk to you before you all really got it down finally, because I'm afraid that it'll be like the Gaither Report,3 somebody in some department looks at it, will leak it. I thought that these folks would be my best defense, if you're in Europe or some other place when we call you for help. And I wondered if you would mind spending ten minutes with Taylor and Clark together—

Ball: Sure.

President: —because they had gone out and done a lot of things for us. They'll both be here. Max is testifying from time to time. He was on the Bay of Pigs thing. He has a background. He's on that intelligence board. Clark is chairman of it, and Clark has to kind of do what you used to do—oppose, put in the no vote sometimes, so I don't think everything's love and peaches-and-cream. If you would do that, then come right on in. Marvin Watson will open the door any time you're ready. You can bring them—bring them or you can just come by yourself and just tell 'em I'd like to have a little reaction from them and any suggestions they have, because Rivers4 is already refusing to hear Bob up there on his valedictory, and we've got the Thurmonds 5 and the Rivers and these wild men that want to blow up a city, and I've just got to have Clark handle some of those and Taylor will have to give them a little touch. So, if you'll talk to them, I'll tell Marvin now to give me an hour or two's notice and we'll bust up what we're doing and receive you any time. And I thank the Lord you're living.

Ball: Fine, Mr. President.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of Telephone Conversation between President Johnson and George Ball, February 7, 1968, 9:59 a.m., Tape F68.02, PNO 3. Secret. This transcript was prepared by the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume.

2  Robert McNamara and Dean Rusk.

3 The Gaither Report, which examined U.S. defense capabilities to respond to a surprise nuclear attack by the Soviet Union, was given to President Eisenhower in November 1957. The Top Secret report was later declassified and published in U.S. Congress, Joint Committee on Defense Production, Deterrence and Survival in the Nuclear Age (The “Gaither Report” of 1957), (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1976).

4 Representative Mendel L. Rivers, Chairman, House Armed Services Committee.

5 Senator Strom Thurmond.

271. Memorandum for the Record 271. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, February 7, 1968.

SUBJECT

The Ball Report

In a meeting with the President by Ball, Clifford and Taylor, it was agreed that Ball would endeavor to obtain agreement from his colleagues on his committee for him alone to make an oral report of the principal findings to the President. He would avoid policy recommendations, limiting his comments to the specifics of the Pueblo incident.

In the written draft report,2 the following points are made: a. It would probably be wise to abandon efforts to conduct covert ELINT collection activities at sea. If this attempt were abandoned, then it would be possible to operate ELINT ships without radio silence and to protect a ship by an armed naval vessel further out to sea.

b. The government should review the sensitivity of coastal areas of ELINT interest before dispatching Pueblo-type ships on new missions.

c. There should be adequate destruction devices aboard ELINT ships to assure quick destruction in times of emergency.

d. Instructions to the skippers should be reviewed. Apparently there is an ambiguity in the instructions regarding the use of weapons in self-defense.

Ball is to pull in all copies of his draft report from other members of the committee. We will decide at the next meeting with the President (probably toward the end of next week) what kind of public statement to make upon query with regard to the Ball Committee report. Some such statement as the following seems to be contemplated:

“The Ball Committee has filed an oral report which emphasizes the complexities and technical character of many of the matters raised by the Pueblo incident and points out that committee has not been able to explore all these matters in depth in the time available to it. Hence, the report to the President limited itself to suggestions of certain areas which require further examination in order to determine appropriate action by the responsible governmental agencies. It took note of the fact that the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board is already seized with certain aspects of the Pueblo incident and that the Eaton Board is in the course of making a thorough study of the many kinds of intelligence activities in which the Pueblo was engaged at the time of the incident.

“The President expressed his appreciation to the members of the Ball Committee for their help and for the effectiveness of their work in the relatively short time available to them.”

At the next meeting of the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, the Pueblo matter will be given top priority. The principal question will be the scope of any study of the Pueblo incident which is within the capability of the Intelligence Board.

MDT

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Vietnam Policy, Memos to the President, T–167–69, Box 57, SPC–S–094–93. Secret. Drafted by Taylor.

2 A copy of the sixth and presumably the final draft of the committee's report, February 7, is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Intelligence File, Pueblo, January 1968.

272. Action Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk 272. Action Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, February 7, 1968.

SUBJECT

Panmunjom Talks—Next Steps

1. The North Korean stand at the Fourth Meeting is unpromising for an early settlement and could further complicate our relations with the Republic of Korea.2 The North Korean requests for the addition of a deputy, the exchange of minutes and more formalized procedures, including press releases, seem to have the following purposes: a. To establish even more clearly that we have moved to government-to-government negotiations for prestige purposes.

b. To spin out the negotiations on the assumption they can do so with impunity, and to inhibit us from taking more forceful action while the talks continue.

c. To increase the existing strains on ROK-US relations, for the very idea of government-to-government talks, and especially without them, is anathema to South Korea. The North Koreans perhaps hope that these strains might become so acute as to produce street demonstrations in Seoul, and growing public resentment that would lead the ROKG to withdraw some of its forces from Viet-Nam, or at least keep them from sending additional troops.

d. To keep the situation sufficiently unsettled and roiled as to keep US forces pinned down in the area. The North Koreans know, of course, about our foreign exchange problems, budgetary deficit, and the President's domestic difficulties, and it may be they think maintaining a certain amount of tension in Korea will put added strains on our resources and add to the President's troubles at home.

2. The request for a change in procedure, per se, presents no great problem for us, and we could accept it were it not for the strong [South] Korean reaction. However, we need not make a decision on this request for another meeting or two. By then, the news of the additional $100 million in military assistance will be public, and this might help moderate Korean feelings about these talks.

3. Probably the most significant sentence of the Fourth Meeting is: “You will be able to express your opinion at the next meeting on the disposition of the case of your armed spy ship Pueblo.” This is a clear indication that they expect us to table some specific proposal.

4. At the next meeting we should state again that we agree with them that a situation of acute tension, of which they complain, exists in the area, and it will not be reduced until: a. The crew and vessel are released.

b. The provocations against the ROK stop.

5. We should stress that no amount of talk in this forum, or any other forum, is going to produce agreement on the facts.

6. We therefore see no special need for a new procedure. The North Koreans should be asked what the new procedure can do that can't be done under existing arrangements.

7. We should at the next meeting say we are ready at that meeting to table proposals for the disposal of the case. If this is a true negotiation they should table their proposal for disposal of the case at the same time. Are they prepared to table? If not, will they table theirs at the next meeting?

8. We have two proposals we can make: a. We might state that we are prepared to submit the Pueblo issue to an international fact-finding body provided they agree to release the crew and vessel to us in connection with such an inquiry. This will give them something to chew on and smoke them out on this course of action. They are not likely to agree since they say the issue should be settled in direct talks.3

b. Our second proposal is to provide them with the following signed statement and assurance when the men and the vessel are released to us:4 i. “The USS Pueblo is a vessel of the US Navy. It was engaged in intelligence collection at the time it was seized by force of arms. It was, according to our information, in international waters at the time it was seized.

ii. “Vessels of the US Navy are under the strictest instructions not to approach closer than thirteen nautical miles off the coast. An inquiry will be held when all the crew has been returned to the United States. The question whether the Pueblo approached closer than thirteen nautical miles to the coast of North Korea will be particularly examined. We shall make public the results of that inquiry and take appropriate action.”

9. General Bonesteel is absolutely opposed to agreeing to the new procedure.5

10. Ambassador Porter recommends moving the talks outside Korea.6 The trouble with this is that it will take time, and the North Koreans may not agree if their purpose is to cause trouble between us and the ROKs.

11. I think we should hold to the present venue and arrangements for another meeting or two, by which time we may have the North Korean proposal for “disposal of the case.”

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Exdis; Sensitive.

2 The Embassy did not send a summary of the fourth Senior Members meeting, since it lasted only 26 minutes, but noted that the “meeting was again businesslike” and “Pak's manner was cooperative and polite.” (Telegram 4047 from Seoul, February 7; ibid.) A verbatim text of the meeting was forwarded in telegram 4051 from Seoul, February 7, and corrections based on an analysis of the Korean-language tape recording of the meeting are in telegram 4058 from Seoul, February 7. (Both ibid.)

3 The instructions sent to Admiral Smith in preparation for the fifth meeting reflected this proposal. Smith was also instructed to inform the North Koreans that the United States had no objections to their proposed procedural changes. (Telegram 111812 to Seoul, February 8; ibid.)

4  Smith also received instructions covering potential responses to an unexpected release of the crew. (Telegram 112831 to Seoul, February 9; ibid.)

5 When informing Sharp of the North Korean proposal on instituting new procedures that would “in effect, make it more formal and obvious that meetings were between representatives of US and DPR,” Bonesteel stated unequivocally, “In light of intensifying ROK bitterness re U.S. unilateralism in MAC, I recommend strong opposition to any U.S. acceptance of any version of Communist proposal.” (Telegram KRA 0473 from CINCUNC to CINCPAC, February 7; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Military Cables, Vol. II, February 1968 to March 1968)

6  Porter submitted his comments on the meeting and the implications for future negotiations in telegram 4062 from Seoul, February 7. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US) The Department of State informed Porter of its opposition by pointing out that to “change from military to diplomatic channels would go farther toward giving appearance of recognition of North Korea than present procedures,” which could only have a detrimental effect on official and public reaction in the ROK. (Telegram 111805 to Seoul, February 8; ibid.)

273. Information Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 273. Information Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, February 8, 1968, 7:30 p.m.

Mr. President:

I have been speculating with the members of my staff most directly concerned with the Korea problem. We have been looking beyond the present situation to the possible failure of Panmunjom or its endless stringing out.

We are conscious of the following weaknesses in all the forms of action which have been proposed: —The Soviets have committed a high proportion of their Far East fleet to the area. They will feel their prestige is on the line if we move in on North Korean ports or attack North Korean installations with our air or naval power.

—but equally, in our message to Kosygin we have indicated that time was relatively short before some form of action might have to be taken. Nothing would damage our credibility with the Russians more than if, having put forces in the area and stated to Kosygin the urgency of the matter, we did nothing.

—it is true we can pick up some North Korean-Polish ships; but they turn out to be almost wholly Polish. Sect. Rusk is worried about possible pressure on the road to Berlin if we fuss with Polish transport, although I don't think the Poles want a Berlin crisis at the moment. But you should know that Gronouski, when sounded out, said in effect: Please don't.

—we don't have any firm fix on the possibility of a Free World denial of shipping and bunkerage in trade to North Korea, but it doesn't look like a very substantial measure.

In the face of these thin prospects and our desire to avoid a second front in Korea—at least at our initiation—the following thought has arisen: that we now mine the Haiphong and other harbors of North Viet Nam. The advantages are: —even if not a decisive action, it is an important action which bears upon the major battle we are fighting;

—the Russian capacity to deal with it, and the Russian commitment to deal with it on a military basis is much less than something done in the Sea of Japan;

—it would maintain our credibility with Kosygin & Company, especially if timed in relation to the indication in the letter concerning the Pueblo.

If we wish to institute the policy by increments, we could start by laying mine barriers in the south of North Viet Nam and progressively but swiftly moving north, perhaps using a back channel to suggest to Moscow that if they wish to have the mining stop short of Haiphong, they had better deliver the Pueblo and its crew.2 But it is a course which, once embarked upon, we would have to mean.

As for the men and the crew, we could continue being just as patient in the Panmunjom negotiations as the other side; but we would have to accept as likely that we would not get them back for some considerable period of time.

I am not recommending this course of action; but I believe it deserves careful thought if in fact the North Koreans and the Soviets are going to play this game out to extract humiliation of us.

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part A (beginning February). Secret. The memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

2 The wisdom of saying anything to Moscow—even back-channel—would have to be checked. [Handwritten footnote in the source text.]

274. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 274. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 10, 1968, 0756Z.

4136. Subj: 5th Closed Senior MAC Members Meeting Feb 10.

1. Since meeting was so short and consisted largely of Admiral Smith's reading of verbatim text, we will not send full transcript of meeting until we have had qualified language personnel examine it carefully and make any necessary revisions.2

2. Admiral Smith opened meeting by reading verbatim text of statement contained State 1118123 as amended by para 6 State 112452.4

3. Although Pak was probably only prepared to receive Smith's response to his proposals regarding future conduct of business through formal meetings, he also noted without objection that portion of Smith's statement which presented our view on disposition of Pueblo case. He then immediately proposed recess and formal meeting next time.

4. Admiral Smith countered with request for response to two questions contained at end of his statement.5 Pak replied that his side would express its position at formal meeting.

5. Admiral Smith, bearing in mind fact that NNSC conference room where this and previous meetings have been held is small and that additional personnel will attend formal meetings, asked Pak where he proposed that formal meetings be held. Judging from his reaction, Pak misinterpreted this question and apparently thought Smith had in mind holding meeting somewhere outside Panmunjom. He became flustered, consulted with KPA/CPV Assistant MAC Secretary who wrote out reply for him, and answered in manner betraying some anxiety that it his understanding both sides had already reached agreement that meetings will be held in NNSC conference room at Panmunjom. Smith concurred.

6. Pak agreed with Smith's assumption that he would propose next meeting. Smith then proposed recess. Pak agreed.

7. Meeting recessed at 1413 hours local. At precisely that time KPA/CPV JDO was receiving Smith's request for open MAC meeting Feb 12 to discuss tension resulting from armistice violations in and through the DMZ.6

8. Comments: During this meeting Pak parried request for information regarding NK intentions with respect return of ship and crew. Smith was prepared with special request for return of dead and wounded but, feeling that in this atmosphere he would accomplish nothing, he withheld request.7

9. Pak did not go back to question of Smith's precise status in future formal meetings or refer again to point that two sides should be DPRK and USA.

10. Attendees feel that Pak was more polite, soft-spoken and cooperative than in previous closed meetings, albeit no more willing to concede or offer anything. Moreover, he was not aware during this meeting of our request for open MAC meeting, and we therefore have no basis for judgment as to how he will react to this request or what effect it will have on order and timing of subsequent meetings.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Nodis; Cactus. Given to the President under February 10 covering memorandum from James L. Brown, Briefing Officer, White House Situation Room, which indicates that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IIa, Cactus Seoul Cables, February 10 to February 28, 1968)

2 A verbatim text of the meeting was transmitted in telegram 4137 from Seoul, February 10. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3 See footnote 3, Document 272.

4 Dated February 8. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IIa, Cactus Seoul Cables, February 10 to February 28, 1968)

5 As reported in telegram 4137, Smith asked: “Are you prepared today to state your side's readiness to return the crew and vessel? If you are not prepared today, will you be prepared at the next meeting to state that you will release the crew and vessel?”

6 A summary of the open MAC meeting, which was held on February 14, was transmitted in telegram 4226 from Seoul, February 14. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 27–14 KOR/UN)

7 The Department of State agreed that Smith's approach was appropriate and instructed that the request not be made at the next meeting, “since we do not want give North Koreans impression that we expect anything less than immediate release of entire crew and ship.” The substance of the next meeting would determine whether the issue would be raised at a subsequent meeting or through the JDO. (Telegram 113551 to Seoul, February 10; ibid., POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

275. Notes of Meeting 275. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, February 13, 1968, 1:12–2:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Notes of the President's Luncheon Meeting

PRESENT

Secretary Rusk

Secretary McNamara

CIA Director Helms

Clark Clifford

General Wheeler

Walt Rostow

George Christian

Tom Johnson

Director Helms: The report on a possible air attack by North Korea on Seoul was unnecessarily alarming. There is nothing to it.2

We are worried by reports that the North Koreans have the log of the Pueblo and are publicizing specific co-ordinates.

Secretary Rusk: An operations order of 1966 CINCPAC Fleet permitted these ships to go up to a three mile limit.3 We need to check to see if such an operation order might have been aboard this craft.

General Wheeler: The Pacific Command was placed on a high state of alert for the possibility of an attack on South Korea in any case.

Mr. Rostow: Representative Pucinski took Secretary Rusk's answer to Representative Carey on Capitol Hill last week. He violated his word about the off-the-record nature of the discussion in the belief he was helping the administration.

The President: When is our next meeting with the North Koreans?

Walt Rostow: 9 p.m. tonight.4

[Here follows discussion of the situation in Vietnam.]

[The President asked if Vance should go to Vietnam at the conclusion of his mission to South Korea and went on to say] I think Cy has a point that Pak wants me to get the message from him as quickly as possible.

Secretary Rusk: Also we should not underestimate the trouble with South Korea Vance is handling.

General Wheeler: Admiral Sharp asked me whether we should move the cruiser Canberra from the Sea of Japan back to Vietnam in light of the political problems this might cause with South Korea.

The President: What is the situation on the Pueblo?

Secretary Rusk: Ambassador Bohlen and I are having lunch with Dobrynin later this week. I am perturbed by this broadcast giving the log, plot, and co-ordinates of the ship. The North Koreans may want a confession and an apology. It is hard to confess something when you do not believe you did it. We need independent access to our men, but they may have us.

The President: Should we review the orders on all ships of this type?

Wheeler: The Pueblo Task Force under George Ball is looking at this now.

The President: Is there a significant difference in intelligence gathered three miles out versus fourteen miles out?

Director Helms: It depends on what you want to get. The farther out the ship is, the less communications intelligence you get.

[Here follows further discussion of Vietnam.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings, Luncheon Group, February 13, 1968. Top Secret. Drafted by Tom Johnson. The meeting was held in the White House.

2 The comment apparently refers to North Korean messages of February 9 and 10 [text not declassified] indicating that the Soviets and North Koreans planned an atomic attack on Seoul and Osan. Several [text not declassified] officials received the report without being notified of the tenuousness of its contents, thus spawning [text not declassified] demands for increased military preparedness and similar measures. [text not declassified] concluded that the intercepted communication was merely part of a training exercise and represented no danger of imminent attack to South Korea. (Telegram from DIRNSA to the White House, February 14; National Security Agency, Center for Cryptologic History, Historical Files, Box 4, V. Initial Reaction)

3 A copy of this order is attached to a February 13 memorandum from Leonard to Berger. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

4 The senior members met in open session on February 15 at 1400 (KST).

276. Action Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk 276. Action Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, February 15, 1968.

SUBJECT

Sixth Closed Meeting at Panmunjom

The sixth closed meeting of Senior Representatives was held yesterday afternoon at two o'clock Korean time and lasted twenty-two minutes. The whole meeting was devoted to presentation of the North Korean position on the Pueblo case.2

The North Korean representative sharply attacked our version of both the facts and law bearing on the case. He made the following principal points: a. The intrusion of the Pueblo into North Korean territorial waters is proved by confessions of the crew, the ship's log and navigational plot, and by “other material evidence, including intelligence data.”

b. When challenged by North Korean patrol craft, the Pueblo attempted to escape “while committing provocative firings.” The North Korean vessels returned fire in “self-defense.” (This charge was first made at the January 24 open MAC meeting.)

c. The Geneva Convention of 1958 concerning territorial waters refers to “violations of order in navigation” and cannot be applied to “the case of an armed spy ship.” (We are not clear what the former phrase means. Possibly navigational error.)

d. The US side has signed treaties recognizing “the inviolability of territory of states.” The North Koreans were therefore fully justified in seizing the Pueblo.

The concluding North Korean statement apparently indicates their terms for the release of the crew of the Pueblo. The word “vessel” is significantly omitted.

“Therefore, we will give considerations to (will be able to consider) the issue of returning the crew members only when your side apologizes for the fact that the US Government dispatched the armed spy ship Pueblo to the territorial waters of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, conducted espionage activities and perpetrated hostile acts, assuring (and assure) that it will not commit such criminal acts again.”

It is the US turn to set the date of the next closed meeting. We believe that we should call for such a meeting as soon as possible. We will prepare an instruction for Admiral Smith and seek clearance on it by 6:00 p.m. today (8:00 a.m. February 16, Korean time), which will enable us to ask for a meeting the afternoon of February 16. In this instruction we will provide answers to the major points raised by the North Korean side and focus particularly on language that deals with “apologies” and “assurance” not to violate territorial waters.3

We will also prepare a message to Seoul giving Seoul the text of the Pueblo's Sailing Order which instructed the ship to go no closer than thirteen nautical miles from the North Korean land mass/offshore islands. Admiral Smith should be authorized to use the Sailing Order in the event that the North Koreans captured a copy of a 1966 CINCPAC Fleet directive which authorized surface patrols up to three nautical miles of the North Korean coast.4 This instruction was, of course, superseded by the Pueblo's Sailing Order.

We have checked with the office which controls reconnaissance flights over North Korea and have been informed that such flights are suspended pending receipt of approval from you. In a separate memo to you I am recommending that no reconnaissance be scheduled until there is a “go” sign from you.

If no progress is made at the next closed meeting, we shall have seriously to consider possible pressure tactics against the North Koreans. The Korean Working Group has staffed out five such measures:5 a. Air reconnaissance over North Korea;

b. Sailing Banner offshore North Korea under escort;

c. Seizing a North Korean vessel;

d. Limited blockade of North Korean naval vessels; and

e. Aerial feints against North Korean territory.

We are now considering a phased combination of some of these measures, possibly in conjunction with a stepped up psychological and diplomatic offensive against North Korea.

Recommendation:

That you approve the general course of action outlined above.6

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis.

2 The meeting took place on February 15 in Korea. A summary of the meeting was transmitted in telegram 4262 from Seoul, February 15; the verbatim text in telegram 4261 from Seoul, February 15. (Both ibid.)

3 Instructions for Admiral Smith for the seventh closed meeting were transmitted in telegram 116188 to Seoul, February 15, and modified in telegrams 116350 and 116402 to Seoul, both February 16. Smith was instructed to repeat the U.S. proposal “to conduct a full and impartial inquiry” after the ship and crew have been released, “to express regrets if any facts revealed by this inquiry would justify our doing so,” and to assure that all U.S. naval ships would “remain more than twelve nautical miles from your coast.” (All ibid.)

4 Telegram 116189 to Seoul, February 15, transmitted the text of the Sailing Order. Instructions for Smith on presenting the instructions to the North Koreans were transmitted in telegram 116190 to Seoul, February 15. (Both ibid.)

5 A paper prepared by the Korean Working Group, entitled “North Korean Aggression and the Pueblo Incident, Possible Future Strategies,” includes an attachment discussing the rationale behind each option. The paper was undated, but it is attached to a February 13 note from Jenkens. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part A [beginning February])

6 The memorandum does not indicate whether Rusk approved the course outlined by Berger.

277. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 277. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State1

Seoul, February 16, 1968, 1122Z.

4304. Subject: Seventh Senior MAC Members Meeting, Panmunjom, February 16.

1. In essence, preliminary review of attendees' notes and tape recording reveals today's meeting produced very little in the way of progress. Pak was notably less truculent today but stated his position firmly. That position was: (A) If Pueblo crew is to be returned at early date US side must change its attitude and provide apology and assurances of nature Pak demanded at sixth meeting.

(B) Return of ship cannot be subject of discussion on grounds there is no precedent for return of equipment used in espionage. Pak stated it “therefore will be better not to mention ship again.”

2. At today's meeting Pak showed photostats of alleged confessions Pueblo crew and of various ship documents2 as evidence to prove his assertion that “armed spy ship Pueblo” had intruded into NKorean territorial waters to commit espionage and hostile and aggressive acts on order of US Government. RAdm Smith requested and received copies of these photostats.

3. RAdm Smith read both statements contained State 116188 as amended.3 Pak summarily rejected these as “preposterous assertions” and several times played on theme that to cling to this attitude will not be beneficial to US side. On several occasions he also requested careful study of statements he made at sixth meeting. He did, however, expressly reserve right to comment on Smith's statements of today at next meeting and agreed to call next meeting as soon as he had received reply to Smith's statements. Smith gave him written copies of his two statements but Pak did not request copy of statement Smith would be able to sign.

4. NK attendees at seventh meeting were same as for sixth with exception absence one Jr. Lieutenant.

5. Verbatim text with language officer's comments on English translation of Pak's statements follows by immediate cable.4

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash; Nodis; Cactus. Rostow forwarded this telegram to President Johnson with an explanatory memorandum, February 16, which indicates that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IIa, Cactus Seoul Cables, February 10 to February 28, 1968)

2  Smith received copies of Bucher's and Murphy's alleged confessions, a photograph of the cover of a document entitled “Position Log Record” with a notation “Odd Day Log” and “Federal Supply Service 7530–28608363,” photographs of various record books, and photographs of two maps allegedly plotting the Pueblo's course. (Telegram 4301 from Seoul, February 16; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US) On February 16 the North Koreans also released a joint letter of apology from the entire crew of the Pueblo for having violated North Korean territorial waters and other acts. (Memorandum from Rostow to the President, February 16; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part A [beginning February])

3 See footnote 3, Document 276.

4 Transmitted in telegram 4305 from Seoul, February 16. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

278. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk 278. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, February 16, 1968.

SUBJECT

Next Steps in Light of the Seventh Closed Meeting

Since no progress was made at the Seventh Closed Meeting held yesterday afternoon at Panmunjom, I believe the following steps are now in order: 1. Aerial Reconnaissance—I have sent you a separate memorandum today recommending that you approve the flying of a Black Shield mission at the first opportune moment.2

2. Approach the Soviets—We do not know how fully the North Koreans have informed the Soviets of the closed talks. We therefore propose that Ambassador Bohlen pass to Ambassador Dobrynin verbatim transcripts of all seven meetings. These transcripts might be accompanied by a letter from you to Gromyko to be delivered by Dobrynin (Chip's suggestion).3

We are preparing a draft for Chip to look at. Its general line would be: a. We have abided by the Soviets advice;

b. We have not been belligerent and have kept the lid on in the United States and South Korea;

c. We have stopped further deployments and turned the Enterprise around;

d. We have direct dealings with North Korea and have had seven meetings;

e. We have not had the slightest indication from the North that they are in any hurry to turn over the crew, and they have made clear they have no intention of ever turning over the vessel;

f. We have reached the end of what we can say and concede;

g. Finally, that Mr. Vance has returned and confirms reports from our Ambassador that a very dangerous mood exists in South Korea, and continued raids across the DMZ or raids against the South could inflame the situation, and produce an even graver problem.

h. That we want the Soviet authorities to know where matters stand.

3. Request for Return of Dead and Wounded—We believe that this step should be deferred at least until after we have seen what results may be produced by the proposed approach to the Soviets.

4. Diplomatic Moves—We are preparing a circular telegram to a number of posts reviewing recent developments in Korea for their information and as a basis for answering inquiries.4

5. Next Meeting—Sit tight and wait. If NK's ask for meeting, we listen and rest on past representations and authorizations.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis.

2 A handwritten notation by Read states: “Approved by S 3 pm 2/16. BHR”

3 A handwritten notation by Read states: “Bohlen letter and verbatim of 6th meeting delivered to Dobrynin on 2/15.” Copies of that and subsequent letters are in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US.

4 Paragraph no. 5 was handwritten by Read. Telegram 117319 to 30 embassies and missions, February 17, contained a summary of the status of the Pueblo crisis. (Ibid.)

279. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 279. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 18, 1968.

For the President

Text of Cable From Ambassador Porter (Seoul 4321)

1. The following is in response to your request for an assessment of the outlook for the Pueblo case and contains my advice as to the next steps.2 I have no doubt that you have considered all the possibilities I list below in the form of gradually increasing pressure on North Korea. They seem to contain, up to a point at least, a useful course of action short of open conflict which may change the North Korean attitude. However, such actions as I list would lead inevitably to even greater engagement of U.S. prestige and therefore, if they fail to achieve the desired result, to a hard decision whether to strike a blow. They also involve the fate of the crew, the reaction of North Korean allies, and the problem of deciding and coordinating the South Korean role.

2. The North Koreans are now fully aware of the value of the men3 and are undoubtedly extracting very valuable information from them through use of hypnotic drugs and perhaps other devices. It would seem that this process could go on for some time and that, consequently, we will be kept waiting, cap in hand, at Panmunjom. It is but a short step from general “confession” to “request” of some crew members at least (probably the most valuable) to be allowed to remain in North Korea and serve the people in atonement for “past crimes.” In fact, almost anything can be expected from a regime like that of North Korea, whose super-Maoist outlook requires that the leader's name be mentioned at least once in practically every sentence of hours-long broadcasts.

3. Your latest instructions to the U.S. senior representative at Panmunjom contained a fairly obvious warning to the North Koreans that seven meetings have proved unsatisfactory.4 That will not move them. They are fully aware of our dissatisfaction, but as long as we are meeting and doing nothing else, they will not be moved by our views about progress or lack of it.

4. If it is now decided to apply other measures, I would begin by not responding for the time being to the next North Korean request for a closed meeting. I would not refuse a meeting—I would simply not respond. A brief message could be sent to North Korea through another channel to the effect we have had enough, that seven closed and three open meetings have proved useless. A clear warning about welfare of crew and responsibility of highest North Korean level should be included.

5. We could then commence a series of non-decisive measures, without verbal threats, which would engage North Korean attention. The first of these would be cancellation of leaves of all UN military elements along the DMZ.

6. After a short period (two or three days) to permit us to note any North Korean reaction, we could announce a black list of shipping to and from North Korean ports. The effect would be more psychological than substantial.

7. The next step would be to alert American dependents and non-essential personnel in Korea that the situation is not improving and that we advise visitors not to make plans to come to Korea for the time being. This would cause considerable comment and might have adverse effect on investment in Korea.

8. This would be followed by an air demonstration well inside [South] Korea, so handled as to have high press visibility.

9. At this point we would assess the North Korean reaction, if any, and decide in light of intelligence gathered through other sources whether to resume private meetings. This decision could of course be made anywhere along the line. If it seemed necessary to continue the process cited above, other measures such as blockade, closer-in naval/air demonstrations and actual evacuation of non-essential Americans here could be considered. Certainly, the last mentioned step would have ominous overtones.

10. I suggest serious consideration be given to the steps listed, in paragraphs 4 through 8, at the present time. If and as such a procedure is approved, we should take steps concurrently at the UN and elsewhere, to make known our feeling that we have done our best with the North Koreans who do not wish to settle the matter in a peaceful or honorable way.

11. I recommend this course of action because I have always felt it desirable to look and plan beyond what we are actually doing, especially with dealing with Communists. For understandable reasons, we have been a little too eager in this case and they have made us dance to their tune. As the process of recovering the men and ship now seems likely to be long drawn out for the reasons I have cited, I think our people would support a change of roles.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Memos, Vol. V. Secret. This is a retyped version of the telegram given to the President with an attached memorandum from Rostow, February 20, who wrote: “I am not at all sure that his [Porter's] particular scenario is the right one; but we had better get a scenario soon.” A note on the telegram indicates that the President saw it.

2 The telegram as sent to the Department of State referenced telegram 117379 to Seoul, February 17, in which Katzenbach requested Porter's assessment and advice on the Pueblo situation. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3 Intelligence reports indicated that Communist China had sent an interrogation team to question 17 crew members who had previously gathered intelligence off the Chinese coast and that the Soviet Union sent a team of electronics and decoding experts to assist with the interrogation of Pueblo crew members. (Telegram from the Commander of Naval Intelligence in Japan, February 16, 1529Z; Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Pueblo, 23 January 1968 to December 1968)

4  Smith had been instructed to state at the Seventh Meeting that it was clear “that further meetings will only be repetitious on both sides.” (Telegram 116350 to Seoul, February 16; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

280. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 280. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 20, 1968, 0528Z.

4368. Subject: Eighth Senior MAC Members Meeting at Panmunjom, February 20.

1. Following is text of preliminary report today's meeting received from RAdm Smith over secure wire system from advance camp.

Begin text. Meeting consisted largely of Pak reading long statement which was later passed across table. No acceptable solution yet apparent. Return of ship not mentioned. After a long justification of DPRK position and action Pak then said (English version follows):

“I have noted your statement made at the previous meeting that your side will assure that 'United States naval vessels will continue to be ordered to remain more than twelve nautical miles from your coast.' I have also noted that the indication of the willingness of the U.S. Government to make an apology.

Such being the case I considered that the issue of the crew will be easily solved in case your side does not try to make the apology after the return of the crew but makes a proper apology on the basis of the confessions made unanimously by all the crew members including the captain of their intrusions into the territorial waters of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and of their hostile acts.

At the previous meeting, you asked me when the crew of the Pueblo would be returned.

My answer to the question is that it completely depends upon your side which will take its position with regard to the matters raised by me in the above.

Therefore, your side should seriously study the statement I have made today.” End text.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Flash;Nodis; Cactus. A copy of this telegram was given to the President under a February 20 covering memorandum from Arthur McCafferty that indicates the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Misc. Papers, February to December 1968)

281. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 281. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 20, 1968, 0825Z.

4385. Subject: Eighth Senior MAC Members Meeting at Panmunjom, Feb 20. Ref: Seoul 4365.2

1. As you will note from reftel and complete text of today's meeting to follow shortly,3 Pak uses apology by entire crew to alter NKorean position as stated in sixth (para 4X, Seoul 4261) and seventh (paras 3C and 10, Seoul 4305) meetings.4 Position now is that confessions and apology by entire crew constitute all evidence US needs to take proper action and that the release of crew “will be easily solved” after US makes “proper apology.” In this meeting Pak perhaps indicated (see reftel) that NK side would be willing to consider expression of regret as an apology. It seems more likely, however, that “proper apology” means something more than post-release expression of regret dependent on findings of impartial inquiry. It clearly means apology in advance of crew's release. Pak's failure to repeat request for assurance in his final statement and his notation of RAdm Smith's statement at seventh meeting that US will assure that US naval vessels will continue to be ordered to remain more than twelve nautical miles from NK coast may indicate satisfaction on this essentially secondary point, but this is only inference and is not spelled out.

2. Main portion of Pak's statement today was devoted to repetitive references to fact that USG had dispatched armed spy ship to intrude into NKorean territorial waters to conduct hostile acts. (Although Pueblo's activities are described in various ways, phrase “hostile acts” is repeated in almost every other sentence.) Pak also makes passing reference to fact that DPRK has “full right” to punish crew members in accordance national law, but that in consideration of crew's apology for their crime, their oath not to repeat criminal acts, and their appeal for lenient forgiveness, NK side has expressed position that it will consider their return when USG has made proper apology and assurance. He also makes reference to six intrusions of territorial waters between January 15 and 23, to allegation that Pueblo fired on KPA naval craft, and to existence of “abnormal hostile relations” between DPRK and US.

3. Pak made no mention of return of vessel itself in this meeting.

4. RAdm Smith reports that Pak today was more polite and circumspect in his attitude than he has been at any other previous meeting. He spoke slowly, carefully and politely, and seemed determined to make his points without arousing emotional response. In light of fact that Pak made it clear in his opening statement that timing on return of crew would depend on prior US apology, RAdm Smith saw no point in demanding specific date for return.

5. Will pouch tape recording and English and Korean versions of Pak's statement which he provided RAdm Smith at close of meeting.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. A retyped copy of this telegram was given to the President under a February 20 covering memorandum from Arthur McCafferty that indicates the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Misc. Papers, February to December 1968)

2 Reference should be to telegram 4368 from Seoul; Document 280.

3 Telegram 4391 from Seoul, February 20, transmitted the verbatim text of the meeting. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69,POL 33–6, KOR N–US) A copy of this telegram was given to the President under a February 20 memorandum from Rostow in which Rostow suggested that “the issue is narrowed to a question of whether we are prepared to 'make an apology' after the return of the crew, or on the basis of their 'unanimous confessions.'” Rostow's memorandum indicates that the President saw the telegram. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IIa, Cactus Seoul Cables, February 10 to February 28, 1968)

4 Both telegrams transmitted the verbatim text of the respective meeting. Paragraph 4X of telegram 4261 from Seoul, February 15, quotes the North Koreans as saying they will consider returning the crew members only when the United States “apologizes for the fact that the US Government dispatched the armed spy ship Pueblo to the territorial waters of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, conducted espionage activities and perpetrated hostile acts, assuring (and assures) that it will not commit such criminal acts again.” Paragraphs 3C and 10 of telegram 4305 from Seoul, February 16, contain Pak's restatement of that position. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

282. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 282. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, February 22, 1968, 2142Z.

119560. 1. We are unable for a variety of reasons to meet the North Korean request at the eighth meeting for an apology based on the confessions and other documents as a condition for the release of the men. Since North Koreans have refused to accept our offer to express regrets after an official inquiry, in the event results of inquiry justify our doing so, we may be approaching a deadlock in these private meetings of U.S. and North Korean seniors at Panmunjom.

2. We are therefore contemplating a four-pronged effort to find a solution.

3. At the next meeting we propose to say that the North Korean proposal for an apology in advance of the release on the basis of the confessions and documents submitted to us does not offer any possibility of a solution. We will repeat our offer of an inquiry after the men and ship have been released and say we will submit the confessions and documents to the Board of Inquiry as evidence pertinent to the inquiry.2

4. If the foregoing is not acceptable to the North Koreans we will offer them the alternative of an investigating commission once the crew, documents and vessel are released, to examine all aspects of the seizure and all documents and statements, and make its finding public. Each side would appoint a member and the two sides would agree on a third member from another country to serve as chairman. If the findings find us culpable we will offer to express regrets.

5. It is virtually certain the North Koreans will reject the investigating commission and possibly both proposals, but at least they will have something to chew on.

6. Before calling the ninth meeting we would make the following additional moves.

7. Embassy Seoul would approach the Swiss and Swedish members of the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission, and inform them that the eight meetings have produced no result. For their private information, we have offered to express regrets after the men are released and an official inquiry held, should our findings warrant such expression, but the North Koreans are demanding an apology now based on the confessions and documents as a condition of release.3 That offers no possibility of a settlement as far as we are concerned. They should also be told of the alternate offer we will make at the next meeting. All this for their private information.

8. What we would like the Swiss and Swedes to do, or either one, depending on what Seoul and they decide, is to convey to the Poles and Czechs their alarm at the delay in releasing the vessel and crew. They can venture their opinion that the U.S. must hold an inquiry after the release, and that clearly the confessions and other documents will be introduced into that inquiry. Further that the Americans will have to publish the results, and if there was any violation or fault, the Americans would have no choice except to apologize. The North Koreans have got all the propaganda value they can out of the case, and what is now required are moves to ease the tensions arising from the seizure of the Pueblo. If the North Koreans try to press the U.S. too far and make impossible demands on them, the already grave situation can become even graver. They therefore urge the Czechs and Poles to try to impress on the North Koreans the need for an immediate release.4

9. The third move will be made with the Russians, possibly through Dobrynin or Thompson or both or in a highest level or ministerial level message.5 We will supply the Soviets with the transcripts of the eighth closed meeting, and indicate our plans for the ninth meeting. We would stress that an apology before an inquiry after the men are released is out of the question, and that if the North Koreans do not accept either of our proposals or come up with a reasonable solution, then we have reached the end of what we can say to the North Koreans or offer them. We could indicate our concern about reports that crew will be tried. We would let the Russians draw the conclusion that we shall soon have to tell our people and the UN that the meetings have produced no results. Our hope is that the Russians will get to the North Koreans before the next meeting or soon thereafter and urge on them the need to affect an early termination of this matter by release.

10. Our fourth approach will be to the Japanese and British, the two main non-communist trading or shipping nations with North Korea. They will be informed of our plans for the next meeting and of our general view that it looks as if we are reaching the end of these talks. They will be asked to inform the North Koreans privately at an appropriate time after the ninth meeting—if no progress is indicated there—that the gravity and tension in the area are such that they are considering suspension of all shipping into North Korean ports. We shall ask the Japanese and UK to agree in principle to suspend shipping if we should ask them to do so so that this is not regarded by them or the North Koreans as a bluff.6

11. The Japanese and UK will be told that we are not at the moment thinking of more forceful measures, and are still hoping to find some peaceful solution.

12. Japanese, UK and Soviets should be told that gravity of the problem should not be underestimated by them. We anticipate that March will see the start of a new North Korean campaign of violence in the DMZ and the despatch of more raider teams which, if the Pueblo and crew are still in North Korean hands, will further heighten the tensions which already exist. The release of the crew would draw the focal point of acute tension and make it easier to deal with the other causes of tension in the area.

13. The foregoing is for your information and comments which we would like soonest.

Katzenbach

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus. Also sent to Moscow, London, and Tokyo. Drafted by Berger, cleared by Rostow and Read, and approved by Rusk. Rostow sent a copy of this telegram to the President at his ranch in Texas, explaining that he, Rusk, and Clifford met that morning, February 22, and rejected apologizing to the North Koreans based on the alleged confession by the crew, and developed the approach contained therein. (Telegram CAP 80489 from Rostow to the President, February 22; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part B [beginning February])

2 In reply the Embassy in Moscow strongly urged omitting this proposal and proceeding directly to the next alternative. Thompson believed doing so “would greatly increase possibility of Soviets bringing pressure on North Koreans although I am not sanguine they will go very far in any event.” Thompson also noted that making “graduated concessions may encourage Koreans to hold out for more.” (Telegram 2888 from Moscow, February 23; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3 The Swiss and Swedish members had received similar information from the Czech and Polish members, who met with Pak on February 21 to discuss the status of the crisis. (Telegram 4418 from Seoul, February 22; ibid.)

4 At a meeting on February 25 Smith asked the Swede and Swiss members if they would impart this information to the Polish and Czech members and if they, in turn, would report it to the North Koreans. The Swede and Swiss members agreed and anticipated the information being passed to Pak. (Telegram 4476 from Seoul, February 25; ibid.) That and a follow-up meeting produced little, and in telegram 121942 to Seoul, February 28, the Department of State advised the Embassy that the NNSC approach had been taken “as far as can be useful for the time being.” (Ibid.)

5  Thompson's inclination was to send a letter from Rusk to Gromyko, if only to preserve the record, although that step could make it somewhat more difficult for the Soviets to act. If the Soviets were approached through an informal discussion, Thompson suggested a meeting between Rusk and Dobrynin. (Telegram 2888 from Moscow, February 23; ibid.)

6 The Embassy in Tokyo had no objection to approaching the Japanese Government, but could not “be sanguine as to results or, even if GOJ does agree, how much effect this would have on Pyongyang.” (Telegram 5847 from Tokyo, February 23; ibid.) The Embassy in London could not comment on the potential British reaction. (Telegram 6696 from London, February 23; ibid.) In telegram 120318 to Tokyo and London, February 24, the Department of State advised that a decision on the shipping suspension had been left open and instructed the embassies to bring the Japanese and British up to date on the current status of negotiations and on the U.S. approach to the upcoming ninth and tenth meetings. (Ibid.)

283. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 283. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 23, 1968, 0945Z.

4463. Ref: State 119560.2

1. We agree with general thrust of reftel, which as we interpret it is that (a) North Koreans show no signs of willingness accept our past proposal, (b) that closed meetings cannot be continued much longer, and (c) time has come to go to outer limits of our position, backed by as much support as we can muster by third parties. In general, we concur that efforts it outlines are worth undertaking. Following comments are designed primarily to indicate limitations that apply to such efforts and some pitfalls we foresee.

2. North Koreans are now awaiting our comment on their demand for apology in advance of crew release. If this is completely unacceptable to us, we agree that ninth meeting is time to say so. We see no harm in repeating our previous proposal for purpose of establishing absolute clear record of their refusal of our offer. (And we are convinced they will not accept it.) There is possibility that proposed procedure could result in Pak going back for further instructions, resulting in a tenth meeting before Adm Smith could table alternative suggested para 4 reftel.

3. We agree with implication in reftel that offer of investigating commission should be made, at least for record purposes and as indication our willingness to bring impartial judgment to bear on Pueblo case. It would no doubt be to our advantage with respect to world opinion to be able to say we made such an offer and that NKs rejected it, as we agree they would probably do. Certainly there is little in their private or public positions on Pueblo or in their past history to suggest they would agree to anything like impartial outside inquiry into their affairs.

4. In highly unlikely event they consent to concept of investigating commission, negotiations on establishment thereof would offer them variety of opportunities to delay and wrangle. There is serious doubt that we and they could ever agree on chairman to be chosen jointly by their rep and ours. They would doubtless balk at releasing crew before investigation began. They would also seek to enlarge scope of charges against us which commission should evaluate beyond mere question of whether Pueblo intruded into their territorial waters. In short, we should make this offer only if necessity to establish this kind of record is overriding and we should be prepared to state at outset in very clear terms just what it is we envisage commission will investigate.

5. Other moves suggested reftel would be useful in terms of eventually establishing our case before world opinion. We are not hopeful, however, that Swiss and Swedes can accomplish much. They can talk only to Czech and Polish members of NNSC, who in turn can talk only to Pak or to their own and perhaps Russian embassies in Pyongyang. As Dept recognizes, NNSC is channel of limited utility, available for passing information but not for exertion of pressure.

6. Para 8 reftel also raises some other questions, which precise Swiss and Swede would doubtless inquire about. If they tell the Pole and Czech that we would have no choice but to apologize if impartial inquiry reveals any violation or fault, what will this imply to North Koreans? Violation or fault with respect to territorial waters? Or violation in terms also of other NK charges: commission of espionage, hostile acts, war provocation, etc. Does it mean we will punish crew? Does apology mean we abandon position that Pueblo was naval vessel with right to be where it was and doing what it was, and that only recourse of NK under international law was to warn and escort it out of territorial waters?

7. We agree with reftel that attempt to engage support or pressure from UK, Japan and Sovs could be useful. We question, however, need to provide them with transcripts of closed meetings. This is more than we have been doing with ROKs, and if word got back to our friend here that we have provided something to Japanese and Soviets, in both form and substance, which goes beyond what we have told them, we would have another ROK eruption. Accordingly urge that Moscow, London and Tokyo not pass transcripts until Dept has decided what we do about ROKs in this matter.3

8. This leads of course to observation of immediate importance to us in Seoul that ROKs would not be very happy if they had full information on positions we have taken heretofore and would bitterly oppose notion that we would submit our case to investigating commission which would include friends of NK and before which US and NK would appear as equals. We may simply have to live with their reaction, but we should not minimize its importance simply because they are now quiescent.

9. Finally, while argumentation in para 12 reftel would be useful in appeals to Sovs, Japanese and Brits, we should recognize that it has no relationship to real attitudes of either North Koreans or ROKs. North Koreans find heightened tension in this area entirely to their advantage for a complex of reasons. They have deliberately raised tension and we fully expect that their future actions will be carefully calculated to maintain it. They have obviously decided long ago that stability in this area works only to advantage of their sworn enemies and they have taken serious risks to upset that stability. They must regard Pueblo seizure and Blue House raid as highly successful operations from their point of view, results of which indicate that US at least will tolerate very high degree of tension, perhaps one ruinous to US/ROK relations and stability in ROK, and that they run little risk of retaliation unless ROKs get out of hand.

10. As for the ROKs, return of Pueblo and crew under conditions which we have proposed would not relieve their anxieties, frustrations and desire to retaliate. We do not expect that prior return of Pueblo and crew would have material effect on ROK desire to retaliate. If North Koreans resume raids in March, ROKs will want to retaliate whether or not crew has been returned.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus.

2  Document 282.

3 In reply the Department of State made note of Porter's comments, but was reluctant to provide the South Koreans with transcripts “because of well-known ROK proclivity of leaking documents to press.” The Embassy was instructed to continue briefing the President or Prime Minister on the substance of the meetings. (Telegram 120307 to Seoul, February 14; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

284. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 284. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, February 24, 1968, 1853Z.

120290. Subject: Instructions for Ninth Closed Meeting.

1. You should request next closed meeting soonest.

2. At next meeting, Admiral Smith should open with following statement. a. In previous meetings, I have made a specific proposal for resolving the controversy over the Pueblo and its crew. I have made it quite clear that the US Government is prepared upon the return of the ship and its crew to conduct a full inquiry and to make the results public. We have taken note of the various documents which you have handed over in these meetings. I can assure you that these documents2 are pertinent to the proposed inquiry and will be submitted to it. It would, of course, be important to authenticate these documents by testimony of the crew members involved.

b. As I have also previously made clear, we are willing to express regret if the inquiry would justify our doing so.

c. An expression of regret based exclusively on the documents you have provided might later prove inconsistent with the facts which a full and impartial inquiry would disclose. Moreover, until the officers and the men of the Pueblo have been released, the evidence which you have submitted is unverifiable either by us or by anyone else. In any event, an expression of regret on our part prior to a full inquiry into the facts and in advance of the release would not be understood by the American people.

d. Our previous discussions in these meetings indicate that factual questions divide us. There is no dispute that the Pueblo's mission was to gather intelligence. We disagree as to precisely where this mission was carried out and where the Pueblo was seized. The U.S. is not reluctant to have these factual issues resolved.

e. We would welcome any impartial resolution of this disagreement and would be willing to have the facts reviewed by any impartial, international, factfinding body. For example, we would accept assignment of this task to any person or persons named by the President of the International Court of Justice.

f. We are prepared to express regrets, if the international body should find that, in violation of its orders, the Pueblo entered waters closer than 12 nautical miles to North Korea.

g. Whatever the body agreed upon, we do not see how an impartial inquiry into the facts could be conducted with the crew still in North Korean hands. We believe it would be appropriate to return the crew immediately to the United States. We would, however, accept release of the crew to the custody of a neutral party, for example the Swiss Government.

h. I urge you to consider most seriously adopting one of the concrete approaches to settling this matter which we have placed before you.

3. Pak will presumably not be in a position to respond to our proposals at this meeting. If this is the case, Smith should say: a. As you can see we have given most serious consideration to everything you have said in these meetings. We have placed before you concrete proposals which, if accepted by you, would permit settlement of the matter before us.

b. You have now held the crew of the Pueblo for over a month. We can see no reason why you should want to detain them further.

c. I hope that you will give me an answer to our proposals at our next meeting which will result in an immediate release.3

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Repeated to Tokyo, London, Moscow, Stockholm, and Bern. Drafted by Yager; cleared by Walsh, Clifford, and Rostow; and approved by Katzenbach. Forwarded to the President at his ranch in Texas; that copy indicates that the President saw it. (Telegram CAP 80531, February 24, Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part B [beginning February])

2 The phrasing here and elsewhere was changed to “photographs of documents” on Seoul's recommendation that merely to refer to “documents” could “mislead the NKs into believing that we accept these photographs as valid evidence” and because of Smith's reluctance “to concede that any meaningful documents have been received at these meetings if this is not really the case.” (Yager/Ericson/Smith Telcon, February 24, and telegram 120342 to Seoul, February 25; both in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3 The ninth senior MAC members meeting was held on February 26. In reporting on the meeting the Embassy noted that “Pak was completely unprepared for what RAdm. Smith had to say and was forced to discard all statements he had prepared in advance.” (Telegram 4503 from Seoul, February 26; ibid.) The verbatim text was transmitted in telegram 4504 from Seoul, February 26 (ibid.) and forwarded as telegram CAP 80584, February 26, to the President at his ranch in Texas by Rostow, who noted in an introductory opening paragraph that the North Korean response to the U.S. proposals was “surprise and virtual silence,” meaning that “the next meeting will be critical.” CAP telegram 80584 contains a note that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part B [beginning February])

285. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 285. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

Washington, February 24, 1968, 1901Z.

120291. For Ambassador. We now believe oral demarche to Soviets is more appropriate at this juncture of Pueblo situation than formal communication.2 Request you see Gromyko soonest and discuss situation along following lines (Bohlen discussed problem with Dobrynin February 23 when latter called on another matter, but only in general terms):3

1. It is now a month since North Korean patrol boats forcibly seized the USS Pueblo in international waters. Despite the clear illegality of this action and despite the strong emotions which it has aroused in the United States, we have shown considerable restraint and made every effort to arrive at a quick, peaceful solution. As you know, we have acted on your advice by making certain adjustments in our posture in the hope of facilitating a prompt settlement.

2. We have now had eight private meetings in direct talks at Panmunjom. As you know, copies of the verbatim transcripts of the meetings have been given to Ambassador Dobrynin, since we wish to be sure you are fully informed on what has transpired at Panmunjom.

3. Our position in these talks has been moderate and reasonable. We offered to conduct a full and impartial inquiry after the ship and its personnel have been returned to us. We further offered to express our regrets if that inquiry develops facts which would warrant our doing so. The North Koreans reacted negatively to these proposals. At the next meeting, we will offer to submit the Pueblo problem to an impartial fact-finding body provided the personnel are first released into our custody or into neutral hands. We will tell the North Koreans that if the commission should find that, in violation of its instructions, the Pueblo entered waters closer than 12 miles to the North Korean coast, we would express regret.

4. We do not see how we can go further. Nor do we believe that by any objective standards should we be expected to do more. The present acute tensions in the area have not diminished. I think you will agree that it is in your interest as well as ours that this vexing problem is resolved without further delay.

5. These tensions have their origin primarily in the behavior of the North Koreans. You know of the raid on Blue House and of the numerous violations of the DMZ. Beyond this, the North Koreans have recently voiced irresponsible threats which can only serve to inflame the situation.

6. Let me give you just a few examples. At the open meeting of Military Armistice Commission on February 19, senior North Korean representative declared that North Korea would exchange “punishment for punishment, retaliation for retaliation, and all-out war for all-out war.” Just prior to this, on February 17, North Korean Vice Premier Pak Song-chol made an equally intemperate statement in which he concluded: “If the US imperialists and the Pak Chong-hui clique should dare attempt some retaliatory action, it will at once mean the beginning of war. The US imperialists and their stooges should take a square look at reality and act with discretion. Whether a new war will break out or not in Korea depends entirely on the attitude of the US imperialists and their stooges. The more the US imperialists cling to intimidation, blackmail, and war clamors, the more complicated the current situation will become. If they gain anything from this, it will be only corpses and death.”

7. North Korean spokesmen have said publicly that the Pueblo crew may be tried and punished. This was said here in Moscow by the North Korean Charge d'Affaires. This is highly irresponsible behavior, and clearly any such action would seriously aggravate the already tense situation.

8. Mr. Cyrus Vance recently returned from talks with high officials in Seoul and confirms reports from our Ambassador that the South Koreans' patience is sorely tried. They are angered at what the North Koreans have already done and what they understand they plan to do in the future. Captured agents over the past years have provided a picture of size and character of North Korean training program to infiltrate saboteurs and assassins. There are other indications that point to a step-up in campaign of violence against Republic of Korea in the very near future. We should both consider very carefully what might develop in this potentially explosive situation, if Republic of Korea is subject to more depredations such as attack on Blue House on January 21.

9. We are doing our utmost to restrain the Republic of Korea, and we hope Soviets are exerting similar effort with North Koreans. Neither of us is in complete control of situation, but we should do what we can to prevent a flare-up. Immediate release of Pueblo and its crew will contribute to relief of the tension. We wanted you to know these facts regarding the situation before the North Koreans made any reply to our offer.4

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus. Repeated to Seoul. Drafted by Toon; cleared by Walsh, Clifford, Yager, and Rostow; and approved by Katzenbach.

2 The Department of State had earlier considered sending a letter from Rusk to Gromyko. The thrust of the draft letter paralleled the instructions contained in telegram 120291. (Telegram 117432 to Moscow, February 19; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus Ia, Cactus State Cables, February 11 to 29, 1968)

3 A memorandum of their February 23 conversation and telegram 120035 to Seoul, February 24, summarizing the meeting are in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. On February 15 Rusk and Bohlen met with Dobrynin and briefly discussed the Pueblo incident. (Memorandum of conversation, February 15; ibid.)

4  Thompson met with Gromyko on February 26; see Document 286.

286. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 286. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 1

Moscow, February 26, 1968, 1405Z.

2913. Ref: State 120291.2

1. I saw Gromyko at 1430 today and made oral demarche per reftel.

2. Gromyko confirmed receipt verbatim transcripts Panmunjom meetings which had been given to Dobrynin and wondered if I could summarize to him proceedings last meeting. This connection, it became obvious that some confusion exists in Soviet mind re number of private meetings held, since Kornienko, who also present, said they had received transcripts of eight meetings and thought another, ninth, meeting had taken place on February 21. In particular, Gromyko wondered whether we had answered all questions put forward by North Koreans and whether any progress had been made.

3. I said I did not have report on last meeting with me, but noted North Koreans had demanded apology before release of ship and crew and rejected our offer conduct impartial inquiry on our own. Now we intended offer impartial investigation by completely outside body.

4. Gromyko said that on basis information Soviets had from different sources he could say little at this time. If he spoke at length, he was afraid that would result in repetition of what had been said in Kosygin's message and his own statement to me earlier. He stressed Soviets hoped very much problem would be settled, the sooner the better. Soviets not sure U.S. using all possibilities. He said he had noted in my statement assertion that detention had been illegal; in fact, entire U.S. position seemed to be based on this assertion. He did not wish dwell at length on this point but wanted to state that Soviet views on it as stated before still valid.3

5. I said we believed disagreement may be result of each side's basing itself on different facts. Therefore, we making offer of impartial investigation those facts. As I had noted in my oral statement, it difficult see what more we could do. In any event, we could not rely on statements by other side or other statements which we doubt had been made voluntarily.

6. Asking rhetorically if U.S. would agree to impartial investigation of U.S. statements re situation in other parts of world, Gromyko said proposition would not satisfy other side. He wondered whether North Koreans had accepted proposal. I explained we had not yet made this offer, but intended to do so at next meeting. Gromyko said question arose what could be regarded as impartial. After all, past U.S. actions in Korea had been under UN label but UN had had nothing to do with them. I stressed we meant an impartial investigation which should be acceptable to North Koreans.

7. Gromyko said he was sure we knew Soviets wanted problem resolved as soon as possible. I said we believed Soviets rational people, and we also thought the sooner this dangerous situation resolved the better for everyone. As to Gromyko's remarks re impartiality, we did not exclude possibility facts might be against us but we prepared accept results impartial investigation.

8. Gromyko said main thing was for U.S. to tell its people not to engage in this sort of activity; as experience had shown, such activity might result in precarious situation. I pointed out our crews had their instructions to stay out of territorial waters.

9. Comment: Although Gromyko was cautious in his reaction, I believe he was impressed by position we are taking and would guess that Soviets will at least recommend if not urge North Koreans to accept.

Thompson

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis; Cactus.

2  Document 285.

3 The Soviet view was also repeated in a letter from Kosygin to Prime Minister Wilson written in response to a British appeal that the Soviets exert their influence with the North Koreans to resolve the crisis. (Telegram 6716 from London, February 26; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

287. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 287. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, February 29, 1968, 0120Z.

122259. Subject: Instructions for Tenth Closed Meeting.

1. Since ball is now in North Korean court, we see no need to supply Admiral Smith with detailed instructions for next closed meeting. Smith will probably have to do no more than listen to and acknowledge Pak's response to new proposals which Smith made at ninth meeting.

2. We recognize that Pak may try to avoid direct and specific response on our new proposals by repeating position he has taken at earlier meetings and merely denouncing our position in general terms. If Pak does adopt this or other unresponsive line, Smith should say: a. At this meeting, I had hoped to receive your serious and carefully considered reactions to the various concrete proposals for settling the Pueblo case which I made at our last meeting. I urge you to study those proposals more thoroughly and come to the next meeting prepared either to accept one of them or to tell me in precisely what respect you believe they should be modified, and why.

b. We have now had ten private talks. We should be well past the stage of general discussion and should focus on specific means of reducing the dangerous level of tension in this area by releasing the officers and men of the Pueblo from the detention in which they have been held for far too long, and by returning the ship itself to United States control.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Yager; cleared by Brown and Warnke; and approved by Katzenbach.

288. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 288. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, March 4, 1968, 0855Z.

4652. Subj: Summary and comments on tenth closed senior MAC members meeting at Panmunjom, March 4.2

1. Today's meeting lasted 48 minutes, mostly devoted to uncompromising presentation by Pak of NKorean position as stated in sixth and subsequent meetings and equally firm rejection of proposals we put forward at ninth meeting. At end of his opening statement, Pak handed RAdm Smith English version with heading again describing him as rep of Govt of DPRK. He also gave Smith handwritten letter addressed to President Johnson purportedly signed by entire crew, including wounded. Letter says wounded in final stages of recovery. Text of letter being transmitted with comments by septel.3 Smith accepted letter as “document addressed to President of the United States” to avoid any endorsement of authenticity.

2. Following Pak's long statement, Smith made statement based on guidance contained para two, State 122259.4 Pak responded with shortened version of his previous line. Meeting ended with Pak proposing recess after Smith had said he would refer Pak's statement to appropriate authority and advise Pak when he had reply.

3. Believe following aspects this meeting are noteworthy: A. Communists obviously used interval between meeting to draft letter to President Johnson with considerable care and to obtain (or possibly forge some of) crew's signatures.

B. Pak had carefully rehearsed his presentation. He deliberately projected tough image during portion of his statement in which he rejected impartial inquiry by third party and indicated U.S. in no position to “accept” release of crew to neutral custody. He added in very harsh tones that such remarks constitute defilement of DPRK sovereignty and asked rhetorically and sneeringly whether this meant U.S. believes DPRK has neither law nor ability to deal with situation. He concluded this most dramatic portion of his presentation with statement in softer tones that it would be height of folly for US to believe that it can compel DPRK to accept “unwarrantable” claims.

C. Pak's presentation contained only vaguest references to possibility that crew might be tried, but implication was present in such statements as: “As long as your side keeps on taking such an unwarranted stand as present at our meetings, our side will have no other way but to understand that your side has no concern about the fate of the crew of the Pueblo and tries to evade the responsibility for them. Accordingly, our side will have no alternative but to consider another step.”

D. In arguing for U.S. acceptance of DPRK position, Pak at one point referred to existence of “precedents of having settled similar cases in the past under the terms acceptable to both sides,” by which he doubtless meant helicopter crew.

E. Pak clearly left door open for further meetings, although there equally clearly no give in DPRK position.

F. There was nothing in Pak's presentation to indicate DPRK thinking in terms of prisoner swap or ransom as suggested last week by Czech and Polish NNSC members.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2 A verbatim text of the meeting was transmitted in telegram 4655 from Seoul, March 4. (Ibid.)

3 The texts of telegram 4652, the letter from the crew, and Porter's comments, which center on an analysis of the signatures appearing on the letter, were transmitted in telegram CAP 80651, March 4, from Rostow to President Johnson. In the letter, which had been read over Radio Pyongyang, the crew admitted violating North Korean territorial waters, argued that North Korea properly deserved an apology, and urged the President to issue an apology so that the crew could return to the United States. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Vol. Ib, Part B [beginning February])

4  Document 287.

289. Memorandum From Alfred Jenkins of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) 289. Memorandum From Alfred Jenkins of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, March 4, 1968.

SUBJECT

Tactics in the Pueblo Case

1. We should rule out definitively as inappropriate, unseemly, not in the American character, and a knuckling under to simple blackmail: —a swap of Korean prisoners, of whatever ilk, for the Pueblo crew;

—any form of ransom;

—an apology if we are unable to establish that one is called for.

2. I reluctantly conclude that our best tack for the foreseeable future is sticking to the diplomatic pressures line, while building up, rapidly, substantially, and very overtly, ROK capabilities.

3. U.S. forces in Korea, although understrength, should not be built up at this time because of Vietnam needs, balance of payments problems (the 25,000 men required for minimal meaningful buildup would cost $200 million per year), and various adverse readings which would be taken in many quarters because of greater American presence, other than in Vietnam, on the Asian continent.

4. While something like symmetrical retaliation theoretically would have been the best move immediately after the Pueblo capture, I do not believe we would now profit by small-scale harassing military actions. If there were one or more ships which could be “snatched,” I would not rule this out, but the Korean ships stay too close in and non-Korean ships should be off limits. Other harassing military actions would not be designed to release the crew, but would probably have the opposite effect and would damage our legal position as the injured party. Such harassing actions would invite retaliation. There would almost certainly be gradual escalation and a second front could easily result.

5. While we are on the diplomatic course, and now that tensions are reduced, we might release a carrier force for Vietnam duty. It could return fairly quickly if needed and meanwhile its departure could give an excuse to the North Koreans to take a favorable step forward if they have any reason to do so.

6. In addition to beefing up ROK capabilities, we should build up our overall strategy posture from which we can speak and be listened to. This would mean calling up reserves, and keeping larger reserves in CONUS, but the better we are prepared the less likely we are to have to use additional force. We do not now have the military posture to take risks in Korea, according to the JCS.

7. While we should be ready to talk at all times, we should not play along in seeming weakness with the North Korean propaganda game by seeming to want frequent meetings. Each side has given its position and I don't see how we can alter our last position appreciably. Over-eagerness is weakness.

8. We should keep the NNSC channel open, but I am not sanguine as to its utility.

9. We may yet want to return to the UN, particularly if a trial seems likely and the Panmunjom talks can be shown to have broken down because of North Korean unreasonableness. We should prepare thoroughly for this contingency through such means as a detailed handwriting analysis of the recent letter to the President, and its signatures. The North Koreans are on a weak wicket in any multilateral forum, because of the increasingly convincing record of fabrication on their part.

10. As galling as it is, I fear that on this Pueblo case we may have to lick our wounds, wait out release of the crew, and wait our chances for action when the advantage is more ours. The only way I see where we could act sooner would be in Vietnam—presumably by mining Haiphong Harbor. North Korean actions seem partly designed to aid the Communist Vietnam effort and it is important that we not permit that to happen.

11. Some people in town are playing with the idea of coming a bit closer to what the North Koreans want by way of an apology. I do not quite understand what we have to apologize for unless we did invade territorial waters, but this presumably we do not yet know. It seems to me that absolutely basic to problems of this sort is the integrity, prestige and credibility of the United States. As tempting as it might be to make an apology—with tongue quite prominently in cheek—in order to ransom the 83 crew members, I believe that such opportunistic duplicity would be playing loose with the ultimate security of 200 million Americans. In today's world the adversary can escalate—short of allout war—to match us. Short of allout war, then, our one tremendous advantage over the enemy lies not in what we do but in what we are. That must be safeguarded at all costs. It means we should not apologize unless an apology is in order just as it means we should apologize, with dignity, and promptness, if one is in order.

Alfred Jenkins 2

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council History, Pueblo Crisis, 1968, Vol. VII, Day-by-Day Documents, Part 14. Top Secret. A copy was sent to Jorden.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

290. Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Brown) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) 290. Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Brown) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)1

Washington, March 4, 1968.

SUBJECT

Next Steps on Pueblo

1. Facts:

North Korea at the tenth closed meeting: A. Rejected our offer of impartial inquiry.

B. Insisted on apology.

C. Indicated apology would make release of men possible.

D. Threatened “some other measure” if no apology forthcoming.

2. Next Steps Available:

A. Restate our ninth meeting position, i.e., that we are prepared to submit factual issues to an impartial international body, that we would express regrets if warranted by results of inquiry by such body and that we would accept release of men to neutral body prior to inquiry.

B. Try to get NNSC to issue appeal for release of men primarily on humanitarian grounds.

C. Military moves (aerial feints, aerial reconnaissance, blockade, sailing USS Banner off North Korea under escort, etc.).2

D. Exploit internal inconsistencies in North Korean case (alleged confessions and navigational data) by either: (1) Informing Russians of these inconsistencies and of fact we are seriously considering exposing North Korean case at United Nations, or3

(2) Simply publishing our analysis of North Korean “evidence”.

E. Offer in private Panmunjom talks to express regrets, concurrently with release of Pueblo crew, for any hostile acts contrary to international law which may have been committed by the Pueblo.4

F. Ask North Koreans for precise language which they would accept as expression of regret justifying concurrent release of Pueblo and crew.

3. Relevant Considerations:

A. Impartial inquiry non-starter. If held it could only show up North Koreans as liars.

B. If we stick to our present position, there is high risk of men being put on trial and punished.

C. NNSC appeal almost certainly non-starter. North Koreans not interested in humanity.

D. Available military action would be mere pin-pricks unlikely to move North Koreans, and would probably prejudice chances of getting men back.

E. North Koreans would probably reject conditional expression of regret and insist on unqualified apology.

F. Apology, whether conditional or otherwise, can be undercut after return of crew. In tenth meeting, General Pak hinted that 1964 helicopter case might be precedent. In that case (inadvertent intrusion), the North Koreans insisted that we admit “criminal espionage” as well as intrusion. General Combs signed receipt admitting “crimes of espionage and illegal intrusion…” and guaranteeing “that it will not commit such criminal acts… in the future”, but repudiated this admission publicly the next day. There appears to have been little or no adverse reaction in the US to the temporary admission of wrong-doing made to get the men back.

G. Soviets might be disturbed by any threat to expose North Korean “evidence” and might press Pyongyang to settle Pueblo case promptly.

H. Course followed by US in Pueblo case could have important impact on our relations with ROK and possibly also on those with South Viet-Nam and Thailand. Thus, abject apology, particularly after prolonged private negotiations, would outrage Seoul and probably also Saigon and Bangkok. On the other hand, open attack on North Korean evidence would clearly gratify these allies.

4. Recommendation:

Smoking out North Koreans on precise language of acceptable expression of regret would keep the private talks going and possibly provide us with useful information without in any way prejudicing any of the other options listed in 2. above. We therefore recommend approval of the attached draft instruction to Seoul for the eleventh meeting.5

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis.

2 Next to this paragraph Walsh added the following handwritten notation: “Bohlen opposes this.”

3 Next to this paragraph Walsh added the following handwritten notation: “Bohlen thinks this premature.”

4 Next to this paragraph Walsh added the following handwritten notation: “Bohlen prefers this.”

5 The draft instruction was not attached. The memorandum does not indicate if the recommendation was approved or disapproved.

291. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 291. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, March 5, 1968, 0825Z.

9439. 1. Last night we heard reading by an American voice of letter addressed to President which Smith was handed yesterday by Pak at Panmunjom. The tone of voice was subdued, as well it might be in view of degrading contents of letter. It is unimaginable that all 82 Americans of Pueblo would agree to such a condemnation of their government, their service and their principles after hardly more than one month's confinement unless they were subjected to harshest mental/physical pressures. I do not believe for a moment that all of them did. FBIS English language tape of 1100/1200 GMT March four Pyong- yang broadcast to Southeast Asia would contain text mentioned.

2. Broadcast no doubt monitored by governmental and private services, and if its sequence of admission of guilt and abject apology comes to public attention at home strong reactions may result. Also, it would seem from present handling of letter that NKs intend to keep repeating it, perhaps to lay foundation for whatever next move they may contemplate.

3. It is important, nevertheless, that officers and crew of Pueblo not be judged prematurely. Hopefully news media will cooperate in this. I suggest to deal with that aspect of matter and the problem generally, time may have arrived for you to consider complete press briefing in Washington during which efforts of USG to bring about reasonable solution of this matter could be related. There would seem no longer to be basis for continued silence on Panmunjom meetings. The NKs appear to be preparing field for further action against crew, and their use and re-use of “confessions,” “admissions of guilt,” and “apologies” should no longer go unchallenged. I do not know whether there is still a steel fist inside that silken glove, everything considered, but I am sure that our approach to this problem has been characterized by both restraint and reason of which our people would approve.

4. It might be desirable to give Pak notice at next meeting that we intend to publicize our proposals to NK which we consider fair and reasonable, and then to note his reaction. It will probably be nasty, and could bring about end to present series of discussions at Panmunjom. NKs would call for and claim we are breaking understanding for mutual agreement on what we would say publicly about those proceedings. It might also force their hand on trial of crew, and we should be prepared to face this contingency.2 But Pak's performance yesterday confirmed what we here have believed since this exercise began—that is, that we will not be able to get back these men on anything resembling our terms. The exercise was necessary but unless it is desirable to keep it going to cover up other possibly useful contacts, it seems to have run its course. As to next moves, several possibilities were mentioned in State 119560 (para ten) and Seoul 4321.3 They offer no panaceas but unless we undertake some psywar and/or economic measures we will soon be without even the appearance of motion provided by the fact of the closed sessions at Panmunjom.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2 In telegram 125332 to Seoul, March 6, the Department of State advised that a response to an announcement that the crew would be tried was being considered and asked for Embassy suggestions to prepare for that eventuality. The Department of State also admitted that the closed talks may have reached a dead end, but they would not be broken off yet. (Ibid.)

3  Documents 282 and 279.

292. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to Secretary of Defense Clifford 292. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to Secretary of Defense Clifford 1

Washington, undated.

I–21216/68

SUBJECT

Future Steps Regarding the Pueblo Incident

Secretary McNamara informed Secretary Rusk that the Department of Defense desired no role in coordinating the diplomatic initiatives designed to secure the return of the Pueblo and its crew. Accordingly, our only activity relating to the Pueblo incident has been the preparation of information on the incident itself for members of Congress, and the preparation, in coordination with the Joint Staff and State, of some general military options papers.

As you know, the North Koreans gave us some photostatic copies of maps which purport to prove that on six occasions the Pueblo intruded into North Korea's claimed territorial waters. The attached book2 prepared by the Department of the Navy demonstrates that these maps are almost certainly false.

The North Koreans have now given us a letter to President Johnson, purported to be signed by all surviving members of the Pueblo crew, confessing again that they were indeed seized in North Korean waters and asking the President to apologize for this act. A copy of the letter is attached.3 I believe that we should consider using this letter as a basis for an apology if the North Koreans would agree in advance that our apology would result in the release of the crew of the Pueblo. If interrogations of the crew confirm our belief that the North Korean charges are false, this fact could be given wide publicity, and we could retract the apology which we had based solely on information provided to us by the North Koreans.

Paul C. Warnke

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 385.3. Secret. The memorandum indicates that Clifford saw it on March 5.

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

293. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 293. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, March 9, 1968, 0020Z.

4795. Subj: Eleventh Senior MAC Members Meeting at Panmunjom, March 9, 1968.

1. Meeting began at 1200 hrs March 9 and ended at 1253.2

2. RAdm Smith opened by reading statement contained State 125424.3 Apparently anticipating that Smith would reiterate our basic position, Pak responded after short interval with prepared statement which began by referring to fact that at previous meetings he had “already clearly” told Smith about “unwarrantedness of your side's claim on the matter of crew of armed spy ship Pueblo.” This prepared statement contained much of language Pak used at past two meetings. In essence he said if US sticks to its position this will only create artificial difficulties, further complicate situation, and give no help in solving matter. If US really wants to solve problem of crew, it should not ask NKorea to return criminals for nothing but should accept just and reasonable NKorean proposal which will make it possible to have crew returned.

3. At mid-point of his statement Pak again implied that crew might be punished, saying in effect that if US sticks to its proposal NKorea can only conclude that US has neither concern about fate of crew nor intention to bear responsibility for them, in which case NKorea “would have no alternative but to take another step.”

4. RAdm Smith took this opportunity to use language from State 1231574 to effect that any trial, punishment or threat of punishment can only aggravate already serious situation. Pak asked for written copy of this statement, which was provided.

5. After pause of nineteen minutes, during which he carefully wrote and checked his reply, Pak made statement which in essence repeated language of his first statement, again describing US proposal as request for return of crew in exchange for “nothing” from US side.

6. Meeting ended with brief exchange devoted to Smith's request that NKorean side carefully study US statements and to agreement that Pak would call next meeting.

7. Comment: Beyond Pak's keen interest in obtaining written copy of Smith's statement on implications of punishment of crew, meeting contained nothing noteworthy. Pak was restrained and reasonably cooperative, reading his own statements with effort to reflect air of conviction.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2 Telegram 4797 from Seoul, March 9, transmitted the verbatim text of the meeting. (Ibid.)

3 In telegram 125424 to Seoul, March 6, Smith was instructed to restate the proposals submitted at the ninth meeting and request a North Korean response to them. (Ibid.)

4 Dated March 1. (Ibid.)

294. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 294. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, March 9, 1968, 1856Z.

127735. Offer to express regret after release of crew and if impartial inquiry discloses violation of NK waters has now twice been refused and Pak has twice hinted that if stalemate persists NK may take “other steps,” presumably trial and/or punishment of crew.

We are considering next steps, among them the following proposal: 1) At next meeting Smith should try to pin Pak down on fact that crew will in fact be released without trial or punishment concurrently with expression of regret and assurance that US ships will continue to be ordered to stay out of 12 mile limit.

2) If Pak officially confirms this we would then propose to express regret at time of release “for any hostile acts contrary to international law which may have been committed by the USS Pueblo.”

(Obviously there is an infinity of variations on this theme which could be considered in drafting our expression of regret.)

3) Immediately upon release of the crew we would publish our refutation of the NK “evidence” together with a blast at North Koreans for both their duplicity and their series of illegal and aggressive actions. This might give significant comfort to ROKs.

We recognize that almost any variation of this formula would cause difficulties with the ROKs, as it would for us here. We recognize also that North Koreans may well not accept any such formula and ultimately face us with choice between a helicopter type of statement and impasse.2

We would appreciate your comments on this proposal, your suggestions as to any variations in it which would make it more palatable to the ROKs and any alternative courses of action which you may wish to propose.3

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Brown, cleared by Walsh and Katzenbach, and approved by Brown.

2 The Department of State prepared variations of the wording of a conditional apology based on the helicopter case in the event that course was adopted. (Memorandum from Brown to Katzenbach, March 7; ibid.)

3 In telegram 4798 from Seoul, March 10, Porter replied that the proposed statements were generally acceptable and should be tried. He agreed that the approach would displease the South Koreans, but noted “ROK displeasure should not be controlling factor at this point, and we agree that if one is possible, a tough, post-release statement would ease matters.” (Ibid.) After reflecting further, however, Porter submitted a more pessimistic view of the approach, cautioning that North Korean demands for an apology and an admission of wrongdoing from the United States could have unforeseen and completely unacceptable ramifications. (Telegram 4851 from Seoul, March 12; ibid.)

295. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze) 295. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze)1

Washington, March 11, 1968.

SUBJECT

Legal and Tactical Considerations in Pueblo Case

I am increasingly concerned about the American stance in the Pueblo situation. The position expressed at the Panmunjom closed meetings is basically the reiteration of the fact that we have no convincing proof that the Pueblo came within the 12 mile limit claimed by the North Korean Government, that we will not be in a position to determine this question until the crew is returned to us or to neutral third party custody, that we will investigate the charges promptly upon such return and, if the North Korean claim appears justified, will express appropriate regret.

This position appears to concede that we must respect the 12 mile limit and that, on its own definition of the territorial sea, the contiguous state may seize naval vessels of another power that venture within it and intern the crews.

Up to this point in history, our legal position has been that we do not recognize a territorial sea more than 3 miles from any shore and that instructions to our vessels to remain further off shore are an exercise of discretion rather than a legal necessity. Moreover, we have maintained that, under international law, the only right of the contiguous state is demand that the intruding vessel leave the territorial waters.

The closest approach to its shores claimed by North Korea is about 7.6 nautical miles. The purported confessions of the Commanding Officer and crew admit such “intrusion” and implicitly assume that this is a violation of legitimate territorial sea claims. Our reaction has not emphasized that, under our construction of international law, our vessels are on the high seas when outside the 3 mile limit, that all American naval personnel are aware of this US position, and that the North Korean action was illegal even on their statement of the facts.

As a legal proposition, therefore, we should not be asserting our willingness to express regrets if subsequent investigation shows that the North Korean claims are correct and the “confessions” are bona fide. Under our legal interpretation, no claim of the North Koreans, even if accurate, could lead to an admission that we have violated the territorial waters of North Korea. And, as noted above, even if our ship had been within 3 miles, international law would not justify the seizure of our crew and ship and the killing of an American service- man.

It thus appears to me that we have already given away our legal position on the Pueblo seizure. We have indicated a willingness to apologize if the Pueblo ventured between the 3 mile limit we recognize and the 12 mile limit claimed by the North Koreans. We have indicated this willingness despite the fact that the North Korean seizure of an American warship and its crew, occasioning the death of one crew member and the wounding of three others, is certainly a far more serious offense than any intrusion for non-violent purposes, within even the three mile limit we recognize. The implicit assumption is that the Pueblo's activities would warrant violent response if conducted in territorial waters.

We therefore are sticking on only the relatively minor factual issue: Did the Pueblo, in violation of orders, come closer than 12 but further than 3 miles from North Korean territory? Perhaps we should now rely on the letter to the President from the Pueblo crew and try and devise a statement that might satisfy the North Korean demands and effect their return.

Any such statement should, in my opinion, be predicated not on our legal obligations—since even the facts as claimed by the North Koreans would involve no violation of international law as we interpret it. It would instead have to be predicated on the fact that the purported confessions show a failure to abide by orders. It is obviously illogical to apologize to North Korea solely because US naval personnel have failed to obey US naval orders, but we are already in this anomalous and ignoble position. To get out of it, and to get our men back, it might be better to go the rest of the way.

A possible semantic formula might be for Admiral Smith to prepare a letter noting that President Johnson has received the letter that appears to be signed by the Pueblo crew; without mention of the North Korean claim of a 12 mile territorial sea, the United States has instructed its naval vessels to remain more than 12 miles from North Korean territory; the statements contained in the crew's letter show a failure on their part to obey orders; and the United States expresses its regrets at the violations described in the letter and repeats its intention to continue to order its ships to remain more than 12 miles from North Korean territory. This could be shown to General Pak at Panmunjom and he could be told it will be given to him concurrently with the return of the crew. No mention would be made of the ship.

Admittedly, this concession might involve some loss of prestige. But in my view, we have already capitulated on the major legal points involved and conceding the factual question on the basis of the crew's letter would be preferable to protracted maintenance of a demeaning stance.

Our capitulation then would turn solely on the statement of facts allegedly signed by the Pueblo crew. It would not imply that the Pueblo's mission was illicit. Establishment of the falsity of the statement would enable us to retract our apology. As you know, the Navy analysis indicates that the North Korean asserted intrusions could not possibly have been accomplished by a vessel of the Pueblo's speed. This evidence would be made public after the crew is returned. In addition, we would presumably have from the crew other evidence that their “confessions” were contrived or extorted. Our expressed regrets would then be withdrawn, because based on North Korean fraud. As things now stand, world opinion is probably that we've been caught in tawdry behavior. Exposure of North Korean lies would give us support we now lack.

It must be anticipated that adoption of this course of action would provoke strong adverse reactions from the South Koreans. If, however, it led to prompt return of the crew, and prompt withdrawal of our apology, it might well be better for US/ROK relations than the continuation of the present futile closed meetings. A draft letter is attached.

Paul C. Warnke

Attachment

Draft of Letter

President Johnson has read with concern the letter sent to him by the officers and men of the USS Pueblo. The operations of the USS Pueblo as set forth in that letter violate the orders issued by U.S. Naval authorities to remain more than 12 miles from North Korean territory. The United States regrets the violations of orders described in the letter and will continue to order its ships to remain more than 12 miles from the coast and offshore islands of North Korea.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 385.3. Confidential. A stamped notation on the memorandum indicates that Nitze saw it.

296. Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Brown) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) 296. Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Brown) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)1

Washington, March 11, 1968.

SUBJECT

Next Moves at Panmunjom

The closed talks in Panmunjom appear to have reached an impasse. I believe that we must now choose one of five possible courses of action: 1. Stonewall repetition of our present position.

2. Publish falsity of North Korean “evidence”, with or without private advance notice to the U.S.S.R.

3. Offer conditional expression of regret.

4. Sign helicopter-type receipt.

5. Ask Pak for language of apology or receipt which would meet his requirements.

It is pretty clear now that stonewalling would achieve nothing but would damage the reasonable record which we have thus far made in the talks and risk early trial and/or punishment of the crew. Exposing the North Korean “evidence” at this stage might both harden the North Korean position and precipitate a decision to try and punish the crew. The U.S.S.R. is not likely to be impressed by exposure of the falsity of North Korean evidence or to be either willing or able to be helpful. Signing a receipt similar to that signed by General Combs in the helicopter case would amount to the very humiliation of the U.S. which the North Koreans are seeking and would cause serious trouble with the ROK. Asking Pak for his language would probably lead to prolonged negotiations damaging to our relations with the ROK. In the end, we would probably have to choose between breaking off the talks or signing a humiliating statement.

Offering a conditional expression of regret also poses difficulties, but these appear to be of a lesser order than those noted for the other four possible courses of action. Thus, such an offer could lead to prolonged negotiations, but these might be avoided by indicating that the substance of our offer was not negotiable.

The possible formulation of conditional expressions of regret are of course almost infinite. The three best formulations which we have been able to come up with are set forth in the attachment in order of preference.

We also attach a draft presidential letter received informally from DOD/ISA which contains an expression of regret in response to the Pueblo crew's letter of February 29.2 The principal difficulties which we see with DOD's suggestion are (1) it escalates the level of the expression of regret and therefore the degree of humiliation; (2) it would accord a degree of status to the North Korean regime and cause a violent reaction in the ROK; and (3) it appears to validate the letter ostensibly signed by all members of the crew.

As we now see it, a conditional expression of regret should probably not be tabled until the 13th meeting. We would use the 12th meeting primarily to request clarification of the North Korean position. A draft instruction for the 12th meeting is attached.3

Attachment

CONDITIONAL EXPRESSIONS OF REGRET

Draft One

1. I acknowledge receipt of the 82 surviving members of the crew of the USS Pueblo and the body of Seaman Wayne D. Hodges.

2. On the occasion of the release of the Pueblo's crew, I am authorized to state: A. The sailing orders of the USS Pueblo explicitly directed that the ship remain at least 13 nautical miles from North Korean territory. Ships of the United States Navy will continue to be ordered to remain more than 12 nautical miles from the coast of North Korea.

B. The North Korean authorities have made public photographs of documents which they regard as proof that on several occasions the USS Pueblo entered their claimed coastal waters. The United States Government has not until now been in a position to verify inde- pendently the evidence on which the North Korean authorities rely. We nevertheless have no hesitation in expressing regret, in advance of the full and impartial inquiry which will now be conducted, for any violation of orders by the USS Pueblo which may have resulted in the ship's approaching closer than 12 nautical miles to North Korean territory.

Signed:
John V. Smith 4
Rear Admiral, USN

Draft Two

1. I acknowledge receipt of the 82 surviving members of the crew of the USS Pueblo and the body of Seaman Wayne D. Hodges.

2. On the occasion of the release of the Pueblo's crew, I am authorized to state: A. The sailing orders of the USS Pueblo explicitly directed that the ship remain at least 13 nautical miles from North Korean territory. Ships of the United States Navy will continue to be ordered to remain more than 12 nautical miles from the coast of North Korea.

B. The North Korean authorities have made public photographs of documents which they regard as conclusive proof that the USS Pueblo was on an intelligence gathering mission and that on several occasions the USS Pueblo entered their claimed coastal waters. The United States Government has not until now been in a position to verify independently the evidence on which the North Korean authorities rely. The United States Government does not dispute that the USS Pueblo was on an intelligence gathering mission and has no hesitation in expressing regret for any violation of orders by the USS Pueblo which may have resulted in the ship's approaching closer than 12 nautical miles to North Korean territory.

Signed:
John V. Smith
Rear Admiral, USN

Draft Three

1. I acknowledge receipt of the 82 surviving members of the crew of the USS Pueblo and the body of Seaman Wayne D. Hodges.

2. On the occasion of the release of the Pueblo's crew, I am authorized to state: A. The USS Pueblo, a commissioned ship of the United States Navy, was captured on January 23, 1968 by patrol craft of the Korean People's Army while engaged in an intelligence gathering mission off the coast of North Korea.

B. The North Korean authorities regard the Pueblo's mission as provocative and have provided the United States with photographic copies of documents which they regard as conclusive evidence that the Pueblo intruded into North Korean territorial seas.

C. As conditions for the release of the Pueblo's crew, the North Korean authorities have demanded that the United States both apologize and provide assurance that intrusions of the nature cited above will not occur in the future.

D. In response to these North Korean demands, I am authorized to declare: 1. Ships of the United States Navy will be ordered to remain more than 12 nautical miles from the coast of North Korea.

2. The United States expresses regret for any hostile acts contrary to international law which may have been committed by the USS Pueblo.

Signed:
John V. Smith
Rear Admiral, USN

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis.

2 See the attachment to Document 295.

3 Not printed.

4 Each of the three drafts contains this typed signature; none is signed.

297. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 297. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1

Washington, March 14, 1968.

SUBJECT

USS Pueblo

After eleven closed meetings we have made little progress at Panmunjom. As conditions for the release of the crew (they have made clear they will not return the ship), the North Koreans demand: —an admission by us of hostile acts and intrusion into their claimed territorial waters;

—“a proper apology”;

—a guarantee against future similar incidents.

We know—and can prove—that at least some of the documents which they have given us are falsified. I firmly believe that we should not admit incursions which we are reasonably certain did not occur.

We have said that after release of the crew to our custody or that of a neutral power we would investigate thoroughly, and express regrets if any intrusion had in fact occurred. We have suggested that this investigation could be made by an impartial body. The North Koreans have responded that their “evidence” is conclusive and that an inquiry is unjustified. They have also said that if we persist in our attitude it will show “no concern for the crew”, and require them to take “other steps” against these men—presumably trial and/or punishment.

Pak has just advised the NNSC that U.S. proposals so far have been unsatisfactory (e.g., have not included an apology or offer of compensation) and that he does not propose to call or attend another meeting until he knows that we have some “constructive” proposals to make.

This, then, is where we now stand. Our next step is to see that the twelfth meeting is held fairly soon and to prepare instructions for it. At this point, I think it best that we pass the buck back to the North Koreans.

Thus, if you approve, we plan to instruct Admiral Smith to:

Send word to Pak through NNSC that we expect him to call the twelfth meeting soon and that we would have something to say which would be of interest to him.

At the meeting Admiral Smith would: 1. Say that we have a precise and constructive proposal, to wit:

That at the time of the release of the crew we would —acknowledge the intelligence gathering mission of the Pueblo;

—assure North Korea that we would continue to instruct U.S. ships to remain more than 12 miles from the North Korean coast;

—express regret for any violations of the Pueblo's orders which may have resulted in the ship's coming closer than 12 miles from North Korea. (This is slightly further than we have yet gone on regrets—and as far as I think we should go.)

2. Point out that Pak has not made equally precise proposals.

3. Remind Pak that, while we are concerned about the crew, our primary concern is with the heightening of tensions in the area caused by their provocative and illegal acts.

(A draft instruction to Admiral Smith is at Tab A.)2

Recommendation: That you approve the instruction at Tab A.

Approve3

Disapprove

Speak to me

Concurrently, we plan to let the Russians know—perhaps through a reliable correspondent here—that continuing to hold the crew is not necessarily helpful to the North Koreans. For example, seizure of the Pueblo has made certain an additional $100 million in military aid to the South Koreans. It also will make it easier for the Administration to call up substantial reserves if this becomes necessary, and could always be an additional support for Administration calls for greater effort in Korea or Viet-Nam. We would expect that the Russians would pass this on to North Korea. (Chip Bohlen has looked at this idea and thinks it a good one.)

Recommendation: That you authorize us to have a reliable newsman talk to the Russian Embassy along the above lines.

Approve4

Disapprove

Speak to me

Once we have gone through the next meeting—which will probably produce no real forward movement—we will be hard against the decision on where to go next. We shall probably have two main choices: 1. Stonewall. Admiral Smith could defer calling another meeting and confine himself to informing Pak that he is prepared to meet again if Pak has something new and constructive to say.

2. Apology. Smith could call the next meeting and either: —ask Pak for precise language for an apology which would lead to the release of the crew, or

—table a specific draft of the receipt which Smith would be willing to sign at the time the men are released.

We must face the fact that it is unlikely that any course will lead to a quick return of the crew. If we stonewall now, there is perhaps a small chance that the North Koreans will advance some proposal that will get things moving again. But this is very unlikely. It is far more probable that they will continue along their present course, making propaganda points where they can. They may even decide—as a pressure tactic—to bring the crew to trial.

If we ask them to let us know what they want from us in way of an apology, they probably will refuse to give us anything. If they do come up with suggested language, it will almost certainly be something we can't possibly live with.

If we give them suggested wording for a receipt they will reject it, and we will be faced with a long series of meetings in which we will argue over language—to the benefit of the North Koreans.

In my view, we should stonewall for a bit longer to see if the North Koreans move at all in our direction. But, if things drag on too long without result or without “further steps” by the North Koreans vis-a-vis the crew, I believe we should be prepared to break off the talks and publish the record. This will improve our public image here and abroad at the expense of North Korea's. It would make it virtually impossible to get the crew back in the foreseeable future.

In preparation for such a contingency, we are working on a White Paper which will give the full story of North Korean provocation, U.S. restraint, fairness and moderation at Panmunjom, and demonstrate the falsity of the North Korean “evidence”. This should certainly be published in case the crew were put on trial, or if we or the North Koreans break off talks. (It could also be published immediately after the release of the crew, assuming we decide to go the conditional apology route and it is successful.)

We are all convinced that minor military actions or shows of force would have no constructive effect. Some really massive effort—such as an attempt to eliminate the North Korean Air Force—involves obvious costs and risks. We do not recommend it.

Dean Rusk

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968. Secret; Nodis. Attached to a memorandum from Rostow to the President, March 14, in which Rostow noted “Rusk's proposals on the Pueblo as we approach a dead end” and expressed “one thought: mine Haiphong and regard our Pueblo men as prisoners of the Vietnam war.” Rostow's memorandum indicates the President saw it.

2 Not printed; the instructions were sent to Smith in telegram 131680 to Seoul, March 16. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3 This option is checked and a handwritten note indicates Rostow notified Walsh on March 16.

4 See footnote 3 above.

298. Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Brown) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) 298. Memorandum From the Director of the Korean Task Force (Brown) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)1

Washington, March 15, 1968.

SUBJECT

Possible Actions in the Event the North Koreans Announce that They Intend to Try the Pueblo Crew

1. At your request, we have considered what we might do if we were confronted by an announcement from Pyongyang that the Pueblo's crew (or possibly only the officers) will be tried for alleged crimes under North Korean law.

2. The context in which such an announcement might be made would of course have a material bearing on how we should react. Thus, if the announcement came after the closed Panmunjom talks had been broken off and in a period of intensified North Korean raids on the South, there would be little reason for us not to take a very hard line. On the other hand, the announcement could conceivably be accompanied by indications that the North Koreans viewed the trial as a preliminary to releasing the crew. In this case, a softer reaction would be appropriate.

3. Under almost any circumstances, we believe that two actions should form part of our response to word that the crew was to be tried. A. We should issue a public statement which would at a minimum brand the seizure, detention and trial of the Pueblo crew as illegal and totally indefensible. A draft of one possible version of a public statement is attached.2

B. We should seek to get Communist and neutralist governments and individuals to advise Pyongyang that trying the Pueblo's crew would seriously damage North Korea's international standing. Among the channels which we might use for this purpose are the Russians, Indonesians, the NNSC, and the North Korean editor in Tokyo.

4. Unless we were quite confident that trial of the crew would be merely a prelude to their early release, we should probably follow our initial public statement almost immediately with publication of a White Paper giving a full account of the Pueblo case in the broad setting of heightened North Korean aggression against the Republic of Korea. As you know, such a paper is being prepared.

5. We have also considered a number of other possible reactions to the contingency in question, but doubt that these reactions would be found appropriate or useful. Thus, we do not see how trial of the Pueblo crew would alter our judgment concerning the undesirability of various military actions, such as aerial strikes, aerial feints, sailing the USS Banner along the North Korean coast, blockading the North Korean Navy, etc. We also doubt that a threatening deployment of additional U.S. forces to the Korean area would serve any useful purpose. Calling up additional reserve units might improve our general posture, but could not be expected to have any significant impact on the North Korean decision to try the crew.

6. Our experience with prisoner problems in Viet-Nam may have some relevance to the question at hand. A summary of this experience, prepared in L, is attached.3

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis.

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

299. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 299. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, March 21, 1968, 0825Z.

5051. Subject: Twelfth Senior MAC Members Meeting at Panmunjom, March 21, 1968.

1. Meeting began as scheduled at 1100 hrs and ended at 1203.2

2. Pak opened with long prepared statement which, in terminology typical of previous NK presentations at these meetings, reiterated US position, reviewed “evidence” which NK side had presented, and reiterated NK position that “We would be able to consider return of the crew when you make a proper apology and give an assurance on basis of confessions made by crew of Pueblo.”

3. Pak again insisted that it falls within right of DPRK to deal with Pueblo and there is room for no third party to meddle. He specifically refused to make any proposals or ask any questions concerning US proposals as Smith had asked at 11th meeting, and added that “We are completely unable to find in any of your statements the intention to practically solve the issue.” He continued that “Should your side persist in its present unwarrantable claim, we cannot but think over the meaning of future meetings to be held under such circumstances and we will have no interest at all in such meetings.” In two successive paragraphs Pak used words “for nothing” and “gratuitous” in describing US offer. He concluded opening statement by remarking that US should know that “our patience has its limit” and recommending that US “discuss businesslike details on the basis of our proposal,” ending with phrase that “our side would be prepared to consider any reasonable opinion based on moral obligations which would take account of way shown by us and which would enable US to solve matter of Pueblo crew.”

4. Since Pak had taken hardline anticipated reftel,3 Smith delivered entire statement contained therein.

5. When Pak received written copy of Smith's statement, he concentrated on element of new proposal concerning US preparedness to express regret for any violations of orders by USS Pueblo. He seemed particularly interested in portion of that sentence which read “which may have resulted in the ship's approach.”

6. After 18-minute pause, during which Pak and his assistants sifted through large stack of prepared statements for appropriate reply, Pak then delivered statement which consisted of excerpts from some of prepared statements plus additional language written on spot. This second statement included phrase “if your side has any real concern about fate of crew,” which was only hint of threat to punish crew apparent at today's meeting.

7. Operative paragraphs of Pak's second statement indicated that he understood Smith's statement to be an expression of willingness to discuss concrete businesslike matters for settlement of issue of Pueblo crew on basis NK proposal. Statement continued that if US side agrees to Pak's understanding, NK side is ready to discuss concrete means related to repatriation of Pueblo crew. Statement continued that Pak believes “we will be able to discuss the concrete, businesslike matters at the next meeting on basis our proposal,” and concluded, somewhat disjointedly, with remark “I have heard your statement, I reserve my right to express later our position on it.”

8. Smith merely responded he had noted Pak's last statement. Meeting ended with agreement that Smith would call next meeting.

9. Comment: Pak obviously changed his tune on subject of future meetings after reading Smith's proposal, which he then twisted into expression of willingness to deal on NK terms. Inference seems fairly clear. Pak thinks or hopes we are now moving in direction of apology and will be hoping to move us still further at subsequent meetings.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2 Telegram 5058 from Seoul, March 21, transmitted the verbatim text of the meeting. (Ibid.)

3 Reference is to telegram 131680 to Seoul, March 16, which transmitted instructions for the meeting to Smith. (Ibid.)

300. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 300. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea1

Washington, March 23, 1968, 0043Z.

135403. Subject: Instructions for Thirteenth Closed Meeting. Ref: Seoul 5058.2

1. We believe that next closed meeting should be held day or two after open meeting which Communist side has requested.3 We suggest that you get the open meeting out of way as soon as possible which might make it possible for Admiral Smith to call closed meeting on March 26 or 27. This should give Pak ample time to react to Smith's proposal at last meeting.

2. At thirteenth meeting, Smith should open with following brief statement: A. At our last meeting I made a further specific proposal. You responded by saying that you understood my remarks as an expression of willingness to discuss concrete and practical means of settling the matter before us on the basis of your earlier proposal. You further indicated that, if your understanding was correct, you would be ready at this meeting to discuss concrete means of repatriating the crew of the Pueblo.

B. I can confirm that your understanding of my remarks was consistent with my intention. The proposal which I laid before you at our last meeting was based on careful study of your statements in these private meetings and was deliberately cast in the general framework of your proposals.4

C. Since we agree on these matters, I am prepared to move on to the concrete and businesslike discussion which you proposed at our last meeting. Specifically, I am prepared to discuss the time, place and other arrangements for release of the Pueblo's officers and men. I propose that the Pueblo's officers and men be turned over to me on March 295 at the Joint Security Area here in Panmunjom. Information on the condition of wounded would be appreciated so needed medical personnel and transport could be on hand at time of transfer. We assume body of Hodges will be turned over at same time and place as 82 surviving members of crew are released. At the time of release of the men, I will be prepared to sign a receipt incorporating the proposal which I made at our last meeting.

3. Pak's response is difficult to anticipate and all possibilities cannot be covered in these instructions. A. If Pak levels general blast against Smith's proposals at twelfth meeting. Smith should not respond in kind, but merely ask Pak to specify in what respect Smith's proposals are unsatisfactory and to state precisely how Pak would wish to modify them.

B. If Pak attempts to twist Smith's opening statement into a complete capitulation to the North Korean demands, Smith should correct him by repeating verbatim his proposals of twelfth meeting (para 4.E. State 131680).6

C. If Pak rejects Smith's specific proposals (para 2.C. above) on time and place of release of men, Smith should request alternative proposals.

D. If Pak asks Smith for language of receipt which Smith would be prepared to sign, Smith should read and hand over unsigned copy of the following draft: “(1) I hereby acknowledge receipt of 82 members of the crew of the USS Pueblo and the body of Seaman Wayne D. Hodges.

(2) I have read and taken note of the confessions of the crew of the Pueblo that the ship was engaged in intelligence-gathering activity and intruded closer than 12 nautical miles to the territory of North Korea,7 and other documents to the same effect provided by the Senior North Korean representative.

(3) I have taken note of the request of the Senior North Korean representative that the United States Government should, based upon these documents, express regret for these actions and issue assurance that no U.S. ship shall in the future come closer than 12 nautical miles from North Korea.

(4) Based on the foregoing, I (a) acknowledge that the U.S.S. Pueblo was on an intelligence-gathering mission when she was seized by the North Korean armed forces.

(b) give assurance that ships of the U.S. Navy will continue to be ordered to remain more than twelve nautical miles from North Korea.

(c) express regret for any violation of orders by the USS Pueblo which may have resulted in the ship's approaching closer than twelve nautical miles to North Korea.”

D [sic]. We are prepared, if doing so would result in release, to omit words “may have” in para 4.c. of receipt. We are also prepared to consider any other language which does not admit validity of the North Korean “evidence” or apologize for acts which we consider unproven.FYI. We will not sign a helicopter-case type of receipt. End FYI.

4. FYI. Return of ship not mentioned in these instructions because doing so might reduce prospects of obtaining early release of men. (At seventh meeting, Pak said “return of the ship cannot be the subject of the discussion … It will be good if you do not mention this question again.”) As soon as men have been returned, however, Smith should immediately state that he is now prepared to discuss the return of the ship and call or ask Pak to call a further closed meeting for that purpose. End FYI.

5. At close of meeting, Smith should attempt to confirm fact that it is Pak's turn to call next meeting.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Yager and Brown, cleared by Steadman and Walsh, and approved by Katzenbach.

2 Telegram 5058 from Seoul, March 21, transmitted the verbatim text of the meeting. (Ibid.)

3 An open MAC meeting, lasting 53/4 hours, was held March 25. The North Koreans complained about five separate raids into the DMZ penetrated by ROK forces in March. (Telegram 5145 from Seoul, March 25; ibid., POL 27–14 KOR/UN)

4 In telegram 5120, March 25, the Embassy in Seoul objected to the language used in paragraphs A and B as being “far reaching” and perhaps being on the verge of renouncing previous positions. Porter also mentioned the need to consider the ROK point of view and expressed his intention to meet with the President and Foreign Minister to make clear that the United States “will not consider language which would admit validity of NK 'evidence' or apologize for acts which we consider unproven.” (Ibid., POL 33–6 KOR N–US) In response the Department of State agreed to delete the acknowledgment that the U.S. molded its response to the framework suggested by the North Koreans and approved Porter's approach to the President and Foreign Minister. (Telegram 135734 to Seoul, March 25; ibid.)

5 Since the date of the next closed meeting was uncertain, Smith was instructed to set a date 2 days after the date of the meeting. (Telegram 135542 to Seoul, March 23; ibid.)

6 See footnote 3, Document 299.

7 The Embassy suggested that, since previous references implying recognition of North Korea had been scrupulously avoided, the words “the territory of” be deleted here. The Department of State concurred. (Telegram 5199 from Seoul, March 27, and telegram 136936 to Seoul, March 27; both in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

301. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 301. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 1

Moscow, March 26, 1968, 1615Z.

3270. Subj: Pueblo.

In course my conversation with Gromyko today, I noted Soviets had been informed re our latest exchange with North Koreans on Pueblo and asked him if he could offer any suggestions. Gromyko inquired if we had received North Korean reaction to our latest proposal. I said that while North Korean response to our proposal for investigation by international body had been negative, we had not received any response to our latest suggestion. Gromyko said Soviets knew North Koreans had received our latest views but, of course, did not know whether or how they would react to them. Nevertheless, he thought perhaps North Koreans might comment on them. In any event, he felt it was very good that discussions continued in relatively calm atmosphere. He then asserted main difficulties stemmed from our refusal recognize facts. When I pointed out we could establish facts by getting the crew back and asking them what happened, as well as by having international body conduct an investigation, Gromyko pooh-poohed idea by saying only moon or stars knew exactly what the facts were. I countered by saying that if international body were to find that facts confirmed North Korean story, there would be no problem as far as we concerned. I then observed President had been receiving letters allegedly written by members of crew, noting this not helpful since it stirred up emotions in US. Gromyko concluded conversation on this subject by expression usual caveat that his remarks had not been made at anyone's request.

Thompson

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis.

302. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 302. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, March 28, 1968, 1420Z.

5335. Subj: Thirteenth senior MAC members meeting at Panmunjom. Meeting began at 1600 hrs local and ended at 1748.2 Much time was consumed by composition ad hoc statements. Both release of crew and delivery of mail were discussed (latter reported septel).3

2. Discussion of main item somewhat disjointed since RAdm Smith, who spoke first as one who called meeting, led off with statement contained para two, State 135403, as amended by State 135734;4 whereas Pak's first statement ignored this and addressed itself at length to position Smith had taken at 12th meeting. In essence, Pak raised govt-to-govt issue, criticized ambiguous nature and phraseology of proposal Smith had made at 12th meeting, reasserted NK demand for proper apology, [garble] negotiations. At end, Pak said he had no objection to Smith's understanding that Pak would call next meeting.

3. Pak's first (and only substantive) statement opened with accusation that it was US, not NK, which responsible for tension, describing Pueblo intrusion and force build-up as part of premeditated maneuvers to provoke new war. Pak alleged that US position was that it perfectly all right for side which had infringed on sovereignty of another country to make threats while denying country whose sovereignty had been infringed on its right to self defense. This he described as “logic of stronger playing upon weaker.” Such methods may go down with those suffering with nervous breakdown but not with Korean people. Clinging to such logic will make it impossible to settle Pueblo and only bring about unfavorable results.

4. Pak then alleged that US and not NK had violated understanding regarding secrecy of meetings,5 ending with rather strange statement that “I inform your side in advance that we shall act following this principle in the future.”

5. Pak asserted meetings are between reps of two govts. Said Smith has continued “discourteous act” of calling DPRK “North Korea,” and that US must take into consideration fact that it can never solve question of crew without dealing with Govt of DPRK.6

6. Pak then said NK had noted statement made at 12th meeting that US prepared to make due apology and give assurance when crew of Pueblo is returned. Said, however, there are “not a few ambiguous points in US proposals.” Referring to US admission that Pueblo had been on intelligence-gathering mission at time it was captured, Pak said whole world knows that armed spy ship Pueblo was engaged in espionage mission from outset. Said question is that Pueblo was not only on intelligence-gathering mission but was captured in territorial waters of DPRK while conducting espionage acts; US “must take precisely this point into account.”

7. Pak noted that Smith had said US Navy ships would continue to be ordered to remain more than 12 nautical miles from “the DPRK.” Said NK takes notice of this, understanding it as assurance against further violation by US Navy ships of DPRK territorial waters.

8. Pak then raised expression of regret for possible intrusion. Said at first sight it seems US prepared to bear responsibility for behavior of captain and crew and to apologize. In reality, however, US position is “nothing else but phrase making, using slippery ambiguous phrases,” which under careful examination shows US wants to express regret for “certain unknown hypothetical action.” “Is there anything in it? Nothing.” With such phrase making US cannot conceal obvious crime or deceive anybody. “Don't you think that if you want to settle the matter you must among others make an apology properly at least?” Only then can so-called US proposal be taken into consideration as basis for practical settlement.

9. Smith responded that NK not approaching question in businesslike manner. Said NK had not been specific about desired changes in US proposal. Asked whether NKorean side had specific proposal in writing which meeting could address. Pak responded that his first statement was businesslike matter for practical settlement of question.

10. Smith said US had taken note of all that had been said and published and had made reasonable proposal under circumstances. If Pak had no written proposal to table, could he come to next meeting with one? Stated it Pak's turn to call next meeting. Pak reiterated that his first statement offered businesslike suggestion for settlement and recommended Smith seriously study it. Stated no objection to understanding NK would call next meeting.7

11. Comment: Pak's main statement, delivered in firm but not particularly harsh manner, supports our belief that NK is attempting obtain unambiguous apology from USG to DPRK Govt for intrusion, espionage, and commission of hostile acts. Believe this is first time at closed meetings that Pak has specifically stated Pueblo was captured in NK territorial waters.

12. Apparent willingness to accept US language on assurance (para 7) is probably false lure. Pak's statements today also notable for absence of threat to try crew; however, NK would probably feel that crew's letters over past week have covered this adequately.

13. Pak will speak first at next meeting, presumably addressing himself to whatever NK can make of second para of Smith's first statement today and possibly to nature of receipt Smith mentioned in third para, since Pak and his assistant appeared interested when Smith mentioned (para 9 above) specific changes in US position.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2 Telegram 5336 from Seoul, March 28, transmitted the verbatim text of the meeting. (Ibid.)

3 Not found.

4  Document 300 and footnote 4 thereto.

5 Reference is to Smith's reference at the last meeting to a Radio Pyongyang broadcast on March 10 that violated the confidentiality of the meetings. (Telegram 131680 to Seoul, March 16; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

6  Smith decided, and the Department of State agreed, to avoid references to “North Korea” in future meetings by using phrases such as “your coast” or “land area under control your side.” (Telegram 5602 from Seoul, April 10, and telegram 144339 to Seoul, April 10; both ibid.)

7 Since the Department of State expected Pak to make similar remarks at the next meeting, Smith was instructed to draw on past instructions as appropriate. The Department provided guidance covering various contingencies. (Telegram 139480 to Seoul, March 30; ibid.)

303. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 303. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, April 11, 1968, 0950Z.

5639. Subj: Summary of Fourteenth Senior MAC Members Meeting at Panmunjom, April 11, 1968. Ref: (A) State 139480; (B) State 144448.2

1. Today's lengthy meeting (2 hrs, 15 min) resulted in stalemate, with Pak rejecting latest US proposal along lines he took at 13th meeting and reiterating NKorean demand for “proper apology”.3 Only significant new item to emerge on NKorean side was demand that Smith provide written document or documents embodying NKorean proposal. In his presentation Pak made no obvious threat with regard to fate of crew, but again NKoreans doubtless feel that many letters from crew which Pyongyang has broadcast since 13th meeting adequately cover this point.

2. Pak's opening statement was devoted to denial that NKoreans had failed to state what specific changes should be made in US proposal and to assertion that NKoreans themselves had made concrete proposal to settle issue. He said “our side has clearly indicated that question of returning crew may be considered if your side makes apology it deserves to make on basis of confessions of crew of Pueblo which was captured while perpetrating espionage and hostile acts after intruding into DPRK territorial waters and assures that your side will not commit again hostile acts against DPRK.” He complained that by its proposal US was merely attempting to avoid responsibility for proven espionage and was attempting to treat intrusions as hypothetical acts. He concluded prepared statement by twice referring to necessity that US side present appropriate documents and “write clearly and submit to us details of apology,” instead of asking for written proposal from North Korea.

3. As opening portion his response, RAdm Smith used language provided paras 4A, B, and C of Ref (A). He followed this with statement from paras 3B (1) and (2) of Ref (B).4 He concluded by offering to provide Pak immediately with copy of draft receipt which Smith had brought to 13th meeting, if Pak would request it, and by asserting that unless Pak prepared to accept this proposal he must provide in writing receipt Pak visualizes.

4. After pause of 4 minutes, during which Pak sifted through various prepared statements and finally wrote his response, Pak revived old language concerning “unwarrantedness” of US claim and rejecting US position as basis for settlement. He reiterated refusal to provide written draft of documentation desire by North Korea, saying that basis for settlement could be easily provided only if US takes into consideration North Korean proposal and presents document apologizing for Pueblo acts in proper manner. He then again “seriously warned” Smith about discourteous act of describing DPRK as “North Korea”. He concluded this statement by reserving right to answer Smith's statement of today.

5. Smith responded with language from para 7, Ref (A),5 again pressed for written proposal from NKoreans and acknowledged he would call next meeting.

6. Pak responded with another request for appropriate document from US side.

7. Comment: Issue has boiled down to which side will submit written document, with both fully aware that anything submitted by one will not be acceptable to other. NKoreans clearly anticipate additional meetings, however, since they said as much during this session, and were also overheard saying in Korean that they would hold one of their prepared statements for next meeting. In view their growing insistence that North Korea be referred to as DPRK, however, there is some feeling here that they may not respond to call for closed meeting unless request is addressed to representative of DPRK. Heretofore we have simply addressed request to senior member their side.

8. Of incidental interest, local Newsweek correspondent Kreisher says that item in this week's periscope column regarding movie of Pueblo crew was obtained through Newsweek Bonn Bureau, presumably from East German sources.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2 Telegram 139480 to Seoul, March 30, transmitted Smith's instructions for this meeting; telegram 144448 to Seoul, April 10, outlined procedures for Smith to follow in the event the North Koreans brought a crew member to a closed meeting. (Both ibid.)

3 Telegram 5641 from Seoul, April 11, transmitted the verbatim text of the meeting. (Ibid.)

4  Smith's comments centered on the U.S. proposal and on the position of the Pueblo when captured.

5  Smith reminded Pak that after 14 meetings the North Korean side has still not offered a proposal to resolve the crisis.

304. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 304. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea1

Washington, April 16, 1968, 1810Z.

147513. Subject: Instructions for Fifteenth Closed Meeting. Ref: A. Seoul 5641;2 B. State 135403.3

1. In view of Pak's long delay in calling fourteenth meeting, and in order to avoid appearing eager, Admiral Smith should wait until April 19 and then propose private meeting on April 22.

2. Smith should open meeting with following statement: A. At our last meeting, I suggested that, if you cannot accept the proposals which I have made for settling the problem before us, you give me a concrete proposal of your own in writing. I cannot understand why you are unwilling to do so, but in an effort to get on with the business of these talks, I have brought with me a draft of the receipt which I am prepared to sign at the time of the release of the Pueblo's officers and men. (At this point Smith should read and hand Pak draft receipt set forth in para. 3.D., ref B.)

B. As you can see, this draft receipt includes the three-point proposal which I first made at the twelfth meeting. The draft receipt also takes proper notice of the statements and evidence which you put forth at our past meetings. I believe that it provides a fair and reasonable basis for agreeing upon the immediate release of the Pueblo's crew.

C. I trust that you fully appreciate the effort which we have made to be responsive to the views which you have expressed in these meetings. You must clearly understand, however, that we cannot go beyond the substance of the draft receipt.

D. I must remind you that your side proposed that the problem created by the seizure of the USS Pueblo be solved through meetings of the Senior Members of the Military Armistice Commission. We accepted this proposal in good faith, hoping to reach a speedy agreement on the release of the ship and its crew. After fourteen meetings without agreement or concrete, reasonable proposals from your side, we are entitled to question your seriousness in proposing use of this channel.

3. In responding to Pak's remarks, Smith is authorized to repeat as appropriate any statements in his previous instructions.

4. Smith should not raise question of which side is to set time of next meeting. If subject comes up, however, Smith should agree that it is Pak's turn.

5. FYI. Purpose of paras. 2.D., and 4. is to create question in North Korean minds concerning our intentions. End FYI.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Yager, cleared by Walsh and Smith, and approved by Katzenbach. Repeated to Honolulu for the Presidential party. Johnson was in Hawaii for discussions with President Pak; see Document 194.

2 See footnote 3, Document 303.

3  Document 300.

305. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 305. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, April 22, 1968, 0923Z.

5835. Subject: Summary of Fifteenth Senior MAC Members Meeting at Panmunjom, April 22, 1968. Ref: State 147513.2

1. Communist acceptance of today's meeting was not received until 0800 hrs today. Meeting began at 1100 hrs and ended at 1236.3

2. RAdm Smith opened with statement contained reftel and handed Pak draft of receipt as instructed.

3. Pak responded with reference to Smith's statements at 14th meeting, characterizing request for return of crew on basis US proposal as “shameless demand” and characterizing proposal itself as “nothing but practice of phrase-making to deceive others.” Referring to legality of Pueblo activities under 1907 Hague Convention, Pak said US side can never justify criminal acts of Pueblo under international law. Continued with usual charge that Pueblo was armed spy ship seized while conducting espionage after intrusion into territorial waters of DPRK on mission to detect important secrets and that crew are spies caught in “flagrent delict” (sic). Charged that Pueblo disguised itself as “oceanographic electronic research ship,” stealthily intruded into territorial waters, and tried to hide its identity by responding that it was “hydrographer” in answer to NK naval signals. Recited list of evidence which NK has provided and repeated charge that US attempting to deny “grim reality under all sorts of unreasonable pretexts.” Said such attitude is inhumane act by which US side abandons moral duty to grant, by apologizing, petition of crew to enable them return US as early as possible and to realize fervent desire of waiting families and relatives. Pak then offered to show film which he said would actually show whether confessions of crew had been made under duress. After again deriding US proposal, Pak said it would be miscalculation if US side wants to get something on basis thereof. Ended by saying NK side had put forth concrete proposal for practical solution and fact that question remains unsettled is because of US persistence in maintaining unreasonable position.

4. Foregoing read from prepared statement. Pak then added statement, which he had written following Smith's presentation, acknowledging that he had received draft receipt, commenting that there no difference between receipt and “so-called proposal” of US side, and ending “however, I reserve right to answer at next meeting to the draft as well as to your statement today.”

5. Smith responded that he did not desire to view film but asked Pak to give or lend him copy. He then stated that US side had, as Pak requested at last meeting, written out an appropriate document which would make it possible to settle issue. If NK side did not find this satisfactory, it incumbent upon Pak to present document which NK would consider acceptable. Smith then proposed conclusion of meeting.

6. During next interval Pak anxiously asked his assistant whether Smith had mentioned responsibility for calling next meeting. When he received copy of Smith's statement, he immediately looked at it to see whether mention made of next meeting.

7. Pak then reiterated that NK side had made perfectly clear what kind of apology has to be made to have crew returned and that it completely US side's business to make that apology and submit document in writing. He indicated unwillingness or inability to lend copy of film and asked again whether Smith wanted to see it “at this place.”

8. Smith replied he did not wish to see film and again requested copy. Pak responded he had no intention “to positively ask” Smith to view film and repeated that film fully shows that crew confessed voluntarily under no restriction and is receiving humanitarian treatment instead of being treated as spies. Had Smith seen film, he would have admitted that his assertion regarding confessions under duress is inconsistent with facts. Smith's refusal reveals fear of having unwarrantedness of US position exposed by truth. Ended by warning Smith not to repeat again remarks that crew confessed under duress.

9. Comment: Session ended with question of who would call next meeting left unsettled. Pak did not volunteer to call next meeting and was apparently upset by Smith's failure to seek understanding on this question.

10. While NK position appeared firm at this meeting, Pak's tone was comparatively mild; he made no threats of punishment; and he did not even object to use of “North Korea” in draft receipt.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2  Document 304.

3 Telegram 5836 from Seoul, April 22, transmitted the verbatim text of the meeting. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

306. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 306. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, May 8, 1968, 0710Z.

7078. Subj: Summary of Sixteenth Senior MAC Members Meeting at Panmunjom, May 8, 1968. Ref: State 151745.2

1. Meeting opened at 1100 hrs and ended at 1132.3

2. Pak opened with statement that meetings are between reps of Govt DPRK and Govt of US, discussing issue of Pueblo crew. Asked Woodward to make clear whether he representative of United States Govt replacing RAdm Smith with full authority to discuss issue of Pueblo crew.4 Woodward responded he senior member Military Armistice Commission our side and that he represents United States Govt with full authority to discuss release of Pueblo and its crew. Pak noted that “you are representative of United States Govt” with full authority to discuss issue of Pueblo crew.

3. Pak then read prepared statement, first portion of which dedicated to rejection of draft receipt which RAdm Smith had presented at fifteenth meeting. He said draft fails to reflect any consideration of Pak's previous statements explaining in detail way in which document would be prepared to enable return of Pueblo crew, and that draft vividly reflects unjust position by which US side intends to persist in denying crimes committed by Pueblo and to refuse to bear responsibility for them. Said “we cannot but be surprised” at presentation of draft document devoid of any substance and cannot but doubt real intention of your side. After saying that it NK “consistent position” that question of return of crew “may be considered” only when your side makes “proper” apology, Pak continued that “in order to make document of apology and assurance which your side submits worthy of our consideration, it should be written as follows”:

“The Govt of the United States of America,

Acknowledging the validity of the confessions of the crew of the USS Pueblo and of the documents of evidence produced by the representative of the Govt of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to the effect that the ship, which was seized by the self-defence measures of the naval vessels of the Korean People's Army in the territorial waters of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on many occasions and conducted espionage activities of spying out important military and state secrets of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,

Shoulders full responsibility and solemnly apologizes for the grave acts of espionage committed by the US ship against the Democratic People's Republic of Korea after intruding into the territorial waters of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,

And gives firm assurance that no US ships will intrude again in future into the territorial waters of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

Meanwhile, the Govt of the United States of America earnestly requests that the Govt of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, taking into consideration the fact that the former crew members of the USS Pueblo confiscated by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea side have confessed honestly to their crimes and petitioned the Govt of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for leniency as well as the above mentioned apology and assurance of the Govt of the United States of America, deal leniently with the crew members.”

4. Pak continued that if your side submits such document, means for settlement of question of crews will be easily arranged and preparations of receipt will not be big problem. Pak advised serious study of this statement and that Woodward come to next meeting with such prepared document.

5. Woodward responded with language of first two sentences para four reftel, but reserved use of language from this para beginning with word “specifically” as probably more useful at later meeting.5 He also said he noted that contents of document Pak submitted today differed greatly from fair and reasonable proposals submitted by our side and that it would be necessary for him to submit Pak's document to higher authority.

6. Pak replied with ad hoc statement that his proposal today is just and reasonable one which can make it possible to settle matter practically, again recommending serious study and return to next meeting with such document in hand. Pak then proposed recess, and Woodward agreed.

7. Comment: Pak's manner at today's meeting was mildest yet observed according to Woodward's staff, and in reading his prepared statement Pak made definite effort to use persuasive tone. There was no hint of any threat to crew.

8. We will probably not be able to ascertain without further probing whether position Pak put forward in his draft document today represents starting point for further negotiations or something close to NK final position.6 In essence, document is apology from USG and entreaty that NK deal leniently with crew. It does not even take form of request for release. Judging from language of Pak's presentation NK has in mind two documents: one of nature tabled today to be submitted first and probably exploited for propaganda purposes, followed by receipt which would probably incorporate much of language contained in basic document and which would be negotiated subsequently. Question of who might sign either apology or receipt, or even whether signature on basic document might be required, is left open.

9. There was nothing in Pak's presentation today to indicate that NK is prepared now to discuss details or timing of crew release. Pak very carefully made clear that basic document tabled today is de- signed only to permit NK to “give consideration” to details of eventual return.

10. Byplay at beginning of meeting again emphasizes NK concern over govt to govt aspect of meetings and fact that NK considers it is negotiating on crew only and not on ship itself. We do not believe Pak has ever before used word “confiscated” when referring to ship.

11. Although question of who would call next meeting is also left open, it seems clear from Pak's statements about Woodward coming to next meeting with appropriate document and fact that Pak has tabled concrete proposal, that Koreans find it to their advantage to continue and prolong these sessions and probably intend to do so.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2 Telegram 151745 to Seoul, April 23, transmitted instructions for the next closed meeting. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 7087 from Seoul, May 8, transmitted the verbatim text of the meeting. (Ibid.)

4 Brigadier General Gilbert H. Woodward replaced Smith as Senior Member of UNCMAC in the normal course of military rotation. He attended the Senior Members meetings only after being fully accredited to enhance as greatly as possible “the psychological impact of new representative, fresh from consultations in Washington.” (Telegrams 5859 from Seoul and 151746 to Seoul, both April 23; both ibid.)

5  Woodward emphasized he had “consulted intensively with responsible officials in Washington on problem created by illegal seizure of USS Pueblo,” and assured Pak that all positions presented to date by Smith reflected the “policy of the United States Government.” Woodward chose not to inform the North Koreans that the draft receipt given them at the last meeting “represents in substance furthest that United States Government is prepared to go.” (Telegram 151745 to Seoul, April 23; ibid.)

6 In response to Porter's suggestions, the Department of State authorized him to brief the South Koreans on the proposal, but to refrain from giving them a copy of the documents “unless they press hard for them.” (Telegram 7088 from Seoul and telegram 160538 to Seoul, both May 8; both ibid.) After the briefing on May 9, Porter reported being “compelled to give Pak written copy of the draft receipt” Smith presented at the 15th meeting and anticipated receiving a request for the text of the North Korean proposal. (Telegram 7119 from Seoul, May 9; ibid.) Shortly thereafter the ROKG submitted an aide memoire reminding the United States of its previous assurances not to sign “a helicopter-type document in return for the release of the crew.” (Telegram 7279 from Seoul, May 17, and airgram A–594 from Seoul, May 20; both ibid.)

307. Memorandum of Conversation 307. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 17, 1968, 1–3:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

Korea

PARTICIPANTS

For the United States: The Secretary

G—Ambassador Bohlen

EUR—John M. Leddy

For the Soviet Union: Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin

Min. Couns. Yuri N. Tcherniakov

The Secretary said that the United States was very concerned about the Pueblo affair.2 The United States has gone as far as it is possible for it to go. He said that we could not apologize for something that we do not think that we actually did, i.e., enter North Korean territorial waters. He hoped that we could obtain Soviet assistance in bringing this question to a satisfactory conclusion.

Continuing, the Secretary said we were also concerned about the infiltration of the DMZ by North Korea and statements by North Korea suggesting possible resumption of hostilities toward the South. He asked for Soviet influence with Pyongyang to keep things cool: the situation could become explosive. Mr. Bohlen added that the U.S. was ready to turn over the crew of the Pueblo to any country with which we have relations, including the Soviet Union, pending an objective review of what had happened.

Kuznetsov said that he could not answer at the moment and could only express the hope that the problem would be solved. Dobrynin said that the North Koreans had shown the Soviets a movie of the crew in which they had made statements which left the impression that the crew supported the North Korean view of the Pueblo incident. The Secretary said that if the crew actually said to the U.S. Government what they were alleged to have said to the North Koreans, then the U.S. would be ready to apologize; but we could not place credence in any statements which had been made by the crew under duress.

The Secretary stated in measured terms that if North Korea attacks South Korea, the United States will react with “maximum violence”.

Kuznetsov said that the North Koreans had given the Soviets evidence that South Korea had been infiltrating North Korea and that they, the Soviets, were concerned about this. The Secretary replied that he felt it important that the Soviets and the United States ascertain independently and as objectively as they can what the facts really are on both sides and that the two governments should keep in touch with this matter. He thought that both governments should work to cool down the Korean situation on both sides.

Kuznetsov said that the Soviets strongly favor detente in Korea and that we should move against any tension or aggravation of the situation. The Secretary pointed out that a step toward this would be the release of the crew of the Pueblo.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Leddy. The meeting was held in the Secretary's dining room at the Department of State. The memorandum is Part IV of V.

2  Thompson and Gromyko discussed the matter in Moscow on June 5. Each side repeated the positions set forth by Rusk and Kuznetsov. (Telegram 4114 from Moscow, June 5; ibid.)

308. Action Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 308. Action Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 19, 1968, 10:50 a.m.

Mr. President:

Herewith a proposal suggested by Nick Katzenbach, concurred in by Sec. Rusk, for retrieving the crew of the Pueblo.

It involves our signing a receipt for the return of our men in a way which would permit us to disavow accepting a North Korean version of an apology but would permit them to argue that we had.

An Australian in Tokyo with good North Korean contacts would explore, before the event, whether this procedure would be acceptable to the North Koreans; and that they would deliver the men at the time the receipt was signed by our new representative Gen. Woodward.

Walt

Attachment

Washington, May 18, 1968.

Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson

SUBJECT

Next Steps on Pueblo

In February you approved an instruction to our representative in Panmunjom authorizing him to accept an unsatisfactory North Korean receipt for the Pueblo crew by overwriting in his own handwriting a simple statement that he had received 82 men and the body of the 83rd crew member.2

We have not as yet had a chance to use this procedure, since the North Koreans have never proffered a receipt.

We now would like to revive this proposal through a back channel procedure, i.e., an Australian in Tokyo with good North Korean contacts.

He would be fully briefed on our plan and would tell the North Koreans that we would accept their draft receipt with an overwrite, emphasizing that it must be simultaneous with release of the entire crew.

If the North Koreans were to accept this procedure they would, of course, claim that we had signed their receipt; we would claim that we had signed only what General Woodward had written. Both sides would understand this ambiguity.

We would also publish—immediately after release of the crew—the whole story of the seizure and the negotiations, including the transcripts of the meetings at Panmunjom. This record fully supports our refusal to sign their form of receipt as they presented it.

Dean Rusk concurs in this approach. I recommend that you authorize us to go ahead with it.3

Nicholas deB Katzenbach

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968. Secret. Johnson handwrote “Let's discuss Tuesday on Agenda” at the end of the memorandum.

2 The intrusion was detailed in telegram 110781 to Seoul, February 6, in advance of the MAC Secretaries Meeting convened on February 7. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3 Ambassadors Porter and Johnson were informed of the proposed strategy on May 16 and indicated their support for the approach. (Telegram 00288 to Seoul and Tokyo, May 16; telegram 6549 from Seoul and telegram 0074 from Tokyo, both May 17, all sent through CIA channels; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968) Warnke also supported the proposal for reasons he outlined in a May 21 memorandum to Clifford. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 91–0017, Korea 385.3 [Sensitive]) The Department of State decided to implement the plan and delay the next senior members meeting until May 23 or 24 to allow Porter and Johnson time to make appropriate preparations. (Telegram to Seoul and Tokyo, May 17, sent via CIA channels; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968)

309. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 309. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, May 28, 1968, 0600Z.

7491. Subj: Seventeenth Senior MAC Members Closed Meeting at Panmunjom, May 28, 1968. Ref: (A) State 168988;2 (B) Seoul 7431.3

1. Meeting began at 1100 hrs and ended at 1134.4

2. Woodward opened with statement contained Ref (A). Pak started to take notes while UNCMAC interpreter was reading Korean version of Woodward's statement but soon abandoned note taking and adopted air of boredom and indifference when he discerned direction of statement. However, he again began taking notes when UNCMAC interpreter reached that portion of Woodward's statement discussed Ref (B).

3. After pause of about six minutes, during which he looked carefully at latter portion of Woodward's statement and underlined several sentences including that discussed Ref (B), Pak chose one of several prepared statements to read in response. This statement was general expression of unhappiness with fact that US side had reviewed its previous position and had not come to today's meeting with document of apology and assurance along lines that which Pak had presented at sixteenth meeting. He said US failure to do so clearly shows US is not concerned about fate of Pueblo crew and has no intention of settling question at these meetings. He reiterated that NK-proposed document was based on “grim reality” of crimes committed by Pueblo, pointed out responsibilities US must assume as organizer of crime, and stated that to settle question US must write document of apology and assurance as demanded and present it to NK side. He then closed with statement that he would comment on Woodward's statement of today at next meeting.5

4. Comment: Although Pak's interest was clearly aroused by sentence discussed Ref (B), his failure to comment on it or to probe as to its meaning demonstrates again that he is allowed to exercise virtually no initiative.6

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2 Telegram 168988 to Seoul, May 22, transmitted instructions for this meeting. Woodward was to repeat the U.S. position presented thus far and add “You cannot expect me to consider your draft as a proper basis for settling the issue before us in the absence of your clear assurance that, simultaneously with my acceptance of an appropriately amended version of such a document, you would release all of the members of the Pueblo crew.” (Ibid.)

3 In telegram 7431, May 24, Porter suggested modifying the instruction to make clear that Pak “should come to next meeting armed with such assurance and that if he does so and also proposes appropriate amendments General Woodward will be prepared to discuss them.” (Ibid.) The Department of State concurred. (Telegram 170389 to Seoul, May 24; ibid.)

4 Telegram 7499 from Seoul, May 28, transmitted the verbatim text of this meeting. (Ibid.)

5 The results of this meeting prompted the Department of State to instruct the Embassy in Moscow to again approach Gromyko to review the Korean situation and express the desire of both Washington and Moscow to avoid an escalation of tension on the peninsula. (Telegram 173266 to Moscow, May 29; ibid.)

6  Porter later commented that he believed this meeting “provided indications NK waging war of nerves showing signs of some apprehension on its own part.” (Telegram 8078 from Seoul, June 22; ibid.)

310. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 310. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, June 27, 1968, 0850Z.

8217. Subject: Eighteenth Pueblo Meeting.

1. Meeting began 1100 hrs local June 27 and ended 1225.2 Pak's manner was unoffensive and his language soft and obviously intended to be persuasive. Substance of his statements, however, was unyielding with no hint of accommodation. In brief, he reiterated theme of seventeenth meeting that if US wanted crew returned, it must admit criminal acts and apologize for them.

2. Pak flatly rejected receipt proposed by US at last meeting as basis for negotiating return of crew, and returned to demand for proper document as submitted earlier by NK side. Equally adamant on use of any third party. He noted we had both agreed that Pueblo was on intelligence gathering mission. Essential points, however, were for US side to admit that ship had entered NK territorial waters and had carried out hostile acts. At later point he noted that admission had to be accompanied by apology and assurances that acts would not be repeated. Pak noted that return of crew could then be discussed, implying procedure similar to that of helicopter pilots. Speaking in what US participants described as quite, persuasive manner, he said that if document of apology and assurance were submitted “You need not worry much about the delivery of your crew as there are precedents.”

3. Pak reopened possibility of some sort of reprisal against crew saying at one point they should be punished for their hostile acts and at another that because of USG procrastination, crew might have to pay appropriate price. Both statements were conditional and were not major part of his presentation.

4. At seventeenth meeting Woodward had indirectly and in low key indicated US might make negotiations public. Pak today made veiled reference to this by saying US would have more to lose by such action than NK.

5. Pak refused to comment directly either on health of Bucher or welfare of crew.3 On Bucher he said he had no knowledge of rumor we had cited and that he did not feel it necessary to clarify every rumor.4 With reference to crew, he referred US to his Feb 2 statement and, upon being pressed by Woodward, repeated statements he had made re Bucher. Upon again being pressed, he said we should not believe the rumor and if we were really interested in crew welfare to submit document of apology and assurance. Pak's statements were sufficiently ambiguous to admit of interpretation either way. While evidence is very weak, we inclined to think he was saying Bucher and crew all right. We note that NKs did inform us of Hodge's death, although they probably aware we knew he wounded.

6. Pak made clear he wishes to keep meetings going and referred twice to next meeting.5 From repeated references to crew welfare and reiteration of possible punishment Pak aware US concern for crew safety remains strong bargaining counter on NK side.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2 Telegram 174524 to Seoul, May 31, transmitted Woodward's instructions for this meeting; telegram 8221 from Seoul, June 27, transmitted the verbatim text of this meeting. (Both ibid.)

3 In the wake of unconfirmed rumors about the health and welfare of the crew, including the alleged death of another crewman and the reported suicide of Bucher, Woodward was also instructed to request specific information from the North Koreans about the men's physical and mental condition that, despite repeated requests by the senior member and the ICRC, had not been provided since they were taken captive. (Telegrams 182296, June 13, and 183139, June 14, to Seoul; both ibid.)

4 Prior to this meeting and on instructions from the Department of State, a formal inquiry was made through the JDO on Bucher's status, but no reply to the request for information had been received. (Telegrams 188397, June 21, and 190934, June 26, to Seoul, and telegram 8186 from Seoul, June 27; all ibid.) In a subsequent meeting at which the UNC presented another letter on the subject, the U.S. JDO was informed by the North Korean JDO that the matter must be handled through the Senior Members meetings. (Telegram 194259 to Seoul, July 1, and telegrams 8337 and 8348 from Seoul, both July 3; all ibid.)

5 The next meeting was held on July 10, 11–11:45 a.m. KST. Woodward's instructions for that meeting centered on requesting information about the health and welfare of the crew and addressing the issue of North Korean assurances of simultaneous release. (Telegram 196384 to Seoul, July 3; ibid.) Telegram 8475 from Seoul, July 10, transmitted a summary of the meeting, and telegram 8474 from Seoul, July 10, transmitted the verbatim text of the meeting. (Both ibid.)

311. Memorandum of Conversation 311. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, August 13, 1968, 5:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Pueblo

PARTICIPANTS

Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador

Under Secretary Katzenbach

Deputy Under Secretary Bohlen

Robert O. Homme, Staff Assistant to the Under Secretary

Ambassador Dobrynin called at the Under Secretary's request.2 After greeting the Ambassador and presenting him with commemorative photographs of the NPT signing ceremony, the Under Secretary began by expressing our deep concern over the lack of progress at Panmunjom. He noted that more than 35 days had passed since the last joint meeting and questioned the purpose of continuing these meetings in view of the lack of movement. The Under Secretary noted that the North Korean demands, i.e., that we admit the Pueblo was engaged in espionage, admit intrusion into North Korean waters, apologize and give assurances against any repetition, remain unchanged.

The Under Secretary stated that the US Government is certain the Pueblo did not enter North Korean territorial waters. We assume that the Soviet Government would not wish us to consider the activity of the Pueblo as espionage. As to assurances, this posed no problem since we did not intrude and had no intention of ever doing so.

He pointed out that the Pueblo was becoming more of a public and political issue in the United States. On his recent California trip, the first question asked was always what were we doing to get the Pueblo crew back. He called the Ambassador's attention to the fact that the biggest ovation Mr. Nixon received during his acceptance address was for his reference to doing something about the Pueblo. The Pueblo will undoubtedly be an issue in the Presidential campaign and the American public would associate the Soviet Union with North Korea. This type of agitation and oratory could not help but have an effect on our relations with the Soviet Union. While we could improve our public image by saying more, this would only increase demands for action.

Referring to a possible solution, the Under Secretary reminded the Ambassador that we have told the North Koreans we would sign an appropriately amended version of the document they tabled on May 8 acknowledging receipt of the crew, if we would simultaneously receive custody of the crew. However, we have received no response to this suggestion.

Ambassador Dobrynin replied that the Soviets had received a different version of the facts from the North Koreans. The Under Secretary suggested Ambassador Dobrynin examine the evidence himself. He was confident that if the Ambassador did so he too would be convinced the Pueblo made no intrusion. Ambassador Dobrynin asked why the Soviets should doubt the North Koreans. The Under Secretary replied that he personally knew the Pueblo was under strict orders not to go within 13 miles of the North Korean coast. It had good navigators and there was no reason to believe the Captain would violate his orders or make such a navigational error.

The Under Secretary then asked the Ambassador whether, under similar circumstances, the Soviet Union would apologize for something it knew it had not done. If we had violated North Korean waters, we would, of course, apologize. We did so under similar circumstances when our aircraft violated Soviet air space over the Kurile Islands. The Under Secretary stated he would not hesitate to send another ship within the 12-mile limit and apologize for the intrusion if he thought it would prove this point.

Ambassador Dobrynin commented that perhaps this was a big country-little country problem and that the North Koreans clearly do not view it in the same light as would a large nation.

The Under Secretary repeated his sincere conviction, based on all the evidence which he had personally examined, that there had been no intrusion. He noted again that there was no operational reason for the Pueblo to approach within 12 miles, that navigational errors were unlikely and that if it had intruded we would have apologized.

To this Ambassador Dobrynin again stated that his Government had no reason to doubt the North Korean statement that the Pueblo was in their waters, and mentioned that several of the Pueblo crewmen had admitted this. The Under Secretary observed that the statements made by some crew members could not be verified since no one but North Koreans have been allowed to see them.

The Under Secretary then asked the Ambassador for his advice on how to resolve the problem, observing that the Soviet Union has influence with the North Koreans while we do not.

Mr. Bohlen added that under international law and common maritime practice, if a ship of another nation crosses your 12-mile limit, the practice was to warn it and escort it out of your waters. The Ambassador replied that all this depends upon your point of view. Different-sized nations hold different opinions on such subjects. The Soviet Union has made its views clear to North Korea. As to the facts, there had been no Soviets present who could verify them.

To the Under Secretary's question whether his Government objected to a third country inquiry, the Ambassador replied that this was all right with the Soviet Union.

When the Under Secretary asked why no one had been allowed to see or talk to the crew, the Ambassador commented that there was much bitterness against the United States in North Korea.

The Ambassador stated that he was really in no position to give advice on the Pueblo problem.

The Under Secretary asked why the North Koreans should want to continue holding the Pueblo crew. Ambassador Dobrynin said he could not speak for them. The Under Secretary emphasized that the North Koreans had not even indicated whether they would return the crew if an apology were made. The Ambassador remarked that he was under the impression they had indicated to the US they would. The Under Secretary stated that they had never told us that they would do so.

The Under Secretary repeated his question whether the Soviets wanted the type of legitimate intelligence collection the Pueblo was engaged in to be considered espionage. The Ambassador said the Soviet ships do not do this within territorial waters. The Pueblo issue, he said, always comes back to the question of fact. The North Koreans say one thing, while the United States says the opposite. The Soviet Government does not wish to be in the position of verifying the facts; moreover, the North Koreans know very well the Soviet Government's views.

The Ambassador then asked what the United States is prepared to do to obtain the crew's release. The Under Secretary reiterated that we will not admit to espionage nor admit that the Pueblo violated North Korean waters. We will admit the intelligence gathering mission of the vessel and will give assurances against future intrusion. Ambassador Dobrynin again remarked that the central point is whether or not the Pueblo did intrude.

The Under Secretary asked Dobrynin to put himself in our position. They are holding our crew—under conditions that could lead our men to say almost anything. We are convinced we did not intrude. Assuming we admitted our “guilt” and apologized, the American system being what it is the crew would disavow its guilt upon its return and the United States Government would be made out a liar.

To the Under Secretary's query as to whether the solution might be our receipting an amended version of the North Korean draft apology document—one that did not admit to espionage—Dobrynin stated he did not think that was what the North Koreans wanted.

The Ambassador, however, said he would report our view to his Government.

The Under Secretary gave the Ambassador a memorandum summarizing the views he had expressed and again asked for the Soviet Government's suggestions on this matter. He showed Ambassador Dobrynin a copy of the draft North Korean apology statement. Ambassador Dobrynin asked what it was in it that we could not accept. The Under Secretary pointed out the espionage, intrusion and apology demands, and noted that, in fact, it was only a request for leniency toward men we would be admitting were guilty of espionage and asked if the Soviet Union would sign that kind of a paper.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Homme on August 14.

2 A talking paper had been prepared in advance of this meeting. (Memorandum from Godley and Springsteen to Katzenbach, July 17; ibid.) The meeting had been delayed by Katzenbach's absence from Washington and by the onset of the Czech crisis. That situation, in turn, delayed the implementation of measures to prod the North Koreans to call the next Senior Members meeting. (Memorandum from Brown to Katzenbach, July 30, and memorandum from Godley to Rusk, August 9; both ibid.)

312. Memorandum From Alfred Jenkins of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) 312. Memorandum From Alfred Jenkins of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, September 4, 1968.

Walt:

I have just learned that the Pueblo is on today's luncheon agenda. Attached is the best recent summary of where we are, which I have just received from State. I don't think any of us are very sanguine about the North Koreans buying this tactic, although it comes closer than any of us would like to a helicopter-type receipt. I have reluctantly come to the view that we should try this approach since other alternatives seem to be even less appealing. September 9 may, of course, make this ploy unnecessary but I would be very surprised if all of the crew were released then.2

Al

Attachment

Washington, September 4, 1968.

Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Brown) to Secretary of State Rusk

SUBJECT

Status of Pueblo Talks at Panmunjom

The talks have, for some time, been at an impasse. The North Koreans insist on our admitting, and apologizing for, espionage and intrusion into their territorial waters. Then, they say, we “need not worry about the release of the crew.”

We have refused to admit espionage or to apologize for acts we are morally certain we did not commit. Various forms of conditional apology (e.g., we regret any intrusion that may have occurred) have been rejected.

Consequently, by authorization of the President on May 18, we began to explore the possibility of General Woodward writing across the face of a document presented by the North Koreans an acknowledgment of the receipt of the crew and signing it. If the North Koreans accepted this they would presumably claim that we had signed their piece of paper and we would say that we had signed only what Woodward had written. We tried to explain this ploy in detail to the North Koreans through an Australian contact in Tokyo, but we are not sure whether this really ever got through to Pyongyang or whether Pak knows about it.

Under Secretary Katzenbach reviewed the situation on August 13 with Ambassador Dobrynin without mentioning the over-write plan. There has been no feedback from this demarche. At our request, a number of other governments have approached the North Koreans but were given the standard response: “Let the Americans apologize.”

President Park has been kept informed by Ambassador Porter.3

For the last two or three meetings we have been asking the North Koreans if they would release the crew if Woodward acknowledged receipt of the men “on a document” satisfactory to the North Koreans.

The Twentieth Closed Meeting on August 29 produced an interesting exchange.4 General Woodward repeatedly tried to get General Pak to say yes or no to our latest formulation: “If I were to acknowledge receipt of the crew on a document whose language was satisfactory to you, would you simultaneously release the crew?” On the third go-round Woodward said, “If you were to simultaneously release the crew, I would acknowledge receipt of a document whose language was satisfactory to you.” Pak pounced on this, “noted that your side is ready to sign our document of apology and assurance”, and promised a further comment later. Woodward said, “Your statement contains language I did not use,” and recessed.

The question is what instructions to give Woodward for the next meeting.

It seems clear that we should continue to try to pin Pak down to release of the crew simultaneously with any signing. It is unlikely, however, that he would do more than agree to release the crew within a day or two after a document was signed. Are we willing to take the risk of signing and relying on North Korean promise to deliver the crew? How long could we wait?

In the case of the helicopter pilots (1964), the North Koreans demanded and got our signature on a receipt—admitting espionage—without any promise of when the pilots would be released. They then immediately offered to release the next day and they did so. They keep saying at Panmunjom “There is a precedent. What more assurance do you want?” We feel that Pak is most unlikely to agree to actual release simultaneous with signature, and that 24 or 48 hours between signature and release would probably not hurt but that we need a commitment that it would be no longer.

Recommendation: That we accept up to a 48 hour interval.

It is possible that Pak might agree to simultaneous release and bring the crew to Panmunjom, but would reject a document if it consisted only of an over-write with Woodward's signature, and threaten to take the crew away again. Under those conditions, should Woodward then sign the document the North Koreans want?

Comment: It is probable that an officer of Woodward's rank and experience would sign even though his instructions did not authorize such action, unless he were expressly forbidden to do so.

We had planned, if Pak agrees to simultaneously, to tell him precisely what we would do, i.e. over-write but not sign the actual North Korean draft. Pak might well reject this ploy if he understood exactly what we planned to do. What then should be our position?

Recommendation: That we do not spell out our proposal further. The ploy might just work, and explanation is likely to kill it.

It is possible that the North Koreans would release only part of the crew, for example, all of the enlisted men but not the officers. Would we sign either the over-write or the North Korean apology in order to get part of the men back?

It would be difficult to reveal nothing to the press and Congress on their debriefings, difficult to prevent leaks, yet difficult to say anything of what we learned from those released without hurting those still held. And it would seem logical for the North Koreans to hold some back as hostages to deter our denouncing whatever “receipt” we may sign, to prevent us from issuing a White Paper, etc. Yet obviously we cannot refuse to accept a part of the crew unless the terms are utterly outrageous.

Recommendation: If we can get back all the enlisted men, or even half or more, we should sign while reiterating our demand for release of the others. We should refuse to sign anything for a merely token release.

The papers today and previous rumors have reported that there would be a major development with respect to Pueblo on September 9 at the celebration of the 20th Anniversary of the DPRK. Should we call for a meeting before or after September 9?

Recommendation: That we wait until after September 9. If anything is to happen on that date the decision was probably taken some time ago. We are unlikely to learn anything from Pak. If he wants to comment constructively on Woodward's statement at the 20th Meeting, he can let us know. Any further clarification on our part might cool him off.

Decisions on these points are needed as soon as possible, since Woodward needs instructions in case of unexpected developments.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Miscellaneous, Vol. I. Secret.

2 The North Koreans planned a major celebration on September 9 to commemorate the anniversary of their independence. In telegram 234620 to Seoul, September 7, the Department of State forwarded guidelines for Woodward's use in the event the North Koreans did release some or all crew members on September 9. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3  Porter reported after briefing him on August 27 President Pak appeared puzzled by the overwrite ploy and “strongly advised against anything resembling apology.” (Telegram 9415 from Seoul, August 27; ibid.)

4 Telegram 210445 to Seoul, July 27, and telegram 223042 to Seoul, August 16, transmitted Woodward's instructions for the meeting. Telegram 9475 from Seoul, August 29, transmitted a summary of the meeting, which lasted from 11 a.m. to 12:47 p.m. KST. Telegram 9476 from Seoul, August 29, transmitted the verbatim text of the meeting. (All ibid.)

313. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 313. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, September 17, 1968, 1050Z.

9889. Subject: 21st Senior MAC Members Closed Meeting at Panmunjom Sept 17, 1968. Reference: Seoul 9475.2

1. Meeting began 1100 hours Sep 17 and ended 1452 hours local time.3 Length of meeting was due to persistent efforts on part of both sides to probe position of other side, with long pauses required to write out statements.

2. Some clarification of NK position emerged from General Woodward's questioning of Pak. The North Korean side went on record as stating flatly that the crew of the Pueblo would be released if the US would sign and submit the North Korean document of May 8. Second position of NK was that if US side agreed to sign and submit May 8 document the NK side would be prepared to discuss the specifics of the release of the crew and the signing of the document.

3. At no time was General Pak willing to reply directly to General Woodward's questions regarding simultaneous release. Presumption is that simultaneous release is one of specific details which would be discussed after US agreed to sign May 8 document. We note that Pak made no effort to find out what we meant by “acknowledge receipt.” Again the presumption is that this is one of specific details to be settled after US agreement to sign.

4. We also note that Pak did not at this meeting mention existing precedent in connection with release of crew. Failure to mention precedent may have no particular significance as again, all questions of this nature presumably included amongst details to be settled later.

5. General Pak made several efforts to find out if by language acceptable to NK side, we meant their May 8 document. These efforts frustrated by General Woodward.

6. Typical statement of Pak setting forth first position mentioned paragraph 2 above was as follows: “I clearly stated that our side will send back to your side the crew of the Pueblo only if your side signs the document presented by our side at the meeting of May 8 last.”

7. Second position NK side mentioned para 2 above was expressed by Pak in following language: “I have also stated that if your side indicates its willingness to sign the document presented by our side on May 8 detailed matters concerning signing of the document and return of the crew will be discussed.”

8. General Woodward raised question of visit to NK of father of Angelo Strano.4 General Pak flatly refused to deal with question stating that “this is not the place to arrange for issuance of a visa.”

9. Meeting closed with General Pak asking for reply from US side at next meeting to question of whether US prepared to sign May 8 document. General Woodward's impression is that NKs, as result of question raised by US at 20th meeting and recent press furor, think that the US is prepared to sign. If this impression correct, NKs have incentive to call next meeting at reasonably early date.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2 Telegram 9475 from Seoul, August 29, transmitted a summary of the previous senior MAC members meeting. (Ibid.) For this meeting Woodward was instructed to press Pak to answer his previous question relative to simultaneous signature of a receipt and release of the crew. (Telegram 237348 to Seoul, September 12; ibid.) Instructions covering other eventualities were transmitted in telegram 238737 to Seoul, September 14. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 9890 from Seoul, September 17, transmitted the verbatim text of this meeting. (Ibid.)

4 The parents of crew member Strano met with Benjamin Fleck, Country Director for Korea, in Washington on July 17, at which time Mr. Strano voiced his desire to go to North Korea to attempt to free his son and his expectation that the U.S. Government would arrange his entry. The matter was discussed with Katzenbach and brought to Rusk's attention. (Memorandum from Brown to Rusk, July 25; ibid.) The Department agreed to submit his request to the North Koreans, and Woodward was asked to do so in his instructions for the 20th closed meeting. (Telegram 210445 to Seoul, July 27; ibid.)

314. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to Secretary of State Rusk 314. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, September 18, 1968.

SUBJECT

Pueblo

Dean:

As requested, at Tab A is a redraft—omitting the lurid adjectives and the paragraph requesting leniency for the Pueblo crew—of the May 8 document the North Koreans want us to sign. (The original is at Tab B.)2

My personal view is that any move to tamper with the document now would be a serious mistake.

We have been following a two-pronged course in our negotiations at Panmunjom: —Don't give an inch. This is the explicit approach we have taken in the closed meetings. We have probed for any flexibility in the NK position, without giving any flat assurances of our own willingness to compromise.

—What compromise can we reach and repudiate after the crew is returned? Implicit in much that we have said, however (including a clandestine Australian contact with the North Koreans), is a hint that we would be willing to overwrite (in lieu of a simple signature) on the May 8 document an acknowledgement of receipt for the crew (assuming release is simultaneous with the overwrite). Our plan is to repudiate the document as soon as the crew is released, arguing that all General Woodward did was acknowledge receipt of the crew.

It may be that at some future date the North Koreans would agree to release the crew on less onerous terms than those they now insist upon. But this is pure conjecture, and could be months or years away.

It is by no means certain that the North Koreans will accept our overwrite ploy, should we reach the point where we might use it. But neither do we have any evidence to indicate that they will not accept it.

There are several compelling reasons against trying to negotiate a document to replace that of May 8: —It would involve many weeks of negotiation (assuming we could ever arrive at a mutually acceptable document, which I doubt). This might be an acceptable price, if it were not for other serious drawbacks.

—The North Koreans will continue for a very long time to insist on a document which (a) admits espionage and intrusion; (b) apologizes for both; (c) recognizes the DPRK.

—If we are ever going to sign (or “acknowledge receipt on”) any document, the more patently false the better. The May 8 document is so bad that it will make our reasons for acceptance and repudiation that much more believable.3

—By entering into negotiations over the wording of the receipt we make the document “agreed”, thus increasing the difficulties of a clean-cut disavowal. (It is easier to disavow a document—outrageous blackmail on its face and “signed” for purely humanitarian reasons—than to disown one we have had a hand in drafting.) It would also make the overwrite ploy less credible to our own and world opinion.

—Anything less than the “clean-cut disavowal” mentioned above will raise questions about our consistent public denials of espionage and intrusion, and confirm the doubts of many—both in the US and abroad—who already tend to disbelieve them.

We still face a number of unpalatable decisions on our present course, but I am totally convinced that we should play the hand out before trying something else. If we now begin to argue about the wording of a document we have had before us for more than four months, it will be extremely difficult to justify waiting so long to raise an issue which can only add many additional weeks to our negotiations—and with no real likelihood of success.

Nicholas deB. Katzenbach 4

Tab A

The Government of the United States of America:

Accepts the statements of the crew of the USS Pueblo and the documents of evidence produced by the representative of the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to the effect that the ship, which was seized by the naval vessels of the Korean People's Army in the territorial waters of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on January 23, 1968, had intruded into the territorial waters of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on many occasions and conducted espionage activities on important military and state secrets of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea;

Accepts responsibility and apologizes for the acts of espionage committed by the United States ship against the Democratic People's Republic of Korea after intruding into the territorial waters of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea; and

Gives firm assurances that no United States ships will again intrude into the territorial waters of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files, 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis.

2 Attached but not printed, see Document 306.

3 In a September 17 memorandum to Clifford, Warnke made a similar point, noting that “If we are to sign anything, I prefer that it be their document rather than one which we had revised. It would then be easier totally to repudiate the document.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 092.2)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

315. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 315. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea1

Washington, September 21, 1968, 2036Z.

242963. Subject: Instructions for 22nd Meeting.

1. Progress at last meeting makes it appear at least possible that overwrite ploy will work and next meeting should be used to press it hard. We note that Pak constantly reiterates idea that Woodward will “sign” but never himself contrasts or probes distinction between “sign” and Woodward's language. It may thus be that Pak will be satisfied with making a negotiating record to support contention Woodward is “signing” while allowing us to keep our own negotiating record clean of any assent to his assertion. Such agreement to disagree on record would satisfy us, particularly since audiences receptive to NK propaganda are not likely to pore over transcripts of talks, and careful reading by impartial observers will bear us out.

2. Pak will presumably open next meeting by restating assurance given at last meeting that crew will be returned “if your side signs document of May 8” and asking if Woodward can now agree to sign. Or he may again state his “understanding” that Woodward is ready to sign (as in para 25 of Seoul 9890)2 and ask Woodward's concurrence.

3. In either case Woodward should respond as follows: “I have repeatedly asked you whether you agree to release the crew at the same time as I acknowledge that I am receiving them. You have repeatedly responded that I am reiterating a question which has already been made clear, because you are well aware that I insist on the simultaneous release of the entire crew and your side has already agreed to their release under certain conditions. You then have repeatedly asked me whether, when I spoke of a document whose language was satisfactory to you, I had in mind the document which you presented here on May 8. Since your side presented that draft, our side of course assumes that its language is satisfactory to you, even though its language does not reflect what we believe to be the true facts of this case and is in other respects inaccurate. The answer to your question is therefore yes, your draft of May 8 is obviously a document such as we had in mind. I am now prepared to state that if tomorrow you will release to me the entire crew, I will tomorrow acknowledge on your draft of May 8 that I am receiving them. I assume that this statement on my part will now make it possible for us to take the next step, that is, to discuss the specific arrangements for the release of the crew tomorrow. Is that correct?”

4. Pak will presumably respond by noting “that your side intends to sign our document of apology and assurance presented May 8” and will say that he cannot possibly make any arrangements for the next day, that he must consult with his authorities, etc. He will probably again seek ratification by Woodward of his “understanding” of US position.

5. Woodward should handle such efforts along following lines: “You are misquoting me. You have said that under certain conditions your side would release the entire crew. I have said that under certain conditions I would be prepared to acknowledge receipt of the crew on your document of May 8. For example, if you will agree to release the entire crew tomorrow, then I can agree today that I will tomorrow acknowledge their receipt on your May 8 document. I see no reason why the crew cannot be brought here tomorrow. (Woodward may expand on this point as he judges appropriate.) You say that these specific arrangements cannot be carried through tomorrow. I ask, why not? And if it really is not possible, then when can the crew be brought here? How long will it take you to assemble and transport them? These are the specific arrangements which you said could be discussed if I would indicate my general acceptance of your demand that your document of May 8 be used when I acknowledge that I am receiving the crew. Let us now move on to discuss these specific arrangements. I await your answer to my question on when the release can take place.”

6. As you see, our object in foregoing is to draw Pak into discussions on time and place of release, bypassing any discussion of what Pak calls “detailed matters concerning signing of the document”. It might, for example, be easier for Pak to agree to simultaneity if he did not have to agree to it in principle but only had to talk of fixing dates. We do not expect any commitment on time at this meeting but Woodward should hammer at necessity for firm date as next move, while avoiding any unconditional statement of our willingness to use May 8 document, i.e., absent their agreement to imminent, simultaneous release.

7. As you can gather, it is most helpful to have on record repeated restatements of whatever commitments Pak has authority to make, not merely for sake of negotiating record, but in order to be sure they are solid commitments and not merely result of slip by Pak or his translators.

8. After squeezing from Pak as much blood as this turnip has in it, Woodward should attempt to close meeting on following lines: “You have said that despite statements I have made you still are not ready to discuss with me the time and place for the release of the crew. I propose that we recess until 11 a.m. tomorrow so that you can obtain the authority to discuss that matter. Do you agree?”

9. We doubt that Pak will, in fact, agree to reconvene after 24 hours or any other specified pause, but Woodward should press on above lines to indicate that US side demands minimum and clearly specified delay from moment when it gives unconditional agreement to acknowledging receipt on May 8 document. (See FYI at end of para 11, State 237348.)3

10. If Pak should indicate either firm or approximate date when crew might be released, Woodward should propose meeting 24 hours in advance “to reach final agreement and make final arrangements on the conditions of the release”.

11. We would prefer that next meeting come quickly and in your discretion you may indicate to other side that we are ready.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Leonard; cleared by Brown, Walsh, and Steadman; and approved by Katzenbach. Rostow forwarded a copy of telegram 242963 to President Johnson at the ranch in Texas as CAP 82460 with an opening paragraph indicating that Rusk and Clifford cleared the instructions. Rostow told Johnson that Clifford accepted the approach after he “understood the North Koreans were clear about the ambiguity.” Rostow reported that Katzenbach did not “think the other side will accept, but it's worth playing the hand.” (Telegram CAP 82460 from Rostow to Johnson, September 22, Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus Ib, Cactus State Cables, March 1 to September 30, 1968)

2 Paragraph 25 in telegram 9890 from Seoul, September 17, quotes Pak as stating: “I understand that this statement of yours implies that your side is ready to sign the document presented by our side on May 8 to have the crew sent back. If you agree to this understanding of mine, specific matters, including the matter concerned with your side's signing the document will be discussed later on.” Woodward replied that he made no implications and simply wanted to understand Pak's position. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3 The referenced portion of paragraph 11 in telegram 237348 to Seoul, September 12, reads: “Though we cannot accept any delay between actual signed acknowledgment and release we probably could accept 48 hours between agreement to acknowledge receipt and release. If Pak suggests something like that Woodward should note it as firm offer which will be reported to Washington.” (Ibid.)

316. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 316. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, September 30, 1968, 0913Z.

10159. Subj: 22nd Senior MAC Members Closed Mtg and Panmunjom Sep 30, 1968. Ref: Seoul 9889.2

1. Meeting began at 1100 hrs Sep 30 and ended 1219 hrs local time.3 Gen Woodward commented that Gen Pak had never been so polite.

2. Gen Pak made opening statement, restating standard NK line, but ending with commitment to release crew simultaneously on signature of apology.

3. Gen Pak at same time handed Gen. Woodward copy in English and Korean of exact statement to be signed. Complete text in English as follows: “To the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea the Government of the USA, acknowledging the validity of the confessions of the crew of the USS Pueblo and of the documents of evidence produced by the rep of the Government of the DPRK to the effect that the ship, which was seized by the self-defense measures of the naval vessels of the Korean People's Army in the territorial waters of the DPRK on January 23, 1968, had illegally intruded into the territorial waters of the DPRK on many occasions and conducted espionage activities of spying out important military and state secrets of the DPRK.”

“Shoulders full responsibility and solemnly apologizes for the grave acts of espionage committed by the US ship against the DPRK after having intruded into the territorial waters of the DPRK,

“And gives firm assurance that no US ships will intrude again in future into the territorial waters of the DPRK.

“Meanwhile, the Government of the USA earnestly requests the Government of the DPRK to deal leniently with the former crew members of the USS Pueblo confiscated by the DPRK side, taking into consideration the fact that these crew members have confessed honestly to their crimes and petitioned the Government of the DPRK for leniency.

“Simultaneously with the signing of this document, the undersigned acknowledges receipt of 82 former crew members of the Pueblo and one corpse.

“On behalf of the Government of the USA: Gilbert H. Woodward, Maj Gen, USA”

4. Since Pak's statement and document he presented to Gen Woodward answered questions regarding nature of signature and simultaneity raised State 242963,4 Gen Woodward proceeded to press Gen Pak as to whether NK side prepared to release crew within 24 hours if he were to acknowledge receipt of them on the document which Gen Pak had handed him.

5. Gen Pak replied that question of procedures on delivery and receipt of the crew could be discussed at next meeting. Gen Woodward did not press further as it obvious Gen Pak had no instructions regarding time of release.

6. Gen Woodward did not raise points raised State 2459795 regarding additional “intrusions.”

7. We intend to tell ROKG at this stage only that NK side has agreed to simultaneous release and that “acknowledgement of receipt” question has not been resolved. ROKG may suspect on the other hand that agreement is near and problem of briefing them (FonOff) at this time is becoming acute.

8. Dispatch now of public relations team mentioned State 2467496 would certainly feed this impression and might lead to speculation jeopardizing chances of release. We continue to believe team should not be sent until all arrangements for release completed.

9. If US should agree to present NK proposal, it would be imperative that Amb give Pres Park full briefing at least 24 hrs before time of actual release, though this will entail certain risks. We will need all the cooperation we can get from ROKG in handling public relations problem here. It is also highly desirable that simultaneous announcement of release be made in Washington and Seoul.

10. If US should decline present NK proposal danger exists that NK side may release text of document stating that US has refused offer for return of crew.

11. Embassy pouching Korean text of NK document.7 Korean text appears to coincide closely with English version.

12. Department will note heading on NK document of “to the government of the DPRK “ in heavy block letters. To best of Embassy's knowledge this salutation has not previously been used in any dealing with NK. Phrase has appeared in body of military documents such as receipt signed by Gen Combs for helicopter pilots in 1964. Dept will also wish to note language of concluding para of document which is combination of simultaneity, signature, and receipt. Gen Woodward states that tone of meeting such that he expects notification NK side ready for US call next meeting in very near future.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2  Document 313.

3 Telegram 10157 from Seoul, September 30, transmitted the verbatim text of this meeting. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US) Telegram 10159 and the verbatim text were given to President Johnson under a September 30 covering memorandum from Rostow in which he stated he thought the ploy would work and added: “Although the device is a trick, I must say that Woodward is so clear in this exchange as to what he is doing that we have a good basis for defending our position if, in fact, the release does take place.” Rostow's memorandum indicates the President saw the documents. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968)

4  Document 315.

5 Telegram 245979 to Seoul, September 27, provided Woodward with instructions in case Pak raised allegations of 11 additional intrusions into North Korean territorial waters based on records found aboard the Pueblo. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

6 Telegram 246749 to Seoul, September 27, informed the Embassy that the Departments of State and Defense intended to send to Seoul “officials concerned with post-release problems,” composed of both military and civilian representatives. (Ibid.)

7 Not found.

317. Action Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Katzenbach to President Johnson 317. Action Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Katzenbach to President Johnson 1

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

Pueblo

The Problem:

The fundamental issue at Panmunjom has been that the North Koreans have insisted on our signing an admission of espionage and intrusion into their territorial waters, apologies for both, and a promise of no further intrusion.

We have refused to admit espionage or to apologize for acts we do not believe were committed. Various forms of conditional apology (e.g., we regret any intrusion that may have occurred) have been rejected.

The “Overwrite” Solution:

To break this impasse, we have, with your authorization on May 18, been exploring the possibility of General Woodward writing the following sentence on the “document of apology and assurance” presented on May 8 by the North Koreans: “There have been turned over to me today at Panmunjom 82 surviving members of the crew of the USS Pueblo and the body of Seaman Duane D. Hodges.” He would sign this inscription. If the North Koreans accepted this they would presumably claim that we had signed their piece of paper. We would say that we had signed only what Woodward had written.

Recent Progress:

For the last four months we have been pressing for a firm commitment by the North Koreans that if we were to “acknowledge receipt of the crew on a document satisfactory to them” they would simultaneously release the whole crew. At the 21st meeting (September 17) the North Koreans for the first time said unambiguously that if we would sign their document, they would return the crew. At the 22nd meeting (September 30), they were even more explicit, saying that the entire crew would be released simultaneous with our signing their document.

The “Overwrite” Not a Deception:

In the negotiations since May we have on a number of occasions noted that the North Korean document of May 8 does not correspond to what we believe are the facts. Moreover, we have been scrupulous in using the words “acknowledge receipt on” in describing what we might be prepared to do, and when Pak has interpreted this to mean that we were “willing to sign” General Woodward has replied, “You are using words I did not use.” Our Korean language experts tell us the difference between “sign” and “acknowledge receipt on” is even clearer in Korean than in English. Moreover, we have sent a message to the North Koreans through an Australian contact in Tokyo spelling out in more detail what we had in mind. We are not absolutely sure that this message got through to Pyongyang, but our Australian contact and his Korean friend are confident that it did.

Moreover, at the last (22nd) meeting, General Pak presented a slightly modified draft of his paper of May 8 with this additional paragraph at the bottom:

“Simultaneously with the signing of this document the under- signed acknowledges receipt of 82 former crew members of the Pueblo and one corpse.” (The entire document is at Tab A.)2

This added paragraph tends to undercut our overwrite and confirms our feeling that Pak knows what we have in mind. If in the end he accepts the overwrite, we will not have misled or duped the North Koreans; rather they will have accepted an ambiguous act as meeting their requirements. They have been as consistent as we: they never speak of acknowledging receipt, only of “signing our document”. We are not at all sure that they will in fact accept the overwrite ploy.

The following courses of action appear open:

Track A: Attempt to negotiate a satisfactory receipt.

We do not believe that the North Koreans would accept any draft which did not contain an admission of espionage and intrusion and an apology for both. Yet a negotiation which reduced but did not eliminate these unacceptable elements would have succeeded only in making the draft our own as well as theirs and therefore more difficult to repudiate. The more extreme the document the easier the repudiation.

Track B: Sign, with an explanatory statement.

At the last Closed Meeting before the signing we could make a further statement for the record that it contains many assertions which we believe to be false, that we do not admit any crime, that the seizure was wholly illegal, and that we are signing the document only for humanitarian reasons to get back the crew. Our public statement at the time of signature and release would probably have to be limited to making clear that our signature was based entirely on the North Korean “evidence” as anything stronger might result in refusal to deliver the crew. Repudiation would follow, of course, immediately upon the crew's coming into our possession. (A draft of such a statement of repudiation is attached as Tab C.)

Track C: Try a last-minute overwrite.

We would move ahead to negotiate with Pak the technical arrangements for the release, leaving unresolved the ambiguity between “sign” and “acknowledge receipt on”. We would then attempt the overwrite at the time of the actual delivery of the crew.

This might work, but if Pak rejected it we would be in a difficult position. He will probably insist on the press being present for the signature and release. For us to attempt to overwrite without a clear understanding and acceptance in advance might seem to the world to be sharp practice, and to stand firm on it would seem to many a heartless legalism. Rather than see the crew return to North Korea, Woodward would have to sign their form of receipt. And we could hardly argue that he had signed without instructions when faced by an unforeseen situation. If we proceed along this track we must be prepared to end up on Track B—signature, with a statement for the record that takes some of the bite out of the document.

Track D: Clarify the overwrite.

We would firm up the detailed arrangements for a release and tell Pak precisely what we plan to do in the overwrite.

Pak will probably reject this, at least for a meeting or two, perhaps finally. But he may accept it if convinced that this is as far as we are prepared to go. If he does agree, we have an impeccable record of disclosure and there is no legitimate basis for any accusations of sharp practice. If he finally does not agree, Track B is not foreclosed.

Recommendation.

I prefer alternative D. Track A is a dead end which will lose time without taking us anywhere. Track C is probably only a round-about way of getting to B—the outright signature. Though a public statement at the time of signing would help, the arguments against Track B are still strong. It would be demeaning to the United States to sign under blackmail imposed by an illegal act an apology for something we did not do and an admission that perfectly legal actions are illegal. We would not, for example, sign an admission that our actions in Viet-Nam constituted aggression and apologize for them even if this would insure release of 82 captured pilots. The repudiation of our signature would also be demeaning and could not wholly erase the stigma of the signature. The apology would confirm the belief of many in the United States and elsewhere that despite our denials and repudiation we were in fact engaged in improper acts, thus further tarnishing our reputation at home and abroad. Our men are dying and being captured in Viet-Nam and are risking their lives along the DMZ in Korea. The Pueblo crew are no different. Finally, there is no need to consider alternative B unless it becomes quite clear that the overwrite (Track D) will not work.

I recommend that we proceed with alternative D. If it works it would result in the release of the crew on a basis with which we can live and if it should fail would not foreclose other alternatives, should we later ever wish to use them. Secretaries Rusk and Clifford concur.3

In addition to a copy of the North Korean document (Tab A), I attach at Tab B a draft statement such as might be used if we succeed with the overwrite and at Tab C a draft statement such as might be used if we signed the North Korean document under protest.

Nicholas deB Katzenbach

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IV, Cactus Miscellaneous Papers, February to December 1968. Secret;Nodis; Cactus. Attached to an October 5 memorandum from Rostow to President Johnson that indicates that the President saw it. Another copy is attached to an October 5 memorandum from Katzenbach to Rostow in which the former states: “This is a very important decision and I would very much appreciate it if the President would read the memorandum in its entirety.” (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

2 Tabs A, B, and C are attached but not printed.

3  Rostow's memorandum to the President identified in footnote 1 above bears a handwritten notation indicating that Rostow notified Katzenbach on October 7 that the President approved alternative D.

318. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 318. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea1

Washington, October 8, 1968, 1421Z.

251495. Subject: Instructions for Twenty-third Meeting.

1. Although Pak's unambiguous acceptance of simultaneity and willingness release entire crew are heartening factors, para which he added to May 8 document may make overwrite play more difficult to execute. (Other differences seem trivial.) As you noted, added para is clever combination of signature and receipt which turns our demand for simultaneity against us. Woodward clearly has worthy opponent.

2. Problem seems to us to lie in clarifying overwrite ploy sufficiently but not too much. We must make quite clear to Pak what we intend to do and satisfy ourselves that he accepts it. If at moment of signature overwrite were rejected it would be most embarrassing for us and if Woodward for humanitarian reasons were compelled to sign on their dotted line, we could not plausibly argue that this had been unforeseen contingency for which Woodward had not had instructions. Next meeting should therefore above all pin down Pak's acquiescence in overwrite—if he can give it.

3. On other hand we recognize Pak probably cannot go beyond direct agreement to specific procedures. His authorities will plan to present overwrite as USG ratification of body of document and we cannot expect explicit language from Pak which would undercut that plan. On our side, we should try to place on negotiating record language as helpful to our case as we can without killing deal. We recognize Woodward will have to decide as he goes along how far beyond minimum he can risk going.

4. Woodward should also be aware that although our present intent is to press hard with overwrite and he should not say anything to encourage Pak to hope for more, we do not flatly exclude possibility of eventually meeting their demand if overwrite does not work.

5. You should call next meeting without delay and have Woodward open along following lines: “A. I am pleased to note that at our last meeting you agreed very clearly to the principle that the entire crew will be released at the same time that I acknowledge on your document that I am receiving them.

B. With this agreement on your part I believe that we can now proceed to discuss the practical details of the release.

C. I assume that you will want to transfer the crew to my custody here at Panmunjom. Is this correct?

D. The other important aspect of the release is the time. I indicated at our last meeting that I assumed 24 hours would be adequate time from the moment when we have settled all aspects of the problem to the moment of release. Am I correct? If you need more than 24 hours, how much more and why?”

6. Pak may respond directly to above queries, but more likely will preface by noting his “understanding” Woodward willing to sign document passed at last meeting and may give no more information in absence of confirmation. We will find useful whatever info on time and place Woodward can extract without confirming Pak's “understanding”, but such info not essential at this stage and Woodward should give priority to avoiding confirmation that he will “sign” by reiterating “acknowledge receipt” each time Pak says “sign” and eventually using paras 9–11 below.

7. If info forthcoming, Woodward should then probe on other aspect of transfer. He should indicate he will wish first to verify that all 82 men present, then have them pass to UNC side while he is actually acknowledging receipt. He should say we want no press present. Pak will presumably insist on them and after arguing hardship for crew who have already suffered enough for carrying out orders, Woodward should agree to report Pak's demand.

8. Woodward should give strong warning at appropriate moment, perhaps in above context, against any breach of privacy of talks. He should point out we have been scrupulous in observing secrecy and NK record not bad but note period immediately before release most delicate. Any breach at that time and in particular any assertion by NK sources that US on verge of apology would be most harmful and could result in breakdown of arrangements.FYI. This problem is of course very real and Woodward's tone and presentation should be designed impress Pak with seriousness of warning. If no appropriate occasion has arisen, this warning should be given at conclusion of meeting. End FYI.

9. After Pak has said all he will (perhaps nothing) on practical arrangements, Woodward should turn to real problem: form of document to be used. After referring, if appropriate, to Pak's statement of what he expects, Woodward should say as much of following as he feels he can: “A. I want to make perfectly clear exactly what I am prepared to do to solve the problem we have been discussing in these meetings. I do not want there to be any doubt in your mind or mine about what the other intends to do.

B. On May 8 you presented a draft of what you would consider a suitable 'document of apology and assurance.' I subsequently pointed out to you the problem raised by the divergences between your draft and the facts. We have told you and I repeat now that the mission of the Pueblo was not 'espionage,' it was intelligence, that we can not accept the confessions and the 'evidence' you have shown us as 'proof' that the Pueblo intruded into the territorial waters claimed by you, and that we can not apologize for actions which we do not believe took place. You may confirm our statements on these points in the record of the Seventh, Fourteenth and Seventeenth Closed Meetings and elsewhere. We have also told you and I repeat now that we are prepared to assure you that our naval vessels will continue to be ordered to remain more than 12 nautical miles from your coast. You may confirm our statements on this point on the record of the Seventh Closed Meeting and subsequently.

C. Despite these statements you have continued to demand that I accept and sign your document and you have held the crew hostage to obtain my signature. I continue to object most strongly to this unprincipled blackmail.”

10. An alternate, and for Pak, less troublesome formulation of these points, would be: “A. Unchanged from 9.A.

B. On May 8 you presented a draft of what you would consider a suitable 'document of apology and assurance.' I subsequently pointed out to you the problems raised by the divergences between your draft and what we believe to be the facts. With regard to your assertions that the mission of the Pueblo was espionage', that you had provided us with evidence' which proved that the Pueblo intruded into your territorial waters, and that we should apologize for these acts, our position has been clearly placed on the record of these meetings. That position has not altered. We have also told you and I repeat now that we are prepared to assure you that our naval vessels will continue to be ordered to remain more than 12 nautical miles from your coast.

C. First sentence only from 9.C.”

11. Para 10 is minimum we believe should be gotten on record before proceeding to deliver following. Woodward should of course feel free to select any variations bracketed by foregoing poles. He should then continue: “Nevertheless, in order to reach a solution of this problem, in order to reduce tensions in the area, and in order to permit these 82 innocent men to return to their families, I am prepared to use the draft you presented me at the September 30 meeting as a basis for solving the problem by acknowledging on it that I am receiving the custody of the crew. I will write on the draft the words:

I hereby acknowledge receipt of the Pueblo crew' and I will sign my name and title. Do you have any objection to these arrangements?”

12. If Pak objects that sentence to be written is superfluous in view of para added Sept 30 to May 8 document, Woodward may suggest para added be removed. FYI: We actually see more advantage to retention of added para since redundancy of overwrite following added para buttresses argument that overwrite is all Woodward is signing. We can, however, accept it either way so long as concept of overwrite in Woodward's hand is retained. End FYI.2

13. If Pak seems in genuine doubt about some aspects of above procedure, Woodward should try to clarify. If he insists in usual fashion on interpreting Woodward's statements as acceptance of signature of document, Woodward should repeat “You are not using my language” and refer him to statement in para 11 above.

14. If Pak had earlier refused to be drawn into discussion of place and time of release and other details, Woodward should make further attempt when foregoing discussion of overwrite has been concluded.

15. When and if it becomes clear that Pak fully understands and accepts proposal in para 11, and assuming other details seem generally in hand, Woodward should ask Pak to fix date on which crew will be released. If Pak does so, Woodward should propose meeting 24 hours before to confirm all arrangements. If Pak does not fix date, Woodward should suggest Pak call next meeting when he has firm date to propose.

Katzenbach

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Leonard; cleared by Meeker, Steadman, Ambassador Brown, Brown (S/S), and in draft by Armstrong (EA/P); and approved by Katzenbach.

2 The Embassy noted that Woodward's instructions failed to mention where he should put his signature. Although the North Korean document included a signature block, the Embassy assumed and the Department of State confirmed that Woodward should sign under it. The Department of State also noted that “best of all would be to write diagonally across face of NK document.” (Telegrams 10316 from Seoul and 252348 to Seoul, both October 9; both ibid.)

319. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 319. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, October 10, 1968, 0955Z.

10338. Subject: 23rd Senior MAC Members Closed Meeting at Panmunjom October 10, 1968. Reference: State 251495.2

1. Meeting began at 1100 hours October 10 local time and ended 1418 hours.3

2. General Woodward opened meeting by suggesting that discussion of practical details of release of crew be held. He asked if his assumption was correct that 24 hours would be adequate time from the moment all aspects of the problem had been settled to the moment of release.

3. General Pak did not reply to 24-hour question but handed Gen Woodward detailed paper giving NK proposal for release of crew (text included in transcript of meeting which follows) and roster of crew with proposed order of release (being pouched). Paper made clear NK desire for maximum publicity at time of release and NK intention to publicize agreement to sign as soon as agreement reached. Paper made no mention of time interval between agreement to sign and actual release but did specify two-hour interval between actual signing and time of release.

4. Department will note from transcript of meeting that arrangements for release proposed by NK side differ considerably from Breeches Buoy concept4 and are designed to provide maximum NK advantage (e.g. by use of bridge of no return rather than JSA as release point). NK sketch of area of release being pouched.

5. General Woodward pushed hard for exclusion of press at time of signing. Pak took line that NK wanted to have three photographers present at signing and had no objection if US made similar arrangement. As noted above, NKs obviously arranging for big propaganda show at time of actual release of crew.

6. General Woodward then took up need to maintain secrecy at this stage of negotiations. General Pak did not reply to this point, presumably because NK proposals for arrangements concerning release openly state NK intention to publicize US agreement to sign as soon as agreement given.

7. Final matter raised by Gen Woodward was statement for record contained in para 9 reftel and explanation our concept of acknowledgement of receipt contained para 11 reftel. There was 33 minute pause while NK considered response. Pak eventually replied that General Woodward's statement meant that US was not willing to see early solution of the question of the Pueblo crew and it could not be understood otherwise. US side would never get crew back unless it made the apology and guarantee suggested by NK side.

8. General Pak's reply to Gen. Woodward's statement on acknowledgement of receipt did not directly reject this concept. Pak stated inter alia “Your side agreed to the matter of principle for the solution of the question of the Pueblo crew but has now taken an insincere and arrogant attitude for frustrating the agreement. Whom are you fooling?” General Woodward considers it possible that our definition of acknowledgement of receipt came as a surprise to Pak and he had no instructions to cover this matter.

9. If NK side genuinely believes we were on point of agreeing to sign and considers overwrite ploy a “trick,” it is possible they will now seek to increase pressure on US through stepped-up propaganda campaign. One obvious avenue of approach would be to reiterate threat to try crew. Other would be to announce that NK had made specific offer to release crew and US had not seen fit to accept it.

10. Summarizing recent meetings we now know: 1. Details of NK proposals concerning actual arrangements for release.

2. NK agreement to “simultaneous release” which actually would be two hours after signing.

3. Time between agreement to sign and actual release of crew would be long enough for NK to publicize US agreement.

4. Question of overwrite still pending.

11. Prior to recess General Woodward agreed to consider detailed arrangements presented by NK side and to comment at next meeting.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis, Cactus. Rostow forwarded this document to President Johnson under an October 10 covering memorandum stating, “The North Koreans herewith pretend not to have understood the 'over-write' ploy on the Pueblo crew—or, in fact, did not understand it. The issue remains in the air.” The memorandum indicates the President saw the documents. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IIb, Cactus Seoul Cables, March 1, 1968 to October 31, 1968)

2  Document 318.

3 Telegram 10340, October 10, transmitted the verbatim text of this meeting. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

4  Breeches Buoy was the name given to the operational plan for the recovery, return, and intelligence debriefing of the crew members.

320. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 320. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea1

Washington, October 12, 1968, 2130Z.

254615. Subject: Instructions for Twenty-fourth Meeting—Part 1.

1. We are of course somewhat disheartened by Pak's apparent surprise when acknowledgement of receipt defined in precise terms. We had been reasonably confident that Pak had at least suspected our intentions, since para added to their document at 22nd meeting was clearly designed to undercut it. Pak's strong reaction may thus be explained partly in terms of hope, now dashed, that we would allow ambiguity to persist until moment of transfer. Whether he planned to confront Woodward with last minute demand for naked signature or planned to present overwrite to his superiors as trivial detail or had genuinely not foreseen overwrite we will probably never know. Wisdom of clarifying our intent seems, however, quite evident since last minute breakdown would be most painful.

2. Whether Pak's surprise was genuine or feigned and how serious his objections will prove to be will only come out in next meeting or two. It is clear NKs thought they were close to resolution of matter and were more than willing to liquidate it on their terms. We will have to wait and see whether this has generated momentum favorable to overwrite compromise. Meanwhile we will activate whatever additional pressures might move them to a favorable decision, e.g., threatening noises toward ships being built in Netherlands.2

3. Our general line for next meeting or two should therefore be stonewalling on main point combined with indications of flexibility on side issues.

4. If Pak has made no move to call meeting by October 18, General Woodward should indicate through JDO that he is ready any time.

5. Pak will presumably open with expanded version of closing statement last meeting and with renewed demand that Woodward state willingness “sign the document of apology and assurance.” He will probably elaborate on charge Woodward is going back on “agreement in principle.”

6. Woodward should reply on following lines: “A. At the last meeting I made a clear, specific proposal for settling this matter. You have responded with a general attack on my position. I deny that I have in any way gone back on an agreement in principle.'

B. I refer again to my specific proposal at the last meeting that we solve this problem by using your draft document presented on September 30. I will write on that document the words 'I hereby acknowledge receipt of the Pueblo crew' and I will sign my name and title. Do you have any specific objection to these arrangements?”

7. If Pak's opening statement contains no general attack but simply avoids either concurring with or objecting to overwrite, Woodward should use only point B above.

8. Pak may respond to para 6 above with flat negative or specific attack on overwrite phrase, or may again deliver general attack. In any case, Woodward should reply making following points: A. He should note Pak's statement.

B. He should regret, if appropriate, Pak's belligerent tone after businesslike atmosphere which had characterized recent meetings.

C. He should then say May 8 document most repugnant to us. We would much prefer to have nothing to do with it. Nevertheless, to secure release of captives, we have consistently indicated since Seventeenth Meeting that we might find it possible to move to a solution based on that document.

D. We have consistently proposed since May using their draft and acknowledging on it that crew was simultaneously being released. We have consistently said, “I will acknowledge receipt on a document satisfactory to you.” Pak can verify from record that we have not deviated. In fact, at conclusion of last meeting in attacking our position he accurately quoted it. (Woodward may wish to read back first two sentences of para 15 Seoul 10340.)3 Concept of simultaneous release was eventually accepted by Pak. Our offer to acknowledge it on NK document was repeatedly misinterpreted by Pak but these misinterpretations have been regularly and carefully corrected. We are surprised Pak should now reopen problem which we had believed was closed. Pak must study record carefully. He will see there is no inconsistency in our position.

E. NK side may not be completely satisfied with procedure we have proposed. Nevertheless they have interest in accepting this proposal and resolving issue. Dragging matter out is obviously undesirable for us since crew being made to suffer as hostages. But prolongation also not desirable from NK point of view. Their relations with other countries—both political and economic—cannot fail to suffer from their contemptuous disregard of international law and morality. It will be to their benefit to begin to conform to these international standards and it will only harm them more and more seriously if they do not.

F. Pak should bring these considerations to attention of his authorities.

9. If Pak persists in flat rejection of overwrite proposal, Woodward should express surprise and regret, say he had thought we had found a solution, urge Pak to reconsider, and suggest adjournment.

10. If at opening or in response to any of foregoing statements Pak indicates acceptance of our proposal, Woodward should say he is prepared to comment on Pak's suggestions for handling press and other procedural matters. He should not do so in absence of clear acquiescence to overwrite, since we wish to present stiff front to maximize pressure for NKs to accept compromise. If it would at any point be helpful, however, Woodward may in his discretion indicate that he sees no insuperable obstacles in technical procedures outlines by Pak.

11. Septel will give instructions on procedural matters which are still under discussion here.4

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Leonard; cleared by Brown, Steadman, Salans, and Walsh; and approved by Katzenbach.

2 Four fish-factory ships for North Korea were being built in the Netherlands for completion between October 1968 and July 1969. Some consideration had been given to ways they might be used to pressure the North Koreans. (Memoranda from Jenkins to Rostow and from Rostow to the President, September 10; Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security History, Pueblo Crisis 1968, Vol. 8, Day-by-Day Documents, Part 16)

3 That portion of telegram 10340 from Seoul, October 10, quotes Pak as having said: “At the last meeting your side suggested to discuss the specific procedural matters, asking us 'If I agree to acknowledge receipt of the crew on the particular document which you have just presented can you release them to me against my signature?' and at today's meeting too you have confirmed it and suggested to discuss the specific procedural matters, the next subject. Thus, at today's meeting the specific procedural matters are being discussed on the basis of such an agreement.” (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

4 Telegram 255214 to Seoul, October 14, covered instructions on procedural matters, specifically, publicity for the agreement, presence of the press and photographers, the actual transfer of crew members, and an acceptable time delay between signing and transfer. (Ibid.) The Embassy raised some potential problems about those procedures, suggesting they needed to be addressed to preserve the integrity of operational plans. (Telegram 10725 from Seoul, October 29; ibid.) In telegram 268226 to Seoul, November 7, the Department of State sent modified procedural instructions to Woodward. (Ibid.)

321. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 321. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, October 23, 1968, 1100Z.

10633. Subj: 24th Closed Meeting.

1. Meeting began at 1101 hours and concluded at 1418 local time October 23.2 General Woodward believes NK intentions were to probe US thinking on overwrite proposal rather than reject it outright while giving impression that NK side was unyielding on obtaining complete US acceptance of its proposal. Tone of meeting was not as harsh as transcript might indicate and only in last formal statement did Pak speak with vigor.

2. Pak opened with a review of NK version of Pueblo incident and negotiations. He stated that NK side had submitted a document with correct title and name and that crew could be returned if we signed document. He accused US of making absurd assertions that we wanted to add unnecessary things to document and to “sign it on your behalf instead of signing it as it is.” Called this “petty stratagem.”

3. General Woodward repeated the exact words he intended to write on the NK document and asked if NK side had specific objections.

4. Pak said proposal ridiculed meeting and that document they proposed included even terms of receipt we wanted, again asked if US prepared to sign.

5. Woodward pointed out consistency of US position noting he had never used any other words than “I will acknowledge on a document satisfactory to you” and that he had corrected Pak when he had misquoted him. He then made points in paras C and D of State 254615.3

6. There was a pause of over 30 minutes while Pak apparently sent for instructions on how to proceed. He then said US had agreed in principle to sign document and on this basis discussion at last meeting had gone to procedures for release of crew. In middle of this US had upset discussions by proposing “some sort of compromise”.

7. Woodward denied going back on any agreement in principle and said he was surprised at rejection of US proposal and urged its reconsideration. He said if Pak had nothing more to say he proposed the meeting adjourn.

8. Pak again asked whether US was ready to sign the document and General Woodward repeated his willingness to acknowledge receipt on a document at time Pueblo crew simultaneously released.

9. Pak then held out a copy of the document and said that Woodward's name and title were clearly written on it together with the terms of acknowledging of the crew. He then asked “does this mean you will sign here under your name?” Woodward said he would write the receipt on the face of the document and sign his name and title. When asked where, he indicated diagonally across face of document. Reaction from NK side was visibly negative. He then suggested writing and signing on clear space at bottom of document. Again reaction was visibly negative. Woodward then indicated there were other ways the document might be signed. General Woodward believes negative reactions of NK side was deliberate and was intended to draw as much specific information on signing as possible from US side.

10. Pak then in prepared statement said US could not get crew back without signing document as it was. He said NK patience had its limits and he had said all there was to say. He said he was not interested in continuing empty talks, called the US proposal “shameless games” and said US side should come back when it was prepared to sign. He then accepted Woodward's proposal to adjourn.

11. Woodward believes that we must wait at least until the next meeting to determine whether Pyongyang is prepared to make any concessions on overwrite proposal.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Rostow transmitted a copy of this telegram to President Johnson under an October 23 covering memorandum stating that the “North Koreans clarify the 'over-write' ploy on the Pueblo; and they reject it, for the time being.” Rostow's memorandum indicates the President saw the telegram. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident—Cactus IIb, Cactus Seoul Cables, March 1, 1968 to October 31, 1968)

2 Telegram 10634 from Seoul, October 23, transmitted the verbatim text of this meeting. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69,POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

3  Document 320.

322. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 322. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea1

Washington, October 24, 1968, 2118Z.

261040. Subject: Instructions for Twenty-fifth Meeting.

1. Best way to convey to North Koreans that we are not considering straightforward signature of their document would seem to be to call next meeting quickly and simply ask if they are now ready accept our proposal. If Pak objects to early meeting we should not press since they may really be debating overwrite now that its details perfectly clear, and if brought to meeting before debate concluded would temporize with attacks which might dig them in deeper. Best solution might be note through JDO on lines, “I am ready, if you are,” rather than proposing particular date.

2. General Woodward's opening statement should be quite direct and brief. Following points should be made: A. Since May we have consistently proposed solution which should be acceptable to NK. It is based on their document and on our principle of simultaneous release.

B. Pak's allegations we have “upset agreements in principle” are not true. As pointed out last meeting, we have stated our position very carefully, checking both English and Korean versions, and have corrected Pak's misstatements of it.

C. If Pak somehow failed to understand, his confusion certainly cleared up by very detailed explanations at October 10 and October 23 meetings.

D. We now await his response. Does he have specific objections to specific procedures outlined by us?

3. If Pak again denounces our position in general terms but avoids closing door on any overwrite, Woodward should note that he has already repeatedly responded to these general comments and propose adjournment, adding suggestion that Pak call next meeting when he is ready to take up our concrete proposal for solving this problem.

4. If Pak opens up business of where Woodward's signature would be located, Woodward should ask if this is only major problem obstructing solution of matter, indicating that such a problem can certainly be solved. Should Pak respond it definitely is critical problem and that signature must be on line provided, Woodward may say that he can agree to add sentence acknowledging receipt in his own handwriting above that line, then place his signature on it, provided it seems likely that his assent to this procedure will lead to the simultaneous release of the crew.

5. If Pak responds that no overwrite acceptable and Woodward must sign on dotted line, Woodward should say he will report his regrettable position to his authorities, and he hopes Pak's authorities will have further thoughts. He should note it will be Pak's turn to call next meeting and propose adjournment.

6. If Pak should accept overwrite, State 2552142 continues to provide appropriate guidance.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Priority;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Leonard; cleared by Brown, Salans, Steadman, and Walsh; and approved by Katzenbach.

2 See footnote 4, Document 320.

323. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 323. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, October 31, 1968, 0610Z.

10793. Subject: 25th Senior MAC Members Meeting at Panmunjom Oct 31, 1968. Ref: State 261040.2

1. 25th Meeting commenced 1100 hours local October 31 and ended 1120 hours.3

2. Gen Woodward made opening statement along lines para 2 reftel. Since Pak responded with prepared statement denouncing our position in general terms, Gen. Woodward proposed adjourning in accordance instructions para 3 reftel. Gen Pak closed with short statement indicating that settlement question depended on US side signing document presented by NK side on September 30.

3. General Woodward believes we are in a period where NKs are waiting to see if we prepared to give. They may believe that US position will alter following elections and expected arrival of new US senior member. We anticipate NK side will wait some little time before calling next meeting.4

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2  Document 322.

3 Telegram 10796 from Seoul, October 31, transmitted the verbatim text of this meeting. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69,POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

4 The Department of State agreed with this assessment and thought it unlikely another meeting would be held until at least mid-November. The Department indicated it would in the interim reexamine the situation “and perhaps suggest a review at highest levels.” In the event Pak did call a meeting, Woodward was instructed to accept. If Pak proposed nothing new, Woodward should “propose adjournment, urging Pak to indicate when his authorities have empowered him to pursue meaningful negotiations.” (Telegram 265604 to Seoul, November 1; ibid.)

324. Action Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson 324. Action Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson 1

Washington, December 3, 1968.

SUBJECT

USS Pueblo

The Problem

The North Koreans have continued to insist that we sign their document admitting espionage and repeated intrusions, apologizing for these “crimes,” and promising not to intrude again. They have denounced us for proposing an “overwrite” solution in which General Woodward would add in his own hand a phrase acknowledging receipt of the crew. They have not categorically rejected our proposal; rather they have refused to accept it, they have attacked us for putting it forward, and they have shown no sign of moderating their demand.

Recent Developments

The meetings in September made it clear to us that the North Koreans are willing to give us back the crew at the moment (or almost the moment) we sign their document. There would still be some procedural problems but they seem manageable.

The meetings in October made clear to the North Koreans what they may not have understood: that we are not prepared to sign their document but only to acknowledge receipt on it. We have not explained to them in so many words that we intend, after the release, to denounce the document, hanging our repudiation on this distinction between “signing” and “acknowledging receipt on,” and saying that we had signed only what Woodward had himself written. But there is no doubt that they now understand this intent. They have denounced our proposal as a “petty stratagem” designed to “evade your responsibilities,” and at present they appear determined not to leave this loophole open.

We called the last meeting (October 31) very quickly on the heels of the preceding one in order to appear firm in our stand. They hesitated for three days before agreeing to meet, but their position at the meeting was unyielding and they may merely have been taken a bit off balance by the unusual speed of our move. It is now their turn to call and they have made no move since October 31 to convene a session.

Our Choices

We can (1) stand on the overwrite proposal, perhaps with minor variations; or (2) sign their document, prefacing our signature with an explanatory statement and repudiating the document as soon as the crew are free.2

Time for a Squeeze Play

The fact that Christmas is approaching and that the Administration will soon change offers us an opportunity to give the North Koreans an ultimatum without grave risk of breaking off the talks. We can call a meeting, give them a package of proposals, and say: “Take your choice; these offers are good only if you accept one of them in time to get the men home for Christmas. This Administration will then withdraw them and will make no further proposals.” If this ploy failed, the new Administration would be free to resume the negotiations on whatever lines it chose.

Variations on Standing Pat

We can simply offer to the North Koreans our present overwrite proposal, giving them the Christmas deadline to take it or leave it.

We can also revive the alternative of a conditional apology (“if we intruded, we are sorry”) which we made last Spring and which was bluntly rejected then. We would dress it up in new language so that it might on the surface seem a new element but we would not include the unacceptable North Korean demands: the flat admission of “espionage” and of repeated intrusions. If the North Koreans are minded to settle the issue, this might satisfy their need for a piece of paper with General Woodward's name at the bottom.

A Repudiated Apology

It is reasonably clear that if we simply sign their document we will promptly get the men back. The pros and cons of this course make an intricate argument which is summarized at Tab A. We do not recommend an outright apology, since it would be costly in foreign policy terms, but we recognize that the argument for an apology appeals to many reasonable men.

We could mitigate some, though not all, of the evil in an outright apology by coupling our signature with a simultaneous or perhaps even prior repudiation of the content of the North Korean document. We could, for example, have General Woodward say into the cameras and tape recorders just before he signs that, as has been made clear in the negotiations, the United States Government does not believe the Pueblo committed espionage or intruded, and that he is signing for the purely humanitarian reasons of getting the crew back. We are far from certain that the North Koreans would accept this procedure if warned about it in advance, and if not warned, they might at the last minute refuse to transfer the crew. And even such a “repudiated apology” would have demeaning elements from our viewpoint. Nevertheless, some variation on this ploy deserves serious consideration for inclusion in our take-it-or-leave-it package.

We would tell the North Koreans that we are now prepared to sign their document but will have to make a statement, before we actually sign, that their document contains statements which we consider false, and that our signature does not alter these facts. Release of the crew and publication of the signed North Korean document would follow. Our repudiation would be released to the press simultaneously with their document. We would have settled the problem through mutual acceptance of two wholly inconsistent statements.

We doubt that the North Koreans would accept this alternative, but they might. If they did, we would have paid a substantial but not exorbitant price to close out the problem.

The most dangerous aspect of such a proposal is that it places on the negotiating record an offer by us to sign their document. The North Koreans are certain to regard this as an indication that we are gradually knuckling under and they will simply press us to remove our attached condition—the repudiation. The “squeeze play” described above does much to meet this danger, but perhaps not enough. The North Koreans may well feel that if they disregard our ultimatum we will come back after Christmas or after January 20 with an unconditional offer to apologize.

We believe that this additional offer of a “repudiated apology” has a better chance of success than the others, but the costs to us in foreign policy terms would still be serious. We therefore are inclined to adopt the following more limited package, despite its relatively small chance of success, i.e., to say to the North Koreans that we are prepared to accept either of the following alternatives provided that it will result in the release of the crew before Christmas. If neither of these offers is accepted, they will both be withdrawn after Christmas and the North Koreans will then have to deal with the new Administration. The proposals would be: a. Our present overwrite proposal.

b. A conditional apology similar to that offered last May, but in new language.

You may wish to discuss this problem with Secretaries Rusk and Clifford.3

Tab A

SHOULD WE APOLOGIZE?

Nature of the Case

The arguments in favor of signing the North Korean document come down to two propositions: a. It is the only humane thing to do since it is clear that unless we sign the North Koreans will not release the crew—certainly not for a long time.

b. It is disadvantageous politically for us to let the affair drag on.

The argument against signing comes down to the single proposition that this Government should not solemnly place its authorized signature on a document it knows to be false, particularly if acting under blackmail and duress.

Apart from these, there are many secondary arguments—about the credibility gap, about the effects in South Korea and on our commitments in general, etc. In our judgment, these arguments tend to balance each other off or to fall in the category “an apology wouldn't really be so bad because …” They thus should not be decisive in determining whether we apologize or not.

The Argument for Apologizing

Only when we sign their document will we get the crew back. If only because the North Korean charges are lies, they will insist on a piece of paper from us validating their lies. They have been and will remain wholly inflexible on this point. We have no means of pressure which look promising. All reasonable people know the North Korean charges are false and that we would be signing purely from humanitarian considerations. We would not be seriously damaged by a signature and we owe it to the crew and their families to pay this price for their release.

Moreover, there are political problems in allowing the matter to stagnate. It reminds people of our impotence and generates pressure for unwise actions, such as seizing North Korean ships. Better to cut the knot, even at some cost.

Assessing the case. It is probably true that the North Koreans will not soon accept any compromise, such as our overwrite proposal. And we do not seem to have any effective pressures against them. The humanitarian argument is the most valid argument for signature.

We do not believe the political argument is valid. If we resolve neither to apologize nor to do anything that might risk war or violate our basic principles, the political pressures can be contained.

The Argument Against Apologizing

The evil effects of signing a false document under pressure would be widespread, insidious, and long-lasting. Most foreign governments and even many Americans are puzzled by our reluctance to utter untruths but they respect us for this eccentricity. The Communist doctrine that truth is relative and can legitimately be manipulated is a major difference between them and us. If we sign we will have seriously damaged our good name.

Assessing the case. Many reasonable people find this argument vague and idealistic. We find it profoundly true. If we were to apologize, the price paid for freeing the men would be substantial, though hard to define. It would not be costly in the short run since the general relief and gratification that they were free would combine with their own revelations to override the negative elements. Nor would it impair faith in our security commitments which are on quite another level of solemnity and gravity. But over the long run the fact that in this case we had bent our principles for tactical, even though humanitarian, considerations would have to be counted, a serious cost. Whether we owe it to the men to pay this price, or should look on them as on other prisoners of war, is a question to which individual consciences and political philosophies will give varying answers. The price in international political terms would be considerable.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Brown on December 2. The date is handwritten on the memorandum. A handwritten note on the memorandum indicates that on December 3 the original signed memorandum was given to Rusk and a copy was sent to Smith at the White House.

2 In a memorandum to Rusk, drafted on December 9, Katzenbach detailed these and a third option—reformulating a “conditional apology” that met North Korean demands but contained no untrue statements, thus basing an apology on the crew's confessions and similar statements—in a draft instructional telegram to Seoul for the next Senior Members meeting. (Ibid.) The options were discussed at a lunch meeting with the President on Tuesday, December 10. The first two options were approved, but the third was not. (Notes of Lunch Meeting; Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Walt W. Rostow, Meetings with the President, July to December 1968 [1])

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Katzenbach signed the original.

325. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 325. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea1

Washington, December 11, 1968, 2008Z.

285426. Subject: Instructions for Twenty-Sixth Meeting.

1. Approach of Christmas, combined with change of Administration here shortly thereafter, offers us opportunity to press North Koreans for release of Pueblo crew without serious risk of formal break in negotiations if they reject our offer. We plan to present them two proposals with warning that unless one is accepted promptly so that men can be home by Christmas, these proposals will be withdrawn and this Administration will make no further offers. Republican Administration would then have free hand for any subsequent dealings.

2. Our hope is that North Koreans will calculate that they are not likely to get more from President-elect Nixon than from President Johnson and will accept one of choices offered. We hope also that recent visit of CVA Hancock will have reminded them that winding-down of Viet-Nam war could liberate resources to improve US–ROK military posture and that they would be well advised to reduce sources of tension, both by releasing Pueblo crew and by desisting from infiltration attempts such as Ulchin.

3. For Seoul. Charge should convey to Prime Minister our intentions as outlined above, describing in general terms contents of package to be offered North Koreans.2 Since we are quite willing to have NK intelligence pick up gist of foregoing, you may also brief MOFA, warning sternly against press leaks, and not describing to MOFA the alternative to the overwrite.

4. For Moscow. We are calling in Soviet Charge to convey fact that final offer from this Administration is about to be delivered at Panmunjom.3 You may as you judge appropriate raise matter in any contacts with Soviet leaders. If you can stimulate reflections among Soviets along lines of para 2 above, so much the better. At minimum, any reference by them to carrier Hancock should be countered with strong denunciation of Ulchin landings. If Soviets were to conclude (wrongly) that Hancock operations somehow related to Ulchin landings, we would not mind. If such landings are continued and expanded as we fear is Pyongyang's intent, we may face situation as serious as that created by Blue House and Pueblo incidents.

5. Negotiating instructions for Seoul are contained in following paras.

6. Although protocol calls for Pak to speak first, we assume he will make only brief pro forma statement and turn floor over to General Woodward. If he delivers long denunciation of past US positions, Woodward should probably brush it aside with brief comment and go directly into presentation of our proposals. Of course, if Pak opens with something new or shows interest in overwrite, Woodward will have to decide on spot whether to explore possible opening or proceed with offers below. Following guidance is based on assumption Pak says nothing really new.

7. Woodward should draw attention to fact that Christmas, a national holiday of great significance to Americans, is only X days off and that USG very much wants to have Pueblo crewmen reunited with their families by that date.

8. Woodward should then point out that present Administration will end on January 20 and USG will from that point have a new President, Mr. Nixon, and new Secretaries of State and Defense. If Pueblo matter not settled by then, the new Administration will have to decide what measures it considers appropriate to deal with the problem.

9. This Administration intends, however, to make one last effort to solve the matter. Woodward should say that he is authorized to state that President Johnson personally and the other leaders of this Administration are prepared to go very far indeed in order to realize the humanitarian objective of reuniting the crew with their families at Christmas. They are prepared to offer General Pak and his authorities their choice of either of the following ways of handling the matter. A. We are willing to make their draft Document of Apology and Assurance the basis for a solution, and General Woodward is authorized to agree to sign his name on that document, provided that he writes in above his name the phrase “I hereby acknowledge receipt of the Pueblo crew”.

B. If General Pak's authorities prefer to avoid the use of this additional phrase, General Woodward is authorized simply to sign his name on the place provided, but under one specific condition. This condition relates to the fact that, as Pak is aware from the long discussions which have taken place in these negotiations, (1) the USG does not consider that the Pueblo was engaged in illegal activities, (2) the USG has not seen convincing evidence that the ship intruded into the waters claimed by Pak's authorities, and (3) the USG cannot apologize for an action unless that action actually took place. If General Woodward were to sign Pak's document without first adding the overwrite phrase above, he would have to make a formal statement just before signing to clarify those three points. The only reason the USG has considered instructing Woodward to sign is for humanitarian reasons in order to obtain the freedom of these hostages who are being held against this sort of ransom. Only if this fact is made absolutely clear in conjunction with signature, can Woodward be authorized to sign Pak's document. Woodward should also make clear to Pak that, if Pak's authorities announce prior to signature that the USG is admitting its crimes and apologizing, or otherwise divulge publicly the contents of the document to be signed, we would at that point be required to release our statement explaining what we consider to be the meaning of the signature.

10. After presenting above choices, Woodward should suggest Pak study them and offer to respond to any questions he may have. He should remind Pak that Christmas deadline, though it may seem sentimental to others, has great meaning for Americans which thus gives it political significance. These offers will all be withdrawn December 23 and a rapid decision by Pak's authorities is essential.

11. Faced with our deadline, Pak will probably avoid closing any doors with further denunciation of A. He may, however, be puzzled by B and may wish to explore how it differs from repudiation after signature and release, which he presumably has always expected from us. If he comes back with questions, Woodward should state that formal statement referred to in our proposal B would be a clarification by us of the nature of that document and the reason we were signing it. Our clarification would contain the three points noted in para 9.B. above and would explain that we were signing a document which was in contradiction with those points in order to obtain the release of the crew. A text of such a clarification is contained in the following para and Woodward may offer it to Pak if he wishes.

12. Statement by General Woodward. “The position of the United States Government with regard to the Pueblo, as consistently expressed in the negotiations at Panmunjom and in public, has been that the ship was not engaged in illegal activity, that there is no convincing evidence that the ship at any time intruded into the territorial waters claimed by North Korea, and that we could not apologize for actions which we did not believe took place. The document which I am going to sign was prepared by the North Koreans and is at variance with the above position, but my signature will not and cannot alter the facts. I will sign the document to free the crew and only to free the crew.”

13. For General Woodward's information, we contemplate his reading statement in para 12 into tape recorders just before he signs. Text would be available for distribution to press along with NK document.4

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Also sent to Moscow and repeated to Tokyo and USUN. Drafted by Leonard; cleared by Brown, Steadman, Toon, Meeker, and Walsh; and approved by Katzenbach.

2 The Prime Minister was briefed on December 13. He expected a few days of public and media reaction to the outcome, but believed the act would be supported. (Telegram 11770 from Seoul, December 13; ibid.)

3 The Soviet Charge was informed orally by Toon on December 14 and was given a text of his remarks, which outlined the two options to be presented to the North Koreans at the next closed meeting. (Telegram 287260 to Moscow, December 14; ibid.)

4 In reply to procedural questions raised by the Embassy, the Department of State addressed the two most important issues in case an overwrite agreement was reached: (1) the type of announcement to be made once an agreement was made and the length of time between acceptance on and (2) the signing and release of the crew. Regarding the first, the Department preferred that each side announce the agreement and the time of the release, but would repudiate any North Korean attempts to claim the U.S. would “acknowledge and apologize for crimes.” Concerning the second, the Department preferred no more than a 24-hour delay, but was willing to accept a maximum of 48 hours, if necessary. Most other details had been previously discussed or left to Woodward's discretion. (Telegram 11729 from Seoul, December 12, and telegram 286601 to Seoul, December 13; both ibid.)

326. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 326. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, December 17, 1968, 0816Z.

11824. Subject: Summary of 26th Closed Meeting at Panmunjom. Ref: Seoul 11816.2

1. Meeting opened at 1100 hours local Dec 17 and concluded at 1342 local.3

2. Gen Pak opened meeting by stating there was no alternative to signing NK document if crew to be released. Gen Woodward then made proposals (A) and (B) State 285426,4 saying that if proposal (B) preferred we would have to make statement on signing, Gen Pak then proposed recess which lasted fifty minutes.

3. Following recess, Pak indicated NK acceptance proposal (B). Gen Woodward agreed to sign to right of signature block in accordance with Korean custom.

4. General Pak then said that agreement in principle had been reached on signing and questions of procedure could be considered. Gen Woodward read statement he would make on signing in accordance with proposal (B). Pak made no comment.

5. Gen Pak asked if we accepted the proposal on procedures which he had made previously. Gen Woodward in reply gave Pak our counter proposals (State 255214, State 268226).5 Pak did not comment. He seemed untroubled by our counter proposals with the exception our desire avoid two-hour time gap between actual signing and release of crew.

6. General Woodward outlined administrative questions on which agreement would be needed such as handling of coffin and removal of NK road barrier in JSA. Gen Pak said he would comment on our counter proposals and on administrative questions at next meeting.

7. General Woodward strongly urged that next meeting be held Dec 18. Pak did not agree and said he would let us know when he was ready. He appeared to understand urgency as well as need for secrecy which Gen Woodward emphasized.

8. Charge will brief Prime Minister in strictest confidence as soon as possible on developments in view possibility NK side may not maintain secrecy. We do not propose to brief Foreign Ministry at this point and will refuse to comment in response to any other inquiries.

9. Assume Dept will continue to refuse to indicate whether progress made or breakthrough near. If any other line contemplated please advise us immediately.

Lathram

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2 Telegram 11816 from Seoul, December 17, informed the Department that Pak accepted proposal B. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 11830 from Seoul, December 17, transmitted the verbatim text of this meeting. (Ibid.)

4  Document 325.

5 See footnote 4, Document 320.

327. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to Secretary of State Rusk 327. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, December 17, 1968.

SUBJECT

Pueblo Negotiations

State of Play

At the 26th meeting last night (Washington time), the North Koreans accepted “in principle” our latest proposal, a “pre-repudiated apology”. General Woodward passed to General Pak the text of the statement (Tab A) which Woodward will read into the record just before signing the North Korean document (Tab B).2 General Pak, who had just accepted the concept of such a repudiatory statement, did not raise any objections to this text. Prime Minister Chung had been briefed on our proposal and raised no objection.

Procedural details remain to be settled. There will have to be at least one more meeting (probably Wednesday evening) and perhaps several. The possibility of some hang-up remains. The North Koreans may press us to modify our statement, for example. But it looks as though the men will be free before Christmas.

Next Steps

The scenario is fairly well fixed up to the point when the crew is released. Our important problems will be to explain what has happened to the American public and the world.

At the time of release we will publish both the North Korean document and our statement repudiating its contents. We will be prepared to elaborate to the press why we agreed to resolve the matter through these two obviously incompatible documents and what the North Korean acceptance of our statement implies about the truth of their allegations. A brief statement should probably be issued at this point on behalf of the President welcoming the release but not going into the details of the arrangement.

As quickly as possible, we will seek confirmation from Captain Bucher and the crew that there was no intrusion and that their confessions were extorted. If possible, Captain Bucher will immediately make a brief statement to this effect to the press in Korea. We will then brief the press here in detail on the numerous inconsistencies in the North Korean “evidence”, explaining how we have been so confident they were forgeries. (If Captain Bucher says the ship did intrude, we will have to consider what public statement to make, taking into account evidence from other officers, etc.)

We will then have to decide, in the light of information received from the crew, what portion of the draft White Paper should be made available to the press. We may wish to publish excerpts from the actual negotiating record, or we may prefer to give priority to comments by crew members on their experience.

As soon as medical checks have been made the crew will be flown to San Diego for reunion with their families and for detailed debriefings.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Nodis.

2 Tabs A and B attached but not printed. The text of Tab A is the same as paragraph 12, Document 325. Tab B is the same as paragraph 3, Document 306.

328. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 328. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea1

Washington, December 17, 1968, 2354Z.

288724. Subject: Instructions for Twenty-seventh Meeting.

1. We believe current instructions cover most problems likely to arise at next meeting and there is little we can do until Pak delivers his responses to presentation made at Twenty-sixth meeting.

2. One worrisome question is how to respond if Pak tries to whittle away formal statement Woodward is to make. Particularly in view of time element, we prefer to react strongly, saying it is not negotiable and that any effort to obtain alterations in it will simply lead to collapse of entire deal now agreed in principle. We have not tried to modify their draft and they will be wasting time trying to modify our factual statement of considered US position.2 If Woodward prefers he could simply say that he is not authorized to make any changes in our statement.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus. Drafted by Leonard, cleared by Brown and Walsh, and approved by Katzenbach.

2  Woodward agreed and intended to tell Pak “the statement is part of package and is not negotiable.” The Embassy also noted that Pak seemed unbothered by the statement at the last meeting and seemingly knew of it in advance from information passed by the Soviets. (Telegram 11850 from Seoul, December 18; ibid.)

329. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 329. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, December 19, 1968, 1100Z.

11877. Subject: Summary of 26th [27th] Closed Meeting at Panmunjom. Ref: State 285426.2

1. Meeting commenced at 1100 local Dec 19 and terminated at 1553 hours.3 Because of complexity of discussion on wide variety procedural and administrative questions we are dividing this message into two parts. The first deals with questions on which there was no substantial dispute. Second deals with disputed questions.

2. Non-Disputed Items. A. Health of Crew—In response to Gen Woodward's question, Gen Pak said crew in “normal condition”. General Woodward interprets this to mean that crew is in good health.

B. Order of Release Across Bridge—Commander Bucher will cross first with body of Seaman Hodges and will identify body. Remainder of crew will cross in order of roster provided by NK side; that is, lowest ranking personnel first.

C. Press—Our proposal that there be no more than 25 civilian press members from each side was accepted.

D. Other Personnel in Area—Agreement reached.

E. Statement at Time of Signing—NKs agreed to statement by General Woodward of our position but said that they would also make statement at same time.

F. Document To Be Signed—NK will provide document in both English and Korean. Signature on Korean version to be at right of signature block. Signature on English version to be above signature block.

3. Disputed Items. A. Two-hour Interval Between Signing and Release—General Pak held out for interval of two hours between signing and release. He insisted this was necessary to comply with NK law and for administrative reasons.

B. Publicity—NK side offered Gen Woodward choice between no publicity until signature and arrangement which would leave each side free, once agreement reached, to respond to whatever other side said. During 30 minute recess Gen Woodward conferred with Embassy on this point. We reached conclusion it preferable leave each side free as we could not prevent premature leaks once Breeches Buoy plan implemented. Our understanding of agreement is that NK will not issue official release until time of signature if our side does not issue official release. Gen Pak seemed unconcerned with prospect of press speculation.

C. Final Date and Time of Release—Pak insisted he did not have authority agree to date and time of release at 26th meeting. He said he would call another meeting in three or four days to confirm final agreement. Gen Woodward pressed him hard on this point, pointing out that if crew was to be home by Xmas with families final release no later than Dec 21 essential. Pak would not and obviously could not retreat but did say “We will do our best to realize your wish. If we cannot meet your wish it will be because of unavoidable administrative reasons.” It was agreed that final agreement would be reached at next meeting. Gen Pak also agreed to Gen Woodward's proposal that signature take place at 0900 hours day following final agreement with release at 1100 hours same day.

4. Gen Woodward comments as follows: There is agreement on our proposal (B) and complete agreement on all procedural matters except for establishing date of final agreement. I considered it unusual for Pak to say he would do his best to meet my wishes for speedy next meeting.

Lathram

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2  Document 325.

3 Telegram 11878 from Seoul, December 19, transmitted the verbatim text of this meeting. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US)

330. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 330. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, December 22, 1968, 0625Z.

11916. Subj: Summary 28th Meeting at Panmunjom December 22.2

1. General Woodward sent following: 1. 28th meeting ended at 1229 local time. Final agreement reached. Signing will occur at 0900 hours tomorrow, 23rd December with the release of the crew at 1100 hours same day.

2. Major item covered was sequence of events at 0900 signing.

3. First, I will make my statement and then sign documents. Pak will examine documents, make his statement and then give me written assurance of crew return.

Porter

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US. Secret; Immediate;Nodis; Cactus.

2 Telegram 11917 from Seoul, December 22, transmitted the verbatim text of this meeting. (Ibid.)

331. Editorial Note 331. Editorial Note

On December 23, 1968, at 9 a.m. Korean time, General Woodward and General Pak met for the last time. General Woodward opened the meeting, which lasted for 47 minutes, by making a brief statement and signing the documents as prearranged. The text of the document signed by General Woodward on December 23 is in Department of State Bulletin, January 6, 1969, pages 2–3. After General Pak accepted and examined the signed documents, he accused the United States of having violated the agreement, charging that the Department of State had publicly announced the time of the release of the Pueblo crew. Because of that announcement, General Pak stated that the time of the release of the crew must be renegotiated. General Woodward disputed his claim, prompting General Pak to announce a delayed release time of 11:30 a.m., to which both sides agreed. The verbatim text of the meeting was transmitted in airgram A–890 from Seoul, December 26; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US.

At 11:30 a.m. on December 23, with two crew members carrying the body of the one sailor who died during attack on the ship, the 82 members of the Pueblo crew walked in single file across the Bridge of No Return at Panmunjom into the southern section of the Demilitarized Zone, where they boarded buses and were taken to a nearby U.S. Army camp. Statements issued by President Johnson and Secretary of State Rusk confirming the release are in Department of State Bulletin, January 6, 1969, pages 1–2. At the U.S. Army camp Commander Bucher and other members of the crew held a brief press conference and met with Ambassador Porter and several South Korean officials. (Telegram 11967 from Seoul, December 24; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US) At the press conference Commander Bucher stated that at no time had the Pueblo entered North Korean territorial waters and described beatings and abuse suffered by the men in captivity. (The New York Times, December 23, 1968) After a brief stay at the Army camp, the crew was flown by helicopter to the 121st Evacuation Hospital on a U.S. Army base near Seoul for medical examination. The following day the hospital's commanding officer announced to the media that, although the examination revealed the aftereffects of beatings the men endured while in captivity and signs of malnutrition, the crew evinced no psychological damage requiring immediate treatment. The men were then released for return to the United States. (Telegram 1958 from Seoul, December 24; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US) From Seoul the crew flew to the Miramar Naval Air Station in San Diego, California, arriving on December 24. After being reunited with their families for the Christmas holidays, the men were given extensive medical and psychological examinations.

From talks with members of the crew the Navy gathered additional information and documented details of the physical abuse and mistreatment inflicted on the Pueblo crew by the North Koreans. (Memorandum from Moorer to Clifford, December 24; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Korea 383.6; and memorandum from Blouin to the Chief of Naval Operations, December 26; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea—Pueblo Incident, Filed by the LBJ Library) The Navy concluded that the maltreatment of the crew members was officially sanctioned, physical and psychological abuse was conducted systematically and during specific periods of the crew's captivity, the crew adjusted to the level of abuse they experienced, and the degree of physical violence inflicted on the men was deliberately controlled to prevent death and permanent injury to the captives. (Memorandum from Colonel Robert E. Pursely to Secretary Clifford, January 6, 1969; ibid., Papers of Clark Clifford, Pueblo, March 16 to January 20, 1969)

On December 26 in-depth intelligence debriefing of the crew members by teams composed of personnel from the National Security Agency and the Naval Security Group began and continued through January 10, 1969, although Commander Bucher's interviews extended somewhat beyond that date. Tape recordings, transcripts, summaries, and similar information in preparation for or derived from the debriefings of the crew are in NSA/CSS Archives, Pueblo Collection, Accession No. 24103, Boxes CBOJ11 to CBOJ33; ibid., Accession No. 24107, Box CBOJ43; ibid., Accession No. 30072, Box CBOJ55; ibid., Accession No. 31236, Box CBOJ55; NSA, Historical Files, Box 1, Pueblo, Summaries and Tapes; and ibid., carton marked Return and Debriefing of Crew (Breeches Buoy); Pueblo: Administrative and Debriefing Procedures.

After the debriefings were completed, a Naval Court of Inquiry convened on January 20, 1969, at the Naval Amphibious Base in Coronado, California, to investigate all circumstances surrounding the seizure and loss of the USS Pueblo and to determine culpability, if warranted. According to the Navy, the Court of Inquiry was merely a fact-finding body, similar to a civilian grand jury, with authority to call witnesses, take sworn testimony in both open and closed sessions, and gather diverse forms of information. Testimony given during open sessions received extensive coverage in The New York Times, among other sources. The Court adjourned on March 13 and issued its findings on May 5.

The Court recommended bringing charges against Commander Bucher and Lieutenant Stephen Harris, the commanding officer of the Naval Security Group detachment on board the Pueblo, and that both be tried by court martial. Commander Bucher faced charges of failing to protect and defend his ship, following North Korean orders to sail to their port, failing to properly train his crew to destroy classified material, failing to destroy that material upon capture, and permitting classified material to fall into enemy hands. Lieutenant Harris would be charged with failing to train his crew in emergency destruction procedures and failing to destroy classified material as ordered. The Court also recommended reprimanding the Pueblo's executive officer, Edward R. Murphy, for dereliction of duty and bringing charges against the Commander of Naval Forces, Japan, Rear Admiral Frank Johnson, and against the Director of the Naval Security Group, Pacific, Captain Everett Gladding, for failing to support and protect the ship adequately. Ultimately, the Secretary of the Navy, John Chaffee, overruled any further action against the officers, stating that the members of the Pueblo crew had already endured enough suffering while held captive and warranted no further punishment and that charges against their supe- riors would also be dropped, since they were not solely responsible for failing to anticipate an attack on and the seizure of the ship. With that decision all further action by the Navy in the Pueblo matter came to a close. (National Security Agency, The Capture of the USS Pueblo and its Effect on SIGINT Operations, pages 164–165)

In addition to the Naval Court of Inquiry, a Joint Intelligence Team, composed of representatives from the Central Intelligence Agency, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the intelligence branches of the Navy, Air Force, and Army, assessed the impact on intelligence operations and programs resulting from the loss of the extensive number of messages—between 7 to 8,000 were analyzed—received by the Pueblo prior to its capture. Its report determined that the loss of those documents gave the Communist world undue insight into United States intelligence-collection capabilities and represented a major compromise of intelligence-gathering sources and methods in Southeast Asia. (“Damage Assessment of the Compromise of Operational Intelligence Broadcast Messages on Board USS Pueblo [AGER–2],” March 17, 1969; NSA, Historical Files,Box #6, Pueblo, Review (GOPI) Damage Assessment)

The National Security Agency also conducted an extensive review and analysis of the intelligence losses resulting from the seizure of the Pueblo and the detention of its crew. The resulting report was based first and foremost on the information gathered during the in-depth debriefing of the crew concerning the information and equipment on board the Pueblo and captured by the North Koreans as well as information imparted by crew members when interrogated during captivity. Analysts learned from the debriefing of the enormous number of documents and the full extent of the equipment that fell into North Korean hands intact or with minimal damage and of the intelligence information imparted by some of the crew members. The conclusions contained in the final report assessed the compromise to “the Cryptologic Community collection, processing and reporting operations/techniques on a worldwide basis is without precedence in U.S. cryptologic history.” The report also observed that cryptographic communications remained secure because of the continued inability of the North Koreans or others to decrypt messages “without cryptographic keys used in conjunction with the equipment.” (“Cryptologic/Cryptographic Damage Assessment, USS Pueblo, AGER 2, 23 January–23 December 1968,” March 1969, page 17; ibid., Carton VIII, Pueblo Files, Charts, Maps, Draft History, etc.) A full realization of intelligence losses resulting from the Pueblo seizure emerged only in mid-1985 when the Walker spy ring, operated within the U.S. Navy by John Walker, his son Michael, and others, was discovered and found to have passed to the Soviet Union over an 18-year period a variety of information, including the keys to coded communications, allowing the Soviets to decrypt and read highly classified documents and transmissions. (National Security Agency, The Capture of the USS Pueblo and its Effect on SIGINT Operations, pages 157–159)

Congressional hearings into the Pueblo seizure, expanded to include the downing of a Naval reconnaissance plane by North Korean jets on April 16, 1969, were held in March and April by a special subcommittee chaired by Representative Otis G. Pike. (U.S. Congress, House Committee on Armed Services, Special Subcommittee on the USS Pueblo, Hearings on the Inquiry into the USS Pueblo and EC–121 Plane Incidents. 91st Congress, 1st Session, 1969, Committee Print 91–10) Documentation pertaining to testimony given by high-level Navy officers as well as key figures in the intelligence community, such as National Security Agency Director Carter and Director of Central Intelligence Helms, are in National Security Agency, Historical Files, Box VIII, Pueblo, Post-Incident Reviews, House and Senate Hearings; ibid., Box 1A, Pueblo, VIII Post-Incident Review, Chronological File, January–February 1969; and ibid., Box 1B, Pueblo, VIII Post-Incident Review, Pueblo Chronological File, March 1969. In mid-April the House of Representatives, with the concurrence of the Senate, passed a resolution stating that “no manned ship or plane of the Armed Forces of the United States should be sent into danger areas on an intelligence gathering mission without adequate protection against attack or capture by foreign armed forces.” (U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, House Concurrent Resolution 204, April 17, 1969, 91st Congress, 1st Session)

In the immediate aftermath of the incident, the examination of events surrounding the capture of the Pueblo and its crew led to an overall evaluation of the intelligence-gathering program as a whole and resulted in a suspension of all intelligence operations using ships of that type. By late 1969 the program came to an end with the deactivation of the last vessels. (National Security Agency, The Capture of the USS Pueblo and its Effect on SIGINT Operations, pages 174–175)

In the closing days of the Johnson administration the Departments of State and Defense discussed alternatives to induce the North Koreans to return the Pueblo. Consideration was given to taking action against fishing vessels being constructed for North Korea in Rotterdam, but that course was rejected as potentially jeopardizing the principle of freedom of the seas. (Memorandum from Brown to Secretary Rusk, December 23; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 33–6 KOR N–US) The ship was never recovered from the North Koreans.

U.S. Efforts To Encourage Normalization of Relations Between the Republic of Korea and JapanU.S. Efforts To Encourage Normalization of Relations Between the Republic of Korea and Japan

332. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State

Tokyo, January 3, 1964, 2 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 33–4 JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Repeated to Seoul and CINCPAC for POLAD.

333. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 21, 1964, 3 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Secret. Drafted by Bacon and approved in S on February 8. This memorandum is Part 1 of 2. The conversation took place in the Secretary's Office.

334. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

Washington, January 23, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Robert W. Komer, Japan-Korea. Secret.

335. Memorandum of Conversation

Tokyo, January 26, 1964.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330, January 1964. Confidential. Drafted by Barnett and approved by Reischauer. The meeting was held at the Foreign Minister's residence.

336. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, February 14, 1964, 7:32 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 33–4 JAPAN–KOR S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Barnett; cleared by Davis, Bacon, Green, and Harriman; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Tokyo for Reischauer.

337. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, February 17, 1964, 7:30 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 33–4 JAPAN–KOR S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Tokyo.

338. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 29, 1964.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Drafted by Fearey and approved in S on March 8.

339. Editorial Note

340. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

Washington, April 9, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Japan, Vol. I. Secret.

341. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, May 12, 1964, 7:54 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential; Limdis. Drafted by Barnett, Fearey, Vettel, and Norred; cleared by Bacon, Green, and Poats; and approved by William Bundy. Also sent to Tokyo.

342. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 19, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. I. Secret.

343. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, June 25, 1964, 7 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Repeated to Tokyo and CINCPAC for POLAD.

344. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 22, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. II. Confidential.

345. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

Washington, July 31, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. II. Secret.

346. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, August 3, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. II. Secret.

347. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, August 19, 1964, 6 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Tokyo and CINCPAC for POLAD.

348. Letter From the Ambassador to Japan (Reischauer) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Tokyo, August 21, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. II. Secret. A copy was sent to Brown in Seoul.

349. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State

Tokyo, September 8, 1964, 9 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Repeated to Seoul and CINCPAC for POLAD.

350. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Seoul, October, 23, 1964.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential; Official-Informal. The letter indicates that Bundy saw it. A copy was sent to Reischauer.

351. Letter From the Ambassador to Japan (Reischauer) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Tokyo, October 28, 1964.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential; Official-Informal. A copy was sent to Ambassador Brown.

352. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, November 11, 1964, 12:34 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Secret. Drafted by Komer and Barnett; cleared by Fearey, Stoneman (AID), and in substance by Blouin (OASD/ISA); and approved by Barnett. Also sent to Tokyo.

353. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State

Tokyo, November 21, 1964, 0357Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 JAPAN. Confidential. Repeated to Seoul and CINCPAC for POLAD.

354. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, November 23, 1964, 0225Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S. Secret; Limdis.

355. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, December 31, 1964, 7:36 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by O'Donohue, cleared by Bennett, and approved by Green. Also sent to Tokyo and repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

356. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 12, 1965, 3:30 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Secret. Drafted by Petree and approved in S on January 26. The meeting was held in the Secretary's Conference Room.

357. Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, February 20, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Japan, Vol. III. No classification marking.

358. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 15, 1965.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 2 KOR S. Confidential. Drafted by Fearey and approved in S on March 22.

359. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

[Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files: East Asia Country Files, Japan, 1964, 1965. Secret; Eyes Only. 2 pages of source text not declassified.]

360. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, April 8, 1965, 0400Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S. Confidential; Priority; Limdis.

361. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, April 30, 1965, 9:35 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Drafted by Norred, cleared by Fearey and Barnett, and approved by Bundy. Also sent to Tokyo and repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

362. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea

Washington, May 3, 1965, 8:16 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Drafted by O'Donohue, cleared by Bennett, and approved by Barnett. Repeated to Tokyo and CINCPAC for POLAD.

363. Editorial Note

364. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State

Seoul, June 15, 1965, 0600Z.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Tokyo and CINCPAC for POLAD.

365. Editorial Note

366. Editorial Note

367. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 29, 1965.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Drafted by Fleck and approved in S on December 21. The memorandum is Part II of V.

368. Memorandum of Conversation

Kyoto, Japan, July 6, 1966, 1 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, JAPAN–KOR S. Secret. Drafted by Zurhellen and approved in S on July 25. The memorandum is Part 3 of 5. Rusk visited Japan July 4–7 to attend the U.S.-Japan Joint Committee on Trade and Economic Affairs held in Kyoto.

369. Airgram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State

Tokyo, February 14, 1967.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Drafted by Armstrong; cleared by Farrior and in draft by Ainsworth, Gallagher, Baker, Fahs, and Nickel; and approved by Zurhellen. Repeated to Seoul, Consulates in Fukuoka, Kobe-Osaka, Nagoya, and Sapporo, CINCPAC for POLAD and HICOM for POLAD.

332. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 332. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 1

Tokyo, January 3, 1964, 2 p.m.

1947. Ref: Deptel 1635.2 ROK-Japan Settlement.

We feel now is more favorable time for settlement than we shall see again before 1965 at earliest. Quite apart from our belief that ability of new Korean Government to push through settlement will tend to decrease rather than increase with time, ratification of settlement before June adjournment of Diet offers best chance in Japan. If this opportunity missed, Diet recess together with Olympic fever would put off serious Diet consideration of settlement until 1965 at earliest. Meanwhile, July elections for LDP presidency would add new note of doubt. Ikeda has fully committed himself to settlement and [garble] political skill needed to carry it through smoothly. While reelection of Ikeda seems probable, if Sato succeeded Ikeda in July though he would be equally eager for settlement, he might find it harder to win ratification because of greater disunity within LDP. If Kom, who has been showing increasing strength as candidate to replace Ikeda, were to be successor, outcome would be even more problematical since his attitude on many matters is not clear.

If ratification before July is necessary, time is running out. FonOff tells us that, after basic political agreement reached, two months will be required for drafting and then three months for Diet consideration. This perhaps too generous timetable would call for agreement before end of January, but we estimated agreement will be necessary by early March at latest if we are to catch present high tide.

We see little we can do at Tokyo end to speed settlement. GOJ is perfectly aware of all points stated above and of intense US interest in settlement. Ikeda and Ohira have skillfully led Japanese public into accepting normalization as only common sense and consequently determined Socialist opposition will probably not cause major problem. GOJ has consistently made clear during negotiations what it considers negotiable and what not, we believe it will not retreat from 12-mile limit.3 Nor would it be consistent with basic US policy for us to try to persuade it to. GOJ has shown flexibility on other issues and recently has proposed that fisheries negotiations be moved to Seoul to have Korean delegation near source of its instructions and thus speed up talks.

From here it appears that bars to settlement are on Korean end. Superficial one is unrealistic effort to avoid 12-mile limit. More basic problem is hostility of Korean public to Japan and therefore political danger for a government that makes settlement. This admittedly makes settlement terribly difficult, but unless we find way to help Koreans surmount this problem, we may miss tide, which may not rise this high again for some time.

Conceivably ROK Government has idea that time is on their side (e.g., that Sato will be Prime Minister and will give them better deal than Ikeda). If so, it might be helpful for us to disabuse them of such notions and point out clearly our estimate that failure to get settlement now would result in long delay with no prospect of any better terms from Japan in future.

Reischauer

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 33–4 JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Repeated to Seoul and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 In telegram 1635 to Tokyo, December 30, 1963, also sent to Seoul as telegram 566, the Department of State transmitted information concerning new supporting-assistance levels to Korea for FY 1964, intended to urge a Korean settlement with Japan, and asked the Embassy in Tokyo to provide an update on where the issue stood in Japan. (Ibid., POL 33–4 JAPAN–S KOR)

3 Reference is to the extent of Korean territorial waters.

333. Memorandum of Conversation 333. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, January 21, 1964, 3 p.m.

SUBJECT

Korea-Japan Negotiations

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Kim Chong-yul, Embassy of Korea

Counselor Pak Kun, Embassy of Korea

The Secretary

Leonard L. Bacon, Acting Director, East Asian Affairs

Ambassador Kim, who had called at his own request, opened by saying that Foreign Minister Chung Il-kwon had asked him to make a statement which he hoped the Secretary would draw on as he saw fit in any discussions he might have with the Japanese in the course of the Economic Conference to be held in Japan the following week.2

(Here Ambassador Kim read the statement, as follows: “1. It is the consistent policy of the Korean Government to seek an early normalization of the relations between Korea and Japan with a view to establishing good neighbourly relations and strengthening the solidarity among free nations. It is, however, to be noted that the Korea-Japan Talks has become a domestic political issue because of the past relations of the two countries and the critical attitude of some opposition parties. It is, therefore, hoped that a full consideration be given to these facts, and accordingly a broader approach be made by Japan in the Talks.

“2. Following is the basic position of the Korean Government on the fishery question which is the main pending issue: a) the fishery resources in the waters in question be conserved; b) interests of the Korean fishing population be safeguarded, and the Korean fishing industry be protected from any adverse effects of Japanese fishing activities.

“3. One of the major obstacles to the settlement of this question is the great imbalance of fishing capabilities between the two countries. Therefore, a sufficient amount of fishery cooperation fund should be secured for the development of Korean fishing industry. Accordingly, it is considered that the practical means of settling the fishery question are for Japan to agree to regulatory measures limiting Japanese fishing activities within the Peace Line3 to the present level and to render a full fishery cooperation. If Japan intends to increase fishing activities within the Peace Line through the conclusion of a fishery agreement or insists on any regulatory measures under which such an increase is anticipated, the settlement of the question will become difficult.

“4. There are expressed apprehensions among the Korean people that, when the Korea-Japan relations are normalized, the role of the United States of America in supporting Korea would be shifted to Japan. Therefore, a reassurance by the United States of continuous support to Korea is necessary.”)

The Secretary asked whether the reference to “domestic political issue” in the first paragraph of the text referred to domestic problems in Korea, Japan, or both. Ambassador Kim said that both countries were intended. In Korea it was the Government several years ago which had held back in the negotiations for a settlement while the Opposition Party and the Korean people favored coming to a conclusion. The situation was now reversed. In Japan the public was likewise not fully in agreement on a settlement.

Referring to the second and third paragraphs relating to the fisheries question, the Secretary asked how much fishing was done by the Japanese within the “Peace Line”. The Ambassador replied that, according to Japanese figures, roughly 120 thousand tons are taken annually by Japanese vessels within the area enclosed by the Line. The Japanese have informed the Korean Delegation in Tokyo of the results of their fishing operations. The Koreans have agreed that the same amount could be caught by the Japanese in the future but warned that any increase would create a problem. The Secretary asked whether the Koreans would expect to raise their catch to the Japanese level or to limit their catch to the present volume for conservation reasons. Ambassador Kim said that the Koreans contemplated an increase in their catch but would need improved equipment which they would expect the Japanese to provide by way of compensation for Korean agreement to Japanese fishing within the Peace Line.

The Secretary thought that it would be important to determine with as much precision as possible the figures on the total catch of each country and on the maximum permissible catch. He asked whether Korean-caught fish is sold principally in Korea or in Japan and whether any third country engages in fishing within the Peace Line. Ambassador Kim said that Korean fishermen sell their catch largely in Japan. He added that the Russians did not fish within the Line although seven years ago Chinese Communists had come close to Korea and had sunk a Korean fishing boat besides capturing a Korean fisherman. The Korean armed forces had orders to sink such invaders and the Chinese Communists' vessel was chased but because of darkness could not be found.

Ambassador Kim expressed the hope that United States assistance and support would be assured as noted in the final paragraph of the statement. The Secretary replied that the United States would hope that normalization of relations between the Republic of Korea and Japan would result in cooperation between the two countries which would be beneficial to both, but that the United States had no intention to discontinue its support of the Republic of Korea.

(On leaving, Ambassador Kim left with Department officers a copy of his statement “for informal reference”, not as an aide-mémoire.)

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Secret. Drafted by Bacon and approved in S on February 8. This memorandum is Part 1 of 2. The conversation took place in the Secretary's Office.

2  Rusk was in Tokyo January 24–28 to attend the meeting of the Joint US-Japan Committee on Trade and Economic Affairs.

3 In 1952 former President Syngman Rhee created the Peace Line, also referred to as the Rhee Line, by expanding the boundaries of South Korea's territorial waters, in some cases by 100 or more miles, into the Sea of Japan and the Yellow Sea in an attempt to protect Korean fishing interests. (DIA Intelligence Summary, March 25; Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Robert W. Komer, Japan-Korea, December 1963–March 1966)

334. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 334. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 23, 1964.

When you see Dean Rusk before he leaves for Japan/Korea,2 you might remind him we want to push hard to get a ROK/Japanese settlement.

This has been hanging fire for ten years. It would mean a flow of over a half billion dollars into the Korean economy, which would greatly reduce the burden on us over time.

At long last we're close to the wire on this. A word to Rusk that you're personally interested would put him on his mettle, and help get State to push harder. A ROK/Jap settlement would be a nice foreign policy plus in 1964.

R. W. Komer 3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Robert W. Komer, Japan-Korea. Secret.

2 Before returning to Washington from Tokyo, Rusk stopped in Korea and met with Pak in Seoul on January 29; see Document 3.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

335. Memorandum of Conversation 335. Memorandum of Conversation1

Tokyo, January 26, 1964.

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Ambassador Edwin O. Reischauer

Mr. Robert W. Barnett, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

Foreign Minister Masayoshi Ohira

Shigenobu Shima, Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs

Ryuji Takeuchi, Ambassador to the U.S.

Harumi Takeuchi, Director American Affairs Bureau, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Toshio Shimanouchi, Counsellor, Public Information and Cultural Affairs Bureau, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

SUBJECT

Korean Settlement; US–USSR Relations

The Secretary invited Ohira to assess prospects for a Japanese-Korean settlement. He said that Washington had not entered into discussion of details of the settlement but was greatly interested in the outcome of negotiations. In effect, Washington wanted an agreement and did not much care on what basis.

Ohira said that the Japanese and Koreans had gone over the hump when they had achieved agreement on claims. The focus of negotiations now was on the fisheries issue: width of the exclusive zone, regulation of the “outside” zone, and fisheries cooperation. Japan had made certain proposals to Korea and, as of this moment difficulties were on the Korean and not the Japanese side. Ohira felt that Pak was being too much intimidated by the opposition and that he could overcome it just as the GOJ was determined to override its domestic opposition on the normalization issue. Ohira went on to explain that Japan's proposals on the fisheries issue were subject to flexible negotiations. If this matter could be wound up others could easily be disposed of. The Secretary urged flexibility on both sides, expressed conviction there was room for maneuvering and hoped for an early conclusion of the settlement. Ohira said if there was some way he believed the Secretary could be helped in advising Seoul he would pass along his suggestions.

[Here follows discussion of US–USSR relations.]

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330, January 1964. Confidential. Drafted by Barnett and approved by Reischauer. The meeting was held at the Foreign Minister's residence.

336. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 336. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea1

Washington, February 14, 1964, 7:32 p.m.

716. From Secretary to Ambassador Berger. Barnett expressed to Ambassador Reischauer opinion, formed on basis talks in Embassy Seoul, that if Japanese would (1) move closer towards Korea's desire for adequate financing modernization its fishing industry and (2) announce intention exercise effective restraint Japanese fishing operations in area between 12-mile limit and Rhee Line, a settlement could be concluded immediately, and no other or new demands would be advanced by Koreans. Provided this present Embassy judgment, Dept would be willing depart from past policy non-involvement in details of negotiations, and instruct Ambassador Reischauer to urge Prime Minister Ikeda or Foreign Minister Ohira to make generous offer in manner best designed help President Pak overcome Korean opposition. Perhaps you—without consulting Koreans—would wish formulate with greater precision formula which would meet Korean economic desires and political sensitivities, while taking account Japanese interests and sensitivities (Tokyo's 2390 and 2400).2 Believe Japanese both flexible and sincere in declared desire complete negotiations, and would welcome deliberated judgment of U.S. Embassy Seoul that such offer would bring it off. Embassy Seoul should not lend its support to this tactic unless confident that it would be our only intervention in negotiations, and be successful. Request immediate reply.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 33–4 JAPAN–KOR S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Barnett; cleared by Davis, Bacon, Green, and Harriman; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Tokyo for Reischauer.

2 In telegram 2390 from Tokyo, February 11, Reischauer reported on Ohira's “firm determination” to reach an agreement with Korea. Ohira told Reischauer that he “was prepared to be amply flexible on fishing zones, conservation measures, and financial aid to Korean fisheries” and that he believed “if the Koreans ready to take action, normalization can be achieved before summer.” Reischauer concluded from his comments that Ohira had presented “ROK with golden opportunity that may not soon return.” Telegram 2400 from Tokyo, February 13, set forth the Japanese position on fishing issues currently being negotiated with the Koreans. (Both ibid.)

337. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 337. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, February 17, 1964, 7:30 p.m.

1043. Deptel 716, rptd Tokyo 2102.2

1. Remaining major obstacles to ROK-Japan settlement are fisheries control in restricted areas and amount of fisheries cooperation loans. On basis our discussions in Seoul and Embassy Tokyo's reports (Tokyo's 2390 and 2400 to Dept)3 both problems appear negotiable although important differences still separate two sides. On question of fisheries cooperation loans we believe a Japanese offer of 60–70 million dollars over given period (perhaps 4–5 years) would meet ROK needs.

2. Fisheries control issue is much more complicated. ROKG willing to accept de facto 12 mile limit but insists that Japanese fishing effort in key areas [garble] Peace Line and 12 mile limit be kept at or only moderately above current limits for a few years during which (with help GOJ fisheries loans) ROK fleet could be expanded and modernized. Absence of agreed historical catch data and of agreed standards for limiting Japanese fishing effort by number and types of vessels and duration of their operations are obstructing settlement. Also ROKG wishes to draw 12 mile limit in manner which GOJ considers would take in too much of open sea.

3. Koreans have indicated that there is flexibility in their position. FonMin has stated that government has fall-back positions on delineation of 12 mile zone and restricted areas, conceding to Japanese some of disputed areas around Cheju Island. FonOff sources have also implied willingness to consider modification of current proposals to limit number of Japanese craft within restricted area if GOJ would present statistical support for number of craft it claims are currently fishing within Peace Line.

4. In view complexity of fisheries problem, and all possible permutations which can enter into a compromise, I do not believe it possible for third party to formulate with precision detailed terms on which a settlement can be reached. Detached formal agreement can only be reached by two govts concerned on basis present negotiations. If we attempted to put forth a specific formula, even on one time basis, we would soon find ourselves caught in middle and involved in mediating technical questions. Therefore we cannot guarantee that single intervention on our part along lines reftel would be successful.

5. Our intervention, if attempted should be designed get negotiations going at a level which gives promise of success. This requires a decision on both sides to resolve fishery issues at a high political level.

6. I therefore propose that Amb Reischauer and I be instructed to approach respective govts and urge them to schedule an early meeting of such persons as can negotiate with full powers, whether at FonMinister or other levels. We should urge Koreans to move ahead regardless of internal political opposition, and urge Japanese to be as magnanimous as possible.

7. Our representation to GOJ might usefully urge: A. Commitment to $70 million in fishery cooperation loans.

B. Agreement by Japanese to restrict fishing effort for temporary period to something near current level.

Our representation to ROKG should urge on them: A. Delineation of 12-mile limit in manner approximating international practice.

B. To avoid injecting any new demands into overall negotiations.

8. I put above suggestions forward in conviction that USG should move forcibly to convince both govts of need to act now, and that normalization will not come about if both sides continue to haggle about details.

Berger

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 33–4 JAPAN–KOR S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Tokyo.

2  Document 336.

3 See footnote 2, Document 336.

338. Memorandum of Conversation 338. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, February 29, 1964.

SUBJECT

Japan-Korea Normalization Agreement

PARTICIPANTS

Ryuji Takeuchi, Ambassador of Japan

Masao Kanazawa, Political Counselor

The Secretary

Robert W. Barnett, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

Robert A. Fearey, Acting Deputy Director for East Asian Affairs

The Secretary said that he had invited Ambassador Takeuchi in to express again our very great interest in a Japan-Korea normalization agreement. He had left his conversations with Prime Minister Ikeda and President Pak with the strong impression that both really wanted agreement and believed that recent developments were conducive to finalization of an agreement in time to permit ratification during the present Diet session. Both capitals might think we were pressing hard but the advantages of a settlement for all of us are so great that as agreement appeared in sight “one could almost taste it”. The Secretary said that he would appreciate the Ambassador's passing on to Foreign Minister Ohira the importance we attach to conclusion of the agreement this spring if at all possible. Noting that he had made the same points to Ambassador Kim,2 the Secretary asked if Ambassador Takeuchi had any late information on the progress of the negotiations.

Ambassador Takeuchi said that he had received a cable the previous day responding to his request for such information. Claims were considered the main issue on the Korean side, and the GOJ felt strongly it had done its best. The next most important problem was fisheries. The GOJ is ready to negotiate but wants more progress at the working level on the technical problems involved before raising the matter to the political level as the Koreans appear to desire. Progress had appeared possible until about a month ago when the Korean side began to show itself unwilling to move ahead in the technical negotiations, and instead to push for a political settlement. The GOJ considered political-level discussions unsuitable now due to the highly technical nature of the problem, centering in three issues: 1. Twelve-mile Base Line—The ROKG is making unreasonable demands. Their proposed line would embrace areas which, if the GOJ were to agree, would set a bad precedent for Japanese fishing arrangements with other countries.

2. Number of Boats—The Koreans are proposing a very limited number based on arbitrary, totally unacceptable calculations. Both Governments agreed to respect present practices but the Korean proposal violates this understanding. The GOJ will not agree to any proposal which would result in a reduction of the present Japanese catch in the affected areas.

3. Fisheries' Cooperation—This issue is less troublesome, but the Koreans requested $178,000,000. Although the GOJ is unable to increase the previously agreed grant and long-term, low-interest loan figures, it is prepared to agree to normal commercial loans, provided the over- all fisheries issue is solved in a satisfactory way.

Ambassador Takeuchi reiterated that the GOJ considers further negotiation at the expert level necessary. Political level discussions could not resolve the technical issues involved, at least until the outlines of an agreement have been reached.

The Secretary asked whether it might be feasible to schedule both technical and political discussions in relation to each other, so each side could enter into the kind of discussions it wants. Ambassador Takeuchi replied that the GOJ fears that if political level discussions were entered into, the Koreans would be encouraged to neglect the working level negotiations. The GOJ is concerned by the Korean attitude of almost boycotting the technical negotiations and insisting instead on political negotiations. The GOJ, having gone far to meet Korean desires in a political settlement of the claims issue, considers sincere negotiations at the technical level essential on fisheries.

Ambassador Takeuchi said that Japanese fishing interests are exerting strong pressures. They are afraid that the Foreign Office will compromise their interests. The Agriculture Minister had called on Mr. Ohira formally to call his attention to this aspect, making it difficult for the Foreign Office to show flexibility.

Mr. Barnett said that it was our understanding from recent reports that all relevant fisheries considerations are now on the table, with little or no further “research” necessary. Technicians tend to become obsessed with technical aspects. The will to agree seems strong on both sides and the gap relatively manageable if dealt with concurrently at the technical and political levels as the Secretary had suggested. Ambassador Takeuchi said that there had been prospects of working level agreement but recently the atmosphere had changed, possibly due to internal difficulties on the Korean side. The Koreans are proposing that the exclusive Korean fisheries zone be extended far out into the open sea, almost to the Rhee line.

The Secretary said that it had been his experience that when experts differed, the solution sometimes was for ministers to tell them to resume their discussions and come up with a solution. This was well illustrated by the experience of technicians and ministers in the GATT negotiations. Ambassador Takeuchi said that he believed Foreign Minister Ohira's role to be one of key importance, particularly with the Agriculture Minister subject to fishing industry pressures. Perhaps it would be a very good thing to meet at a higher level, but this was not the present position of his Government. The Secretary asked whether it might be useful to set a date now for a meeting at the Foreign Ministers level and to establish a preparatory committee to prepare for that meeting. Ambassador Takeuchi saw advantages to such a procedure but feared that if the preparatory committee failed to make progress and an abortive meeting of Foreign Ministers took place it could make a bad impression.

The Secretary expressed appreciation for the information Ambassador Takeuchi had provided and asked him to convey to Foreign Minister Ohira the U.S. Government's hopes for an early Japan-ROK settlement.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Drafted by Fearey and approved in S on March 8.

2  Rusk met with Kim on February 28; telegram 758 to Seoul, February 28, contains a summary of their conversation. (Ibid.)

339. Editorial Note 339. Editorial Note

In March and April 1964 Korean and Japanese Cabinet Ministers met to try to resolve the fisheries question and normalization of relations. Plans for talks were underway when the Embassy in Seoul reported that both sides were “apparently determined to make full effort achieve settlement,” and the Korean Foreign Minister foresaw an agreement being reached by the middle of April. (Telegram 1118 from Seoul, March 5; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S)

As negotiators wrestled with outstanding issues, student demonstrations erupted in Korea on March 24 to protest the impending settlement and the involvement of Assemblyman and Chairman of the Democratic Republican party Kim Chong-pil in the negotiations. (Telegram 1244 from Seoul, March 30; ibid., POL 23–8 KOR S) The Embassy reported the demonstrations “revealed widespread public fears of subsequent Japanese domination as well as misgivings about terms of settlement and dissatisfaction with way negotiations conducted.” That situation coupled with strengthening political opposition led to speculation that the Pak government could be overthrown. (Telegram 1277 from Seoul, April 10; ibid., POL JAPAN–KOR S)

The combination of circumstances brought negotiations to a standstill. Concomitantly, unabated, escalating student demonstrations against the settlement, government corruption, the belief that Kim Chong-pil would profit financially from an agreement with Japan, and similar issues strained Korean-Japanese relations and resulted in the imposition in Seoul of martial law on June 3. Seoul remained under martial law for 56 days; the order was revoked on July 28. Relevant documents are ibid., POL 2 KOR S;POL 7 KOR S; POL 15 KOR S; POL 33–4 JAPAN–KOR S; and in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. I.

340. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 340. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 1

Washington, April 9, 1964.

The 86-year old Yoshida, our favorite Japanese Prime Minister back in the '50s, is a doughty, anti-Communist, pro-Westerner. However, he's a good deal more so than most Japanese including the present PM. So take whatever he says with a grain of salt.

I'd urge you simply mention to both Yoshida and the Korean PM our great hope for a ROK/Jap settlement and the long-awaited normalization of relations between these two countries.2 We have consistently said for the past two years that this was a matter of highest level US Government interest (it could be worth a billion dollars of Jap support for Korea). The negotiations are now at a crucial stage and a simple affirmation of our interest by you would help greatly to push them along.

There won't be time for much other business. However, both Yoshida and Doo Sun Choi would like to hear that we remain as deter- mined as ever to hold the Asian flank against Communist China until such time as they can pick up a larger share of the burden. This kind of generalized reassurance would buck them up without tying our hands.3

R.W. Komer 4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Japan, Vol. I. Secret.

2 Both Yoshida and Choi Doo Sun were among the foreign dignitaries attending the funeral of General Douglas MacArthur in Washington. The President met briefly with each on April 9.

3 When he met with Choi Doo Sun and Kim Chong-yul, President Johnson delivered both messages suggested by Komer. Expressing his “perfect agreement” with the President's statements, Choi confirmed his government's commitment to reach an agreement with Japan in the near future. (Memorandum of conversation, April 9; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL KOR S-US) The Johnson-Yoshida meeting consisted of an exchange of pleasantries and “a brief, light discussion of the Japanese and American political scene.” (Memorandum of conversation, April 9; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Japan, Vol. I)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

341. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 341. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea1

Washington, May 12, 1964, 7:54 p.m.

1029. 1. Department believes that in this crucial period of ROK-Japanese negotiations careful consideration should again be given to possibility of US initiative which might help to drive agreement over the top. Although Department has always been willing consider useful initiatives enhancing possibilities of agreement, conclusion to date has been that any sign of US “interference” would be counter-productive. It remains of utmost importance that terms of settlement be arrived at by two parties on their own responsibility. Care must be taken to avoid any appearance that Japan settled at behest of US, and on Korean side we should carefully avoid appearance of inducing ROKG to “knuckle under” to Japanese.

2. Serious obstacles to full and final agreement nevertheless lie on Korean side. Korean Opposition, recognizing ROKG's lack of popularity, has seized on ROK-Japan negotiations issue to try to bring Government down, playing in part upon suspicions that Kim Chong-p'il and others have, or hope to, profit personally from settlement. Underlying political maneuverings and emotional attitudes appear to be two widespread fears: 1) fear of Japanese domination, but little appreciation of economic benefits of normal relationship with Japan, and 2) fear that with normalization US would attempt shift burden of Korea to Japan and perhaps “abandon” Korea. Overcoming first problem requires education and experience on which only limited gains possible in short time. We wonder, however, if there is some action US might take at this time which might help significantly to dispel fears that we hope to unload Korea on Japan. New Cabinet's professed intention resume negotiations (Embtel 1453)2 may offer favorable opportunity for such action.

3. One possible action for your consideration and comment with understanding that it has not been fully cleared in USG would be: Ambassador Berger would inform ROKG that USG would be prepared to announce upon successful conclusion of ROKG-GOJ negotiations that subject to parliamentary ratification of settlement USG will support an expanded Korean capital development program, specifically (1) Take initiative in seeking to form international aid consultative group for Korea to broaden, enlarge and coordinate capital assistance to Korea; (2) Establish a $100 million AID development lending program with goal of allocating funds for development projects and capital goods import programs over a two-year period, in consultation with other lenders; (3) Continue basic economic support of a sustained Korean financial stabilization policy through adequate provision of Supporting Assistance and PL 480. Development lending program assumes, of course, unprecedented Korean effort in development acceptable projects which US, Japan, International Agencies and other members of consultative group could help finance. Expansion of US development lending also assumes parallel expansion of availability additional local funds. Recognizing profound effects on stabilization effort and counterpart allocations of such an expanded inflow of capital, we need your assessment advantages and disadvantages such USG public commitment.

4. In suggesting to Koreans possibility of offer, we would hope that ROKG would see it as means to obtain needed additional popular support to help conclude ROK-Japan settlement, and to overcome current lack of confidence in government. We recognize of course danger that ROKG, instead of being encouraged by our offer to move to immediate settlement, might bargain for more favorable offer, or even worse, regard offer as substitute for Japan settlement. Fact is, however, utility of offer is dependent, as practical matter, upon establishment of new relationship with Japan and availability Japanese resources, especially as far as Korean trade expansion prospects concerned. We must be prepared therefore to say offer will not stand unless settlement reached. Embassy Tokyo meanwhile must appraise impact this type offer on Japan's motivations in settling affairs with Korea, and possible Japanese fears that we intend to “manage” their aid.

5. Request comment and suggestions from both addressee Embassies.3

Ball

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential; Limdis. Drafted by Barnett, Fearey, Vettel, and Norred; cleared by Bacon, Green, and Poats; and approved by William Bundy. Also sent to Tokyo.

2 Telegram 1453 from Seoul, May 11, contained comments made by newly appointed Prime Minister Chong Il-kwon outlining the aims of the new Cabinet, including his statement that “ROK-Japan talks will be actively pursued.” (Ibid., POL 15–1 KOR S)

3 In telegram 1521 from Seoul, May 21, Berger expressed doubt that the aid package would promote a settlement at this time. He noted that with or without a settlement the Koreans have been assured of U.S. aid, so the proposed package would not overcome the twin barriers of insufficient popular support and the precarious position of the government presently hindering achievement of a settlement. (Ibid., POL JAPAN–KOR S) In telegram 3393 from Tokyo, May 16, the Embassy expressed its belief that the Japanese would be receptive to the proposal and would have no major difficulties with coordinating assistance efforts. (Ibid., POL JAPAN–KOR S)

342. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 342. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, May 19, 1964.

Mac

Top priority in NE Asia today is ROK/Jap settlement. This could mean so much more in the way of long-term US dollar saving than a troop cut that there's no comparison. We're still spending over $300 million a year on 20 million ROKs, with no end really in sight. So we've got to find someone to share the long-term burden, and it's logically the Japs. Settlement would pump $.6 to 1 billion of public and private funds into ROK, with more later.

But many of us fear that if talks (now on brink of success after 11 years) break down once more, Japs will lose interest. They don't need ROKs that much. Also, Jap Diet will adjourn soon.

We badly need that extra push which might put us over the top. State/AID have a scheme for packaging $100 million in DL (which we'd spend anyway) to promise ROKs a bait if they'll sign with Japs (see attached).2 But this should be given oomph by sending a high-level salesman. It would even be worth it to send WPB 3 (though doubtless too busy) or at least Bob Barnett to Seoul and Tokyo. Or how about cranking up Wilson Wyatt?4

RWK

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. I. Secret.

2 Another copy of this memorandum indicates that the attachment was telegram 1029 to Seoul, May 12 (Document 341). Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Robert W. Komer, Japan-Korea, December 1963 to March 1966)

3  William P. Bundy.

4  Bundy added three handwritten notations at the bottom of this memorandum: “Anyone but WPB.” “I'd agree to Bob or Wyatt.” “Why not have Bob sell WPB.” Wilson Wyatt was the Lieutenant Governor of Kentucky and had served as the President's Special Emissary to the Government of Indonesia in 1963 to represent the U.S. in negotiations on Indonesian oil.

343. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 343. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, June 25, 1964, 7 p.m.

1729. 1. Prime Minister Chong Il-kwon told me June 25 he is now actively considering possibility achieving “limited” normalization ROK-Japan relations in period immediately following LDP election assuming Ikeda again elected party president. Chong envisages exchange full diplomatic missions and simultaneous agreement on part of Japanese to liberalize imports from Korea.2 Once normal diplomatic relations established under such arrangement full settlement pending issues could proceed in less controversial manner.

2. Chong expressed belief it would not be possible secure full settlement this year under present procedures. He was concerned that indefinite postponement normalization would lead to growth of two Koreas concept in Japan and greatly weaken ROK position. Therefore wanted to push ahead quickly to limited goal and hoped for US support.

3. Chong believes overt participation by US in such a limited settlement would ensure widest acceptance in Korea.3 Opposition some time ago indicated willingness accept diplomatic exchange and trade expansion as short-term goal and US support would simplify govt's task.

4. Chong will discuss his proposal with President Pak and meet with us again on this question if latter approves. I cautioned Chong against possible press leaks. I told him we would consider role for US once proposal is clearly defined.

5. Comment: We agree with Prime Minister's judgment that it is difficult conceive of early progress on overall normalization and favor further exploration concept of limited normalization timed for late summer. At this stage we would welcome Dept and Embassy Tokyo views. Are we prepared to indicate our support through direct action, e.g, high level US visit to Tokyo or Seoul to help achieve early limited agreement? What would be Japanese reaction to such proposal and to overt US involvement?

Berger

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Repeated to Tokyo and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 In response the Embassy in Tokyo reported that with regard to “limited” or “partial normalization” the Japanese Government “has always favored such a step and would welcome it now.” The Japanese were also willing to accept a diplomatic mission, rather than a full-scale embassy, in Korea. The imports question was a problem because the Japanese were reluctant “to permit increased imports Korean marine products as long as Rhee Line issue unresolved and because of opposition from Diet members with ties to industries concerned.” (Telegram 3987 from Tokyo, June 29; ibid.)

3 The Embassy noted Japanese wariness of overt U.S. participation, which would have to be credibly justified to the Japanese people, advising “that generally speaking the less overt US involvement the better.” (Ibid.)

344. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 344. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, July 22, 1964.

Here's a strong plug for Marshall Green's idea that we shoot for a limited ROK/Jap normalization, so long as prospects for early agreement on the full package seem limited. I still wonder why the ROKs would settle for so much less, but if Marshall, Embassy Seoul, and Chong Il-kwon are all interested why not try.

Marshall mentioned separately to me his idea that as part of the exercise the US would depart from its backstage role to make strong direct approaches, especially to the ROKs. I note that Chong Il-kwon also wants the US to associate itself publicly with the enterprise. To me, the potential gain is well worth the risk.

Wouldn't Win Brown's arrival be a good time to spring this one?2 We could even arm him with some words from the President; we could use a few foreign policy pluses before November, and ROK/Jap normalization might just be made into one.

R.W. Komer 3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. II. Confidential.

2  Winthrop Brown was appointed Ambassador to the Republic of Korea on July 31.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

345. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 345. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 1

Washington, July 31, 1964.

Purpose of seeing Winthrop Brown, our new Ambassador to Korea, is so you can tell him personally why you want movement on our Korean policy, especially a Korean/Japanese settlement. Five minutes should suffice.2

We've poured into South Korea more than $6.6 billion in aid ($3.8 billion economic, $2.8 billion military) since World War II. Despite all our aid, this nation is still an unstable U.S. stepchild. Part of the problem is the absence of leadership after years of Japanese occupation, but part stems from bad planning and neglect by the U.S.

Brown is a top man (he did a great job as our man in Laos 1960–62); he'll follow through on what you tell him. Suggested talking points are: 1. You are concerned over the long and frustrating record of U.S. involvement in Korea—with so little to show for it. We simply can't keep paying with so few results (we're planning $350–400 million in aid for FY 1965).

2. So you give top priority to the long-delayed Korea-Japan settlement. Let's get Japan to start sharing the burden. Aside from $600 million in Jap aid which a settlement would bring, we want to redevelop the natural economic ties between Korea and Japan. Brown should tell Reischauer in Tokyo your views when he goes through en route.

3. You'll put personal weight behind getting a settlement in any way necessary.

4. To start off, Rusk suggests attached oral message 3 for Brown to deliver to President Park. We have word that Park has told his new foreign minister to give priority to a settlement, so these words will come at a good time.

5. You are personally inclined to cut our 50,000 U.S. troops in Korea; our needs are more in Southeast Asia. Defense of Korea is vital; but can't we do it with fewer men? Such big ROK armed forces (550,000) are also a terrible drag on the economy of such a poor country. You've held off on these cuts because they might give the wrong signal to the Chicoms just now, but Brown should keep a close eye on when it might be feasible.

R.W. Komer

Attachment4

Proposed Oral Message From the President

President Johnson asked me to give you his warm personal regards. He also asked me to speak to you for him about the negotiations for normal relations between Korea and Japan, which he discussed with you last November.5 He hopes that you will move forward shortly to establish normal relations and reach a settlement with Japan. It is not healthy for Korea to continue long to be so exclusively dependent upon a single outside friend as it is at present. Korea needs greater trade and a wider circle of strong supporters from abroad. A settlement would be of great benefit to Korea, both economically and politically, and would have good effects for Korea far beyond the direct arrangements established between Korea and Japan. It would also benefit the Free World position in the Far East.

The President hopes that delays will not continue, fearing that Korea's diplomatic and economic prospects and the Free World position in Asia will deteriorate unless this normalization is soon achieved. The United States Government is prepared publicly to support such a settlement, and to make clear that it will not affect the basic United States policies of economic assistance to Korea. In fact, such a settlement would make United States assistance more fruitful, for it would be working in a stronger and more broadly based economy.

It is because the President holds these views strongly that he authorized me to stress United States support of a Korea-Japan rapprochement in my public statement on arrival.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. II. Secret.

2 The President, Komer, and Brown met at the White House on July 31 from 6:18 to 6:22 p.m. In reply to President Johnson's inquiry about “prospects for political stability in Korea and for an early settlement with Japan,” Brown briefly informed the President of the current situation. The President told Brown “that he regarded an early settlement between Korea and Japan as a matter of top priority.” (Memorandum of conversation, August 10; ibid.)

3 Transmitted by a July 28 memorandum to President Johnson from Rusk asking the President to approve the message and pointing out that it “would be a good means of pressing the Koreans to go ahead” and could be used by Brown in “conversations with Korean Opposition leaders and with Japanese Government officials.” (Ibid., Komer Files, Japan-Korea) The President approved the message, Brown discussed the issue with leaders of several Korean political parties between September 10 and 18. Memoranda of those conversations are attached to airgram A–170 from Seoul, September 22. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 12 KOR S)

4 Confidential.

5 A memorandum of this November 25, 1963, conversation is printed in Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XXII, Document 318.

346. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 346. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, August 3, 1964.

Mac—

I think I've got rolling another effort at ROK/Jap settlement, utilizing arrival of new ambassador and LBJ's willingness to weigh in personally.

Regrettably, LBJ/Brown encounter Friday night2 was quite hurried (Dirksen was waiting). Also LBJ clearly hadn't digested his brief; in fact, I had to rescue it from his desk so I could get his approval of Rusk memo proposing oral message to Pak.3

So I can't throw much light on your earlier comment that you didn't know how much LBJ is signed on to: (a) troop cuts; (b) ROK/Jap exercise. However, he did say we seemed to have a lot of troops there, and when Brown explained our ROK/Jap scenario he warmly endorsed, said he regarded settlement as “top priority” (thank God), and told Win “I'll pray for you.”

At any rate, we now have State brought around to point where it agrees US should take a direct hand in pushing settlement through. We've got LBJ saying so orally to Pak through Brown, and we've got Brown ginned up and willing to fire up Reischauer. Attached gives the play;4 I'll keep the fires lit.5

RWK

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. II. Secret.

2 See footnote 2, Document 345.

3 See footnote 3, Document 345.

4 Another copy of this document indicates that telegrams 97 and 99 to Seoul were attached. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Komer Files, Japan-Korea) Telegram 97 to Seoul, August 2, also sent to Tokyo as telegram 331, outlined actions to be taken by Brown in Seoul as well as in Tokyo in order to restart negotiations and help both sides accept interim agreements on several issues to facilitate reaching a general agreement. Telegram 99, August 2, forwarded the text of the oral message Brown was to give to Pak. (Both in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S)

5  Bundy wrote “Good. MGB” at the bottom of this memorandum.

347. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 347. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, August 19, 1964, 6 p.m.

163. Ref: A. Embtel 155, rptd Tokyo 51, CINCPAC unn. B. Embtel 158, rptd Tokyo 53, CINCPAC unn.2

1. It is clear from conversations with key figures reported reftels that differences of view exist within ROKG on how to best achieve objective Korea-Japan normalization. Foreign Minister wishes to program strategy for gaining full normalization, while Prime Minister proposes more modest goal of partial normalization. President Pak takes somewhat middle ground in that he supports attempt achieve full normalization but is prepared reconsider and accept something less if circumstances so dictate.

2. I believe President's position realistic and practical in that failure achieve full normalization will not preclude shifting objective to lesser goal if that becomes necessary. I do not, however, believe we should abandon preference for full normalization without full test of possibility.3

3. President, Prime Minister and Foreign Minister appear convinced ROKG cannot simply reach agreement with Japan, then force its acceptance by use govt majority in Assembly and without “prudent regard” (Pak's expression) to public opinion. I agree and believe that we should gauge our actions and support with this in mind.

4. I recommend we pursue following courses of action at this time: A. Embassy Tokyo explore possibility early Yoshida good will visit to Seoul. We believe such visit would give substantial boost to govt efforts improve public attitudes and make easier resumption full scale negotiations. If Japanese response favorable we would arrange ROKG invitation. We can accept President Pak's and Yi Tong-won's assurance Yoshida would be received with respect.

B. We should proceed with plans from DAC coordinating group. We will discuss subject intensively with ROKG in next few days and believe we can obtain ROKG agreement make formal request. Public disclosure these efforts should await further consideration as to best timing in relation to resumption of negotiations when domestic political reactions may again present problem to ROKG.

C. We should discuss with Japanese and Koreans feasibility and utility arranging meeting of US, Japanese and Korean leaders to promote resumption negotiations. We should make clear US not taking on role of mediator, arbitrator or co-negotiator. I have in mind possible meeting in September between Under Secretary Ball, Shiina and high ROKG figure (Yi Tong-won or someone else). Alternatively we could think in terms similar meeting at time Asst. Secretary Bundy will be in area. Whether meeting should be in Tokyo or Seoul needs to be determined. Koreans would prefer Seoul, but if Yoshida visit precedes, they may more readily accept Tokyo meeting.4

D. ROKG should be encouraged activate early campaign secure maximum public, press and opposition acceptance need for normalization on realistic terms. We can help discreetly with key opposition figures, especially if govt makes serious attempt to bring opposition along, e.g. by including leading opposition or non-partisan [garble] ROK del when negotiations resumed.

5. Above recommendations are not meant to imply substantially greater US role in resolving specific differences between Korea and Japan, but rather to improve atmosphere for resumption negotiations. I recognize that they may be construed as direct involvement, and that efforts will be made to draw us into such a role. On balance I believe we should take such risk. Past efforts in which we careful to remain in background have not ended in success, through no fault of ours. If we are to make new effort now, we should be prepared to extend ourselves and our involvement within carefully predetermined limits.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Tokyo and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Telegram 155 from Seoul, August 18, reported on Brown's August 17 meeting with the Korean Foreign Minister, Prime Minister, and Deputy Prime Minister. (Ibid.) Telegram 158 from Seoul, August 18, detailed topics discussed between Brown and Pak when they met on August 18. (Ibid., POL 1 KOR S-US)

3 Reischauer agreed with this approach as well as with recommendations A, B, and D contained in paragraph 4. (Telegram 641 from Tokyo, August 20; ibid., POL JAPAN–KOR S)

4 Reischauer expressed “grave doubts” about a tripartite meeting, because its value in Korea depended on public knowledge of the simultaneous visit by high-ranking U.S. and Japanese officials. He indicated that such a meeting, although assisting Korea, would have “seriously adverse effects in Japan.” In Reischauer's view it could not occur without “creating impression US 'intervening' directly in negotiations, which we still feel is most unwise” and would give the Japanese leftists an issue to exploit, thus significantly hindering the Japanese Government from making “conciliatory moves toward Koreans and complicating problem of ratification.” Reischauer was not opposed to a visit by a U.S. official, as long as it did not coincide with the Shiina visit. (Ibid.)

348. Letter From the Ambassador to Japan (Reischauer) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 348. Letter From the Ambassador to Japan (Reischauer) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Tokyo, August 21, 1964.

Dear Mac:

In reply to your note of August 13,2 let me say that the message on Korean normalization brought by Win Brown from the White House got through to us loud and clear.

Actually this problem has always stood at the top of my list of priorities. During a visit to Korea in the autumn of 1960, I became convinced that, without the economic boost that Korean-Japanese normalization would bring to Korea, we would never be able to build a solid economic foundation on which a viable political regime could develop there. I promised certain Korean leaders that I would try to convince people in Washington of this when I got back. I was in Washington for this purpose in January 1961 when the Department asked me to take my present job. So you see I have appreciated the vital importance of this problem for a long time.

A major difficulty is that, to get normalization over the very great hurdles of party conflict and public opposition in Korea, we will probably have to push more openly for it in Korea than we have in the past, but any seeming intervention on our part makes the problem more difficult in Japan. This situation requires a careful balancing act between needs in Korea and risks in Japan. However, we do have a considerable margin of safety on the issue here, so I believe it may be possible to put on the needed pressure in Korea without building up unacceptable reactions here. Still it remains a delicate political operation to determine just what is the maximum degree of pressure we can safely exert. The present exchange of telegrams (see our 641, for example)3 is directed toward this end.

In any case, please rest assured that we here in Tokyo regard the whole normalization problem as being of the greatest importance and are prepared to do everything we can and run considerable risks to get it satisfactorily solved.

Cordially,

Ed

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Korea, Vol. II. Secret. A copy was sent to Brown in Seoul.

2 In his letter to Reischauer Bundy underscored the importance President Johnson placed on realizing a settlement and normalization of relations between Japan and Korea and the central role to be played by each Embassy in achieving those objectives. (Ibid.)

3 See footnotes 3 and 4, Document 347.

349. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 349. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 1

Tokyo, September 8, 1964, 9 p.m.

869. Ref: Deptel 672 sent Seoul 208 info CINCPAC unn.2

1. Japanese are ready to continue negotiations with Koreans at any time Koreans feel able to negotiate. Japanese could continue from where negotiations ended last April because of internal Korean political problems, but are more skeptical than ever of Korean ability to make agreement and obtain domestic Korean support for it. While Japanese are probably ready to make certain limited steps and gestures for the sake of improving atmosphere, they feel that these will have little appreciable effect until ROKG determined to make settlement and judges it can politically survive attempt. This they feel is and always has been the basic problem. Conciliatory steps and gestures made at a time when there is no hope for normalization, they feel, uses up ammunition that might better be used at more propitious time.

2. After years of urging on our part, GOJ made firm decision in 1962 to push ahead toward Korean settlement as necessary in Japan's own interests. The then FonMin Ohira told Ambassador of this determination, and urged us not to push GOJ but let Japanese do it in their own way and at their own pace. He argued that US pressure ran danger of being counterproductive in Japan, and that GOJ fully determined to see matter through. Although in August 1962 Ohira had said $70 million in claims was maximum figure (with Finance Ministry proposing $10 million) (Embtel 295, Aug 1, 1962),3 by December Ohira had delivered on his commitment in Kim-Ohira agreement by raising figure to $500 million (grant plus easy loans). GOJ considered this major Japanese concession. It was expected at time that this would soon be followed by fishery settlement, which would be major Korean concession since it was generally understood that worldwide fishing position gave Japanese only limited room for concessions here. Ikeda and Ohira skillfully worked on Japanese public until there was general acceptance of normalization concept even though it had originally been very unpopular with Japanese public and opposition still promised an allout fight to block it. Meanwhile, however, Koreans did not come through on fishery settlement and demanded an additional financial settlement tied to it and various other sweeteners. On whole GOJ has been forebearing and has agreed to additional fisheries financial aid and to various other gestures not contemplated in original deal. GOJ, however, has noted that this forebearance and occasional additional concessions, while helpful no doubt to atmosphere of negotiations, have not overcome basic problem of ROKG's unwillingness to risk settlement. Hence GOJ's skepticism regarding further concessions is not surprising.

3. We intend to keep urging GOJ to be as tolerant and magnanimous as possible. Further import relaxations and extension of more credits on better terms would be desirable both to help improve atmosphere and to increase economic relationship during interim period before normalization. Increase in training programs for Koreans in Japan might also be helpful but only over longer period. In return, expansion and regularization of Japanese representation in Seoul and ending of boat seizures4 would be helpful here and would encourage GOJ to make larger concessions. Clear Japanese apology for their colonial oppression of Korea in past would, of course, make major contribution to improved Korean attitude toward Japan, but after many years of urging Japanese in and out of Government to do this, Ambassador has concluded that maximum Japanese statement, if obtainable, might do more harm than good. Japanese officials and public simply do not feel they owe any apology to Korea. Goodwill visit by figure like Yoshida, while running some risk because of Yoshida's unpredictability, would probably be useful, since it could be interpreted by Koreans as meaning a great deal more than Japanese intended. However, GOJ obviously feels that this is not time for major gestures like Yoshida visit or substantial relaxation of restrictions on imports and that these should be reserved for a time when such major gestures had more hope of getting negotiations over final hump. We also conclude from Emb Seoul's recent telegrams that such gestures would probably not be helpful in overcoming the main hurdle to normalization, which is unwillingness of ROKG to risk settlement.

4. As we see situation, primary need is to find means 1) to persuade Koreans that normalization is absolutely necessary for Korea and 2) convince leaders they can carry it out without committing political suicide. Are there arguments, guarantees, promises or gestures that we can make to convince the government and people of the first proposition and the government of the latter? When we see our way to clearing the major hurdle of ROKG unwillingness to ROK [reach] a settlement, then would be the effective time to pull out all the stops as described in para 3 to improve the atmosphere.

5. One point that we should think about ourselves and possibly use with the Koreans is that time may be running out on them in terms of Japanese attitudes. While Japanese political situation now stable and Japanese public willing to accept normalization with Korea on terms Kim-Ohira settlement, this situation could change for the worse. So far Japanese have accepted with some bitterness this public condemnation Korean refusal to permit establishment Japanese mission in Seoul similar to Korean mission in Tokyo as Koreans had promised at signing of peace treaty, Korean refusal to reciprocate Japanese gestures, and statements by Korean leaders that Japan not sincere in negotiating with Koreans. However, over the years Japanese sense of nationalism has been growing. The time may not be too far distant when this nationalism may rise to point where further seizures of Japanese fishing vessels would raise public storm requiring GOJ protect its boats by force. It should also be noted that both signers of the financial agreement (Ohira and Kim Chong p'il) are now no longer in their administrations. While we believe Ikeda will continue to honor Kim-Ohira agreement, we cannot predict what position of a new primin would be. On whole Japanese public opinion is likely to become less rather than more conciliatory toward Korea and demand may arise even for renegotiation of financial settlement.

6. One important factor in persuading ROKG to go ahead with settlement might be high level US visit to Korea or other intervention. In this connection we should remember that an important factor in GOJ success in winning Japanese public acquiescence in Korean settlement has been argument that this is being done by Japan in its own interest. US intervention in settlement would lend credence to opposition charges that settlement made at behest of US and is first step in Japanese adherence to SEATO, thereby making position of GOJ much more difficult. We therefore should be careful to see that any US intervention should not be in terms of mediation between Japan and Korea. Such visit, confined to Korea, would be to convince the Korean Government, political opposition and public of desirability of an agreement with Japan and to assure the Koreans that after this agreement the US will not leave them to the mercies of the Japanese.

Reischauer

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Repeated to Seoul and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 In telegram 672 to Tokyo, September 4, the Department of State requested recommendations for improving relations between Korea and Japan. The Embassy in Seoul detailed its recommendations in telegrams 250 and 251, September 17, and the Embassy in Tokyo submitted the Japanese response to Seoul's analysis in airgram A–526, October 20. (All ibid.)

3 Not printed. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Decimal File 694.95B/8–162)

4 The Koreans regularly seized Japanese fishing vessels alleged to have breached the so-called Peace Line or to have violated Korea's 12-mile territorial-waters boundary. The Japanese recognized a 3-mile limit on territorial waters. (Telegram 899 from Tokyo, September 10; ibid., Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S) In a discussion of the issue with Brown, Pak explained that the Japanese were at this point sending more boats and penetrating deeper into Korean waters than earlier, thus the incidents were likely to continue until an agreement resolved the dispute. (Airgram A–163 from Seoul, September 17; ibid., POL 1 JAPAN–KOR S)

350. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 350. Letter From the Ambassador to Korea (Brown) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Seoul, October, 23, 1964.

Dear Bill:

This is the first letter in the bi-weekly series which you asked us to provide covering developments related to ROK-Japan normalization. As you suggested I will seek to record nuances in the Korean atmosphere which may not be apparent from cable reports.

The Korean Government, and more particularly Foreign Minister Yi Tong-won, remain determined to resume negotiations as soon as possible. Yi has made clear his time-table. He hopes the Shiina visit to Seoul will occur in November and be followed immediately by a resumption of negotiations in Tokyo. He is also prepared to stop in Tokyo in December on his way back from Germany, to lend his own voice to resolving differences. Certain authoritative voices now speak of a settlement agreement being signed next spring.

The new ROK Ambassador to Tokyo, Kim Tong-cho, will be working to this schedule. He arrived in Tokyo on October 20 carrying a letter of invitation to Shiina. Kim has told me that he intends to re-open negotiations with the Japanese at the point where they were broken off last spring. This appears reassuring because it implies that no attempt will be made to re-open those aspects of the financial settlement already agreed in the Kim-Ohira memorandum. It also would appear to recognize the need to conduct the fisheries negotiations with due regard to what has already been accomplished. That means negotiations on base lines, restricted zones, and economic cooperation in much the same manner as appeared acceptable to the Japanese earlier.

On the other hand, I am not inclined to accept Kim's statement completely at face value. There are indications that the Koreans will seek to gain maximum concessions from Japan in connection with remaining differences and there may be some retreat from previous positions. Moreover, there continues to be pressure for re-opening the Kim-Ohira agreement, most strongly from the opposition but also to a certain extent from people in the government party.

The fisheries-Peace Line problem remains critical. Excitement over Japanese fishing inside the Peace Line has died down but could flare up at any moment. We have been urging moderation and I believe with some success. At the moment the ROKG seems to be restricting itself to chasing Japanese fishing boats instead of capturing them. The move to arrange a Shiina visit will further this moderation as the Koreans know that seizures will make it hard for Shiina to come to Korea.

Our efforts to bring about a greater degree of economic exchange between Korea and Japan have borne fruit slowly. The extended argument over the $20 million loan is nearing an end. The Koreans are just about to accept the loan, although after considerable haggling. Similarly, protracted discussions over the terms of commercial credits for the PVC and cement plants may be reaching an end. The bickering that went on has detracted from what otherwise could have been useful contributions to Korean realization of the economic benefits of normalization. Efforts at expansion of Korean exports to Japan before normalization continue to yield results and are worth pursuing but not much significance has been attached to them thus far by either side, even though Korean's trade deficit with Japan this year is likely to be substantially smaller than in 1963.

The change in Soviet leadership, the British election results, and even more importantly the Chinese Communist nuclear explosion, have all had an interesting and probably significant effect on Korean attitudes in respect to normalization or relations with Japan. These events have caused Koreans to ponder the need for closer relations with Japan in a changing world, and to realize that isolation is not in their interest. The Foreign Minister has told me he intends to take advantage of this fortuitous development. To some extent the press is already reflecting the idea and calling for pursuit of national interest in the broadest possible terms. The government has used the occasion to repeat its plea for a non-partisan approach to foreign policy, especially in relation to Japan.

Although non-partisanship sounds sensible and we expect some effort in this direction, I do not see enough signs of that “sincerity” of which Koreans frequently speak. The Foreign Minister looks at non-partisanship more as a gambit than a serious course of action. The more adamant individuals on the opposition side may give lip-service to the concept but deny the principle in practice. Nevertheless, I believe efforts to create a “national” rather than a “partisan” attitude are likely to continue.

All of the elements involved in achieving a settlement will be coming into play over the next few months. Diplomacy will seek to express itself in negotiation, public support will be solicited, and political maneuvering will take place. President Pak and the Foreign Minister have sufficient determination to lead to a serious effort. The government's internal educational campaign is still in low gear but the Foreign Minister claims it will gather speed once a Shiina visit is in the offing and the resumption of negotiations approaches.

Over the past two weeks the government has been publicly insisting on its intention to go ahead with negotiations. Perhaps this has been a way of testing the water. So far the reaction has not been adverse. Moreover, through a series of meetings within the government and between the government and the Democratic-Republican Party preparations for resumption of negotiations have been stepped up. There is also talk of meeting with the opposition. Good press coverage of these activities has added to the air of seriousness surrounding the government's efforts to get on with negotiations with Japan.

Many uncertainties remain and I do not wish to exhibit unwarranted confidence. But I do believe that there has been a measure of improvement in the atmosphere. We have at least reached the stage where the government feels that the resumption of negotiations in itself is not likely to cause a sharp reaction in Korea. We therefore approach the next crucial round in the settlement process with just a bit more hopefulness than we had a month or two ago.

Sincerely,

Win

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential; Official-Informal. The letter indicates that Bundy saw it. A copy was sent to Reischauer.

351. Letter From the Ambassador to Japan (Reischauer) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 351. Letter From the Ambassador to Japan (Reischauer) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Tokyo, October 28, 1964.

Dear Bill:

Recent developments in the negotiations between Japan and Korea seem to have been marked by a more positive approach by the Korean side and by a “Missouri-like show me” attitude on the Japanese side, which has been complicated by the uncertainties attending the resignation of Prime Minister Ikeda.

The new Korean Ambassador has given the impression that the Koreans are now prepared not only to start negotiations but to bring them to a successful conclusion in the near future. To this end, he said he would settle the outstanding problems concerning the $20 million loan and the loans for the cement and the PVC plants and that he is ready to proceed with similar speed and determination to settle the other issues between Japan and Korea.

On the Japanese side, there appears to be something of the feeling that they are now hearing again the old record which they have heard many times over the past ten or twelve years. Asian Bureau Director Ushiroku has taken pains to point out to us that there are many problems which remain to be solved and that each of these many problems will require difficult negotiation.

An important reason for this Japanese feeling is their inability to predict with much assurance that an agreement arrived at in Tokyo will be supported by enough political opinion in Korea to permit the Korean government to remain in power. For that reason, there is a fear that any concessions the Japanese may make at the bargaining table now will be ineffective in producing normal relations with Korea; thus, further Japanese concessions might become necessary in the new negotiations which would later be required.

There is also a fear that the Koreans will use the weakness of their government to extract further concessions from Japan; the Japanese expect the Koreans will argue that unless Japan makes concessions, the Korean government may fall and normalization will not be achieved.

There is also some fear that the United States will use these same arguments to pressure the Japanese into meeting the Korean demands. There was something of this in the reaction of the Foreign Minister to the recent visits by Bob Barnett and yourself.

The Japanese press continues to regard normalization with Korea as a natural development. It has reported and condemned recent seizures of Japanese ships but there has been no call by the responsible press for refusing to carry on the normalization negotiations. The press has generally followed the guidance of the Foreign Minister, welcoming the new Ambassador but playing down the possibilities of an early settlement.

The resignation of Prime Minister Ikeda and the political negotiations attendant upon the selection of a new Prime Minister will make it difficult, if not impossible, for Foreign Minister Shiina to visit Korea in the immediate future. However, as soon as the new Administration is installed, the Japanese should be able to proceed with negotiations. Japanese policy and positions are already well established and the Japanese negotiators can start their work without further guidance. Normalization with Korea has been established LDP policy for many years and we doubt that any new government will alter this policy substantially.

Sincerely,

Ed

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential; Official-Informal. A copy was sent to Ambassador Brown.

352. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 352. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, November 11, 1964, 12:34 p.m.

407. The Administration attaches high priority to early ROK/Japan settlement and is actively considering whether or not the U.S. should take more positive role, even extending to mediation, in achieving one. Moreover, Japan's growing interest in normalization of relations with Chicoms increases pressure on us to get ROK/Japan settlement first.

Following paras intended to elicit from you contributions to current USG exploration of possible initiatives. We are prepared consider seriously pressures, if likely to be productive, both on Seoul where we have direct leverage and on Tokyo where we can appeal to Japan's great capabilities and the responsibilities which should go with them.

1. One possible move would be to tell the ROKG quietly that we are supporting ROK forces for use against Communists and not as means for pursuing controversy with another U.S. ally—at very time when U.S. and ROK should both be trying to engage this other ally in providing support to ROK development. Future MAP appropriations for Korea, already under severe Congressional examination, could be affected by Korea's use of its security and defense equipment in ways to inflame relations with Japan.

2. Another possibility is to hinge a substantial portion of further DL to an ROK/Japan settlement in some credible manner. We could say to ROKs that U.S. development aid not really effective until it can be augmented by complementing aid from other countries, particularly Japan. It is up to ROKs themselves to prove to us development intentions serious by gaining access to Japanese aid. ROKs would be far wiser to normalize now, when major U.S. presence still available as counterweight to any Japanese ambitions, than to risk loss of U.S. interest which would leave ROK eventually much more dependent on Japanese.

3. General feeling here is that we must achieve normalization of ROK/Japan relations before prospective normalization of Japan/Chicom relations introduces major new uncertainty. Would there be any mileage in delicately intimating to GOJ that U.S., which is in effect carrying whole burden of support of Korean buffer-zone for Japan, would find it most difficult to be confronted with steps toward normalization of relations with Chicoms prior to normalization with ROK? This would simply not be understood by U.S. Govt and public, which would see Japan as failing to live up to its strategic responsibilities in Northeast Asia. We would naturally wish avoid implying to Japanese that, once ROK/Japan settlement achieved, we would have no further objection to any Japanese moves toward Peiping. However, we estimate that some such moves are in the offing anyway, and that inserting ROK/Japan settlement as condition precedent might actually serve to delay rather than accelerate them. Similarly, would it be useful to impress on ROKs wisdom of normalization relations with Japan before Japan moves closer to Communist China (and by inference to North Korea)?

Above are at present merely ideas on which we invite Embassy comments.2 We would also be grateful for Embassy suggestions as to other ways in which ROK/Japan settlement could be brought closer.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Secret. Drafted by Komer and Barnett; cleared by Fearey, Stoneman (AID), and in substance by Blouin (OASD/ISA); and approved by Barnett. Also sent to Tokyo.

2 In their replies Brown and Reischauer agreed that the climate for reaching a settlement was currently positive, but that the United States must continue to exert its influence effectively so that negotiations could be brought to a successful conclusion. Brown believed “new initiatives and possibly harsher intervention” were not yet required, whereas Reischauer advocated exerting pressure on Japan through strong and unequivocal U.S. support for Korea, especially in light of potential domestic and political turmoil in Korea that could accompany normalization with Japan. (Telegram 461 from Seoul, November 16, and telegram 1761 from Tokyo, November 17; both ibid.)

353. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 353. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 1

Tokyo, November 21, 1964, 0357Z.

1802. 1. FonMin Shiina invited me to private breakfast today for general exchange of views before he plunges into current extraordinary Diet session and then leaves for UN week from today. To my inquiry what subjects he hoped discuss with Secy on Dec 3 he replied Korean-Japanese normalization biggest problem and next to it long-range planning on China problem.2

2. On Korea he felt present was best opportunity to settle problem and showed strong determination to push ahead toward early normalization. He agreed with me that unless settlement achieved soon it might become progressively more difficult and also agreed that this was time for Japan to show maximum magnanimity. He said, however, that in talking with Koreans he had found unexpected difficulties. Deep fears of Japanese economic domination sometimes made magnanimous gestures suspect in Korean eyes, and since many Koreans are more interested in profit to themselves or their groups than in benefit to Korea, Japanese economic concessions became embroiled in domestic Korean politics (as they also sometimes did in Japanese politics for analogous reasons). Hence even acts of generosity required greatest caution or they might worsen rather than help situation. On Japanese side, fishing interests of west Japan were thoroughly aroused over threats to their traditional livelihood and created difficult political situation here.

3. I pointed out that most helpful act of magnanimity toward Korea would be some sort of apology to Koreans for colonial past. Shiina replied that any attempt along these lines would probably either arouse strong adverse reaction in Japan or else prove worse than unsatisfactory to Koreans. His private secretary who was also there interposed that proposed Shiina visit to Korea came as close to expression of apology as was feasible. I agreed that apology would be extremely delicate operation, but wondered if some forward-looking statement about turning backs on past unhappy history and moving to new period of friendly cooperation might not help assuage Korean feelings without irritating Japanese public. It might be tied to fact that 1965 is under same sign of sixty year cycle as 1905 when Japanese protectorate established and therefore in East Asian thinking is time for a new departure. (Point was made to me by Amb Kim who says Koreans refer to establishment of Japanese protectorate by cyclical name of year, thus emphasizing relationship of 1965 and 1905.) Shiina seemed unconvinced.3

[Here follows a discussion of China.]

Reischauer

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 JAPAN. Confidential. Repeated to Seoul and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 On December 3 Rusk met with Shiina, Takeuchi, and Matsui over lunch in New York. They discussed several matters, but did not review the Korea-Japan problem. (Telegram Secto 17 from New York, December 3; ibid., POL JAPAN–US) Rusk and Shiina met again on December 5 and briefly discussed Japan-Korea normalization, among other topics. Shiina told Rusk that conditions in Korea and Japan “had improved considerably and were now conducive to a successful conclusion of negotiations” between two countries. He expected a settlement could be reached in 1965. Rusk offered U.S. assistance to achieve that objective. (Ibid., Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330, December 1964)

3 In telegram 1817, November 24, Reischauer suggested that, when he met with Shiina, Rusk could emphasize the difficulties Korea had to overcome to achieve normalization and suggest that Japan “assist ROK by taking attitude of unusual and unprecedented magnanimity toward ROK during negotiations.” Rusk could also mention that any Japanese sacrifices “should be viewed as investment in defense of Asian stability and freedom (Sato phrase) and will be more than repaid in future.” Reischauer further suggested that Rusk discuss U.S. efforts in Korea to foster a settlement as well as the possibility of the U.S. playing a more direct role in bringing the two sides together. (Ibid., Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–US)

354. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 354. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, November 23, 1964, 0225Z.

487. Ref: Deptel 429.2

1. I believe visit by President Pak to US would be useful generally in respect overall US–ROK relations and more specifically in connection ROK-Japan normalization. Over past few weeks we have been reminded by Prime Minister, Foreign Minister and Presidential Secretary, Yi Hu-rak of Pak's desire make official visit. Yi Hu-rak said President definitely desires visit in spring but I have not discussed question with President.

2. Timing of visit should be related to progress ROK-Japan normalization. If settlement with Japan reached before March, Pak visit in March or April could help gain public acceptance normalization and give Pak extra boost in overcoming this difficult problem. If settlement not reached by then because of continuing popular opposition at home, Pak visit could be used to improve prospects early normalization. We will be better able to judge these possibilities after negotiations have been resumed. Whenever it occurs visit would be construed in Korea as US support for Pak and his policies.

3. Timing also related to usually unsettled political climate characteristic of springtime in recent years. With ROK-Japan normalization as focal point, and continuing political animosity to govt on part some opposition party elements, coming spring quite likely to be time of internal tension. Other factors at work include: emerging unification question, economic stresses, student activism, and possible return Kim Chong-pil. Strengthening Pak's position at such time would probably be desirable in interest overall stability and continuity orderly political developments of constitutional government.

4. Foreign Minister at one point suggested that because of expected tensions in spring he believes Pak should remain in Korea at that time and visit US later in year. Yi Hu-rak, on other hand, has remarked that visit in spring would distract public attention from other difficulties facing govt and would increase ability govt overcome opposition to its policies and quiet tensions.

5. I believe we can leave question of timing as related to internal tensions to Pak's judgement. My own judgement now would be to favor visit in spring for reason cited above but I would want to discuss timing personally with Pak. If Dept favors visit I suggest that I be authorized to tell Pak US would welcome visit and then explore various possibilities with him. In this connection it would be helpful if Dept could give some idea of possible alternative dates suitable to President Johnson's schedule.3

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S. Secret; Limdis.

2 Telegram 429 to Seoul, November 18, requested the Embassy's views on a visit by Pak to the United States and recommendations on the timing of such a visit. (Ibid.)

3 On December 4 William Bundy recommended to Rusk, who recommended to the President, that Pak make an official visit to the United States in March or April. (Memorandum from Bundy to Rusk; ibid.) Rusk repeated his recommendation memorandum to the President in mid-January 1965 after the Korean press had hinted that an invitation was in the offing. Although the White House advocated delaying the visit until the outcome of negotiations on the ROK-Japan settlement became clearer, Rusk believed that in light of the media attention in Korea for the United States to withhold or delay the invitation would “create the impression that we are putting a pistol to the head of the Koreans to work out a deal on any terms they can get.” (Memorandum from Rusk to President Johnson, undated, attached to a memorandum from Bundy to Rusk, January 14, 1965; Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Miscellaneous Chronological File) Pak visited the United States May 17–19, 1965; see Document 363.

355. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 355. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, December 31, 1964, 7:36 p.m.

583. Seoul's 585, rptd Tokyo 217, CINCPAC Unn.2 We are seriously concerned about confusion and indecision within Korean Govt on approach to Korea-Japan settlement described reftel. While we do not oppose a staged approach to settlement beginning with early normalization diplomatic relations, Koreans seem to have no clear intention or program to move seriously in that direction. Govt leadership appears rather to be floundering about, looking for ways to avoid taking hard decisions necessary to achieve progress in negotiations. We share Ambassador Brown's fears that approach as outlined by Koreans might end in failure.3

We shall defer considering initiatives on our part until after Ambassador Brown's talks with FonMin and President Pak. In meantime, however, Embassy Seoul should strongly caution Korean Govt against prematurely disclosing to Japanese its current thinking. (On basis PriMin's explanation, we fear Japanese would conclude Koreans unable and unwilling to negotiate seriously for a settlement.) Ambassador Reischauer should similarly caution Ambassador Kim.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by O'Donohue, cleared by Bennett, and approved by Green. Also sent to Tokyo and repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 In telegram 585 from Seoul, December 30, Brown reported that Kim Tong-cho “believed Sato govt. not in strong enough position to go ahead with settlement” and Chong Il-kwon appeared to agree, referring “unconvincingly to political divisions within Japanese ruling party and Sato's inability to rally support.” Neither Kim nor Chong seemed optimistic about reaching normalization with Japan. (Ibid.)

3 In the event the next round of negotiations failed to achieve a settlement, Kim recommended a shift in focus to partial normalization that involved normalizing relations and reaching agreement on specific issues, but postponing resolution of more difficult issues, such as fisheries and financial settlements, to a later time. (Telegram 585 from Seoul, December 30; ibid.)

356. Memorandum of Conversation 356. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, January 12, 1965, 3:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Japan-Korea

PARTICIPANTS

Eisaku Sato, Prime Minister of Japan

Etsusaburo Shiina, Foreign Minister of Japan

Ryuji Takeuchi, Japanese Ambassador

Takeo Miki, Secretary-General of the Liberal Democratic Party

Nobuhiko Ushiba, Deputy Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs

Takeshi Yasukawa, Director of American Bureau, Foreign Ministry

Toshiro Shimanouchi, Consul General of Japan at Los Angeles (interpreter)

Susumu Nakagawa, Minister, Embassy of Japan

Masao Kanazawa, Counselor, Embassy of Japan

Secretary Rusk

Under Secretary Ball

Edwin O. Reischauer, Ambassador to Japan

William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

G. Griffith Johnson, Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs

Marshall Green, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

Robert W. Barnett, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

John K. Emmerson, Minister, American Embassy, Tokyo

Robert A. Fearey, Director for East Asian Affairs

Richard W. Petree, Officer-in-Charge, Japanese Affairs, Office of East Asian Affairs

James Wickel, Department Language Services

Prime Minister Sato turned to Japan-Korea relations.2 He said that his Government found the domestic political situation in the Republic of Korea hard to understand. Apparently both the President and Prime Minister of the Republic of Korea sincerely want to achieve an early settlement with Japan. He did not see any clear prospect for such a settlement, but his Government would do everything it could to promote normalization of relations. He felt strongly that a settlement with Korea could not be delayed.

Secretary Rusk said that a Japan-Korea settlement is very important. We have regretted the delays in the settlement, which have been costly to all of us. As we look back and realize the benefits both countries have lost this past three years, we can see how costly the delay has been. We have felt that both sides desire a settlement, but that the problem is the terms. This problem has been vexing. The Koreans very earnestly desire a settlement of their differences with Japan. One has only to recall some of the demonstrations which have taken place to see that a domestic problem exists, however. Secretary Rusk said he hoped very much that an agreement could be worked out through diligence and patience. Such a settlement would be a stimulus to the Free World position in the Western Pacific; it would be a great achievement if Japan and Korea could put their relations on a long-term, stable basis.

Prime Minister Sato said that he would be discussing this problem with Ambassador Reischauer and would see if a way could be found to move ahead with a settlement. It would be undesirable in both Japan and Korea for the U.S. to appear to intervene in the negotiations, and for that reason the Japanese side had asked for the deletion of the Japan-Korea paragraph from the Joint Communique.3 The Secretary agreed. The Prime Minister said that his Government wants the abolition of the “Rhee Line,” but the Korean Government finds it difficult to get public acceptance for this idea within Korea. He suggested that Japan could accept a de facto abolition of the “Rhee Line,” without a formal approach to the problem in written form, if the Treaty—if ratified—superseded domestic legislation in Korea; but this was a difficult point to iron out. He said another outstanding minor problem is Takeshima (Dokto).

Secretary Rusk said he thought that it might be possible to work out some kind of cooperation on the “Rhee Line.” Similar problems have been worked out in the past. Perhaps the Rhee Line could be left to wither away and disappear ultimately through irrelevance in terms of the overall improvement in Japan-Korea relations. An example of this is the national frontier between Luxembourg and Belgium.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Secret. Drafted by Petree and approved in S on January 26. The meeting was held in the Secretary's Conference Room.

2 Sato made an official visit to Washington on January 12–13.

3 The text of the Johnson-Sato communique of January 13 is in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 769–771.

357. Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 357. Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, February 20, 1965.

SUBJECT

Japan-Korea Progress

I thought you and the President should know that the first returns from Japanese Foreign Minister Shiina's trip to Seoul are extremely encouraging.2

We have just had word that both sides have initialed a draft treaty that includes: (1) the establishment of embassies and an exchange of ambassadors at once; (2) Japanese recognition of Korea's status (the UN formula that fuzzes the question of the geographic extent of the ROK Government's sovereignty; and (3) agreement that all ancient treaties (i.e. 1905, etc.) between the two countries have already been abrogated.3

Shiina came as close as a Japanese can to apologizing for Japan's past sins, and everyone—including State—is thoroughly pleased. (This means that the specifics regarding fisheries, etc., remain to be talked out but will not obstruct the basic settlement.)

JCT

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Japan, Vol. III. No classification marking.

2 Shiina visited Seoul February 17–20.

3 Telegram 779 from Seoul, February 20, contained the text of the Treaty on Basic Arrangements. That document and others pertaining to the Shiina visit to Seoul are in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S.

358. Memorandum of Conversation 358. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, March 15, 1965.

SUBJECT

Current Korean Problems

PARTICIPANTS

Tong Won Lee, Foreign Minister of Korea

Hyun Chul Kim, Ambassador of Korea

Sang Moon Chang, Europe-America Bureau Director, Korean Foreign Office

The Secretary

William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

Winthrop G. Brown, Ambassador to Korea

Marshall Green, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

Robert A. Fearey, Director for East Asian Affairs

After an exchange of greetings, the Secretary said that he had been looking forward to a discussion of a number of problems with Foreign Minister Lee. He invited the Foreign Minister to lead off.

[Here follows discussion of Vietnam.]

Korea-Japan Settlement

The Secretary congratulated Foreign Minister Lee on the progress of the discussions with Japan. Initialling of the Basic Relations Treaty had been a very important step. He hoped that Korea and Japan were close to a final settlement. The U.S. had been very strongly interested in a settlement for some years. Delay itself was costly.

Foreign Minister Lee said that recently there had been very satisfactory developments, though the US might be of assistance in producing a satisfactory and speedy result. Mr. Bundy had been of great assistance during his visits to Korea and Japan last fall. Ambassador Brown had also been doing very effective work behind the scenes. The Basic Relations Treaty concluded a few weeks ago dealt with the most fundamental and important issues, which were now settled. A few minor issues, such as fisheries, the status of Korean residents in Japan, and economic cooperation and trade relations still remained. The Korean Government was negotiating with Japan for a quick settlement of all these issues.

The Foreign Minister said that he planned to stop in Tokyo for three days on his way back to Korea, when he would try to bring an end to the long-drawn-out negotiations and sign an agreement. He had told this to Prime Minister Sato and Foreign Minister Shiina. (The Foreign Minister interjected that Prime Minister Sato had asked him to convey his personal greetings to the Secretary.) Sato had said that Korea should make concessions on the fisheries question. The Foreign Minister said that he had told Sato that fisheries were a little matter and that making small concessions in such a little matter should present little difficulty for Japan. In Korea, however, the issue meant a lot, emotionally and politically. It was Japan's fault that this was so, because of its actions of the past half century. The Foreign Minister said he told Sato that Korea needs not just normal relations with Japan but good relations. Conclusion of the negotiations was very important, but it was even more important that the treaty be accepted by the Korean people. Korea did not want a treaty that caused instability and which might shake the foundations of the Park Government. The Korean people were very emotional on the subject of Japan; Japan should take this fact into account.

The Foreign Minister said that Foreign Minister Shiina had said that maybe it was still too early for a settlement. Foreign Minister Lee said he had replied that Korea and Japan had been talking for the past 14 years and had no more to say. If Japan was prepared to proceed in a spirit of concessions the agreement could be concluded in two hours and signed in half a minute. Shiina nevertheless continued to express doubt that a settlement could be achieved so soon.

The Secretary asked when Foreign Minister Lee planned to return to Tokyo. The Foreign Minister replied that he would arrive there March 23. He had told Sato and Shiina that they should bring a pistol and kill him if a settlement were not achieved—his loss of face would be so great he could not return to Korea. The Secretary demurred, saying that this would set a dangerous precedent among Foreign Ministers. The Foreign Minister said he was sure the Japanese would try very hard to reach agreement. Now was the best time, the golden opportunity.

The Secretary observed that strong propaganda had been coming out of Pyongyang and Peiping against a settlement. He asked what influence this propaganda had in the Republic of Korea. The Foreign Minister replied that it had none. He said that when Shiina was recently in Korea there were no big demonstrations but that when he (Lee) was recently in Japan there had been demonstrations wherever he went. The demonstrations in Japan were by Communists, directed from Peiping. In Korea, on the other hand, the demonstrations were of a nationalistic nature growing out of Korea's past humiliating experience with Japan. The two should not be confused. The opportune time for a settlement had arrived in Korea. The Park regime is very stable and in a good position, and the people are enlightened on the question of a settlement with Japan, understanding the necessity for good relations with Japan. They appreciate the economic benefits which such a settlement would bring Korea. The atmosphere is good and it is most important that the existing momentum not be lost.

The Secretary asked whether Foreign Minister Lee's initialling of the Basic Relations Treaty had caused an adverse reaction in Korea. The Foreign Minister said that it had not, because the treaty was acceptable to the Korean public. He said that the Korean people were poor but well educated; they were enlightened enough to have sound judgment on certain things.2

The Foreign Minister went on to say that a couple of words in Foreign Minister Shiina's arrival statement had helped a good deal. Shiina had said that he was sorry for the past and looked to a new and different future. Shiina was the first Japanese ever to say that, and his statement had had a most helpful effect. It was most important that solutions of remaining issues be acceptable to the Korean people; otherwise the whole purpose of the settlement would be defeated. Korea did not ask that the U.S. apply pressure to Japan—he knew that we could not do that—but he did hope that we would talk frankly with the Japanese. This would be much appreciated by the Korean Government.

The Secretary said that he would take note of the Foreign Minister's comments. He observed that we had been talking to the Japanese concerning a settlement during the four years that he had been Secretary, and before that time.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated topics.]

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 2 KOR S. Confidential. Drafted by Fearey and approved in S on March 22.

2 The Embassy had reported, however, that “opposition parties [were] pursuing relentlessly within and without National Assembly a series of actions designed to bring about cessation ROK-Japan negotiations.” (Telegram 855 from Seoul, March 10; ibid., POL JAPAN–KOR S)

359. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency 359. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence AgencySource

Washington, undated.

* [Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files: East Asia Country Files, Japan, 1964, 1965. Secret; Eyes Only. 2 pages of source text not declassified.]

360. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 360. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, April 8, 1965, 0400Z.

970. Ref: Deptel 935.2

1. I agree crucial question governing communication US reassurances future support is ROKG schedule of moves regarding ROK-Japan settlement. Current schedule calls for signature formal agreements first week in May.3 Koreans determined sign before Pak's departure to Washington and are urging Japanese to speed up drafting. Agreement will be submitted to National Assembly for ratification as soon as possible after Pak's return to Korea, i.e. early June. Assembly consideration will require minimum of two or three weeks.

2. Meanwhile govt is conducting full campaign to explain agreement to public and counter opposition and student moves.4 Opposition extremists, led by Yun Po-son, are out to topple govt and hope to use students as instrument. Govt prepared take all necessary measures protect itself and gain ratification including imposition of martial law if situation requires.

3. Pak visit to Washington is important element in govt plans. In present schedule it is strategically placed between first shock of opposition moves now underway and final struggle over ratification. Barring unexpectedly violent demonstrations in next few weeks ratification period will be most critical period.

4. ROKG is counting on US political, military and economic assurances at time of visit to provide boost to Pak's position at this most important moment. From clear indications we have received from Blue House neither Pak nor his govt wish such a package to be presented prior to visit. I am convinced that if we were to approach Pak with draft letter proposed at this time he would ask matter be deferred until his visit. This would be especially true if, as is likely, visit were to take place only a week or so after signature of agreement with Japan.

5. I believe surfacing US commitments by letter before Pak visit would dissipate their impact, which is sure to be greatest if it comes at time when public opinion in Korea is sharply focused on Pak and relationships between Korea and US. Moreover, prior surfacing would certainly lead to further bargaining in connection with visit. Given Korean psychology and pervasive relationship between US and ROK that has been built up over the years there is no avoiding association of a package with visit itself.

5. Therefore, I continue to believe material content draft letter should be reserved for joint communique or other appropriate occasion connected with visit. I would however see value in simple letter of congratulation at time of signature as further evidence of US interest and support. For this purpose paras one, two, first sentence para three, penultimate para on page three, draft letter dated March 31, ending with para anticipating pleasure of meeting in Washington would be very appropriate. Similar message to Prime Minister Sato might well be felt necessary.

7. Form of expressions of assurances which we are prepared to give is almost as important as their substance and for maximum impact should be tailored so far as possible to Korean reader. With this in mind I will within few days submit recommendations as to how substantive matters contained in draft letter of March 31 and one or two other points I have to suggest might best be expressed in a joint communique. If it is desired to restrict joint communique to general statement, the commitments could alternatively be given at time of visit in some other appropriate form, e.g. an accompanying letter or memorandum.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 7 KOR S. Confidential; Priority; Limdis.

2 Telegram 935 to Seoul, April 4, noted Department of State and White House concern about “determining optimum moment for communication of USG assurances future aid,” and the efforts to grapple with the question of Korea's plans for handling opposition to a settlement with Japan. (Ibid.)

3 On April 3 the Foreign Ministers of Korea and Japan initialed outline agreements and issued a joint communique on a final normalization agreement. The outline agreements and joint communique are summarized in telegrams 3121 and 3123, April 3 and 4, from Tokyo. The Embassy in Tokyo forwarded the complete text of both documents to Washington in airgram A–1447, April 27. (All ibid., POL JAPAN–KOR S)

4 While the Korean Government and DRP politicians attempted to win popular support for an agreement with Japan, the Embassy reported that “opposition politicians continue to fulminate against ROK-Japan agreements and against govt.” and that “activity among student groups against govt. and against ROK-Japan talks is increasing.” Newspaper reports about the outline agreements appeared unfavorable, except in papers owned by or close to the government. (Telegram 966 from Seoul, April 7; ibid.)

361. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 361. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, April 30, 1965, 9:35 a.m.

1067. In meeting with Bundy today Ambassador Kim quoted Korean Ambassador Tokyo Kim Tong-cho to effect that signing of Korea-Japan settlement before Park visit was now almost impossible physically because FonMin Lee and Agriculture Minister Ch'a had had to waste three weeks in Assembly interpellations and there are four or five holidays in Japan in late April and early May. Bundy expressed surprise, saying very high level Japanese officials had expressed hope for signing before Park visit and their intention work to that end. Bundy said it is “strong” desire of U.S. Govt that settlement be signed before Park visit, and urged everything possible be done to that end. If it were not signed, we would try to make Park visit a success, but it would be far better if it were. Bundy added we have, and will continue, to do all we can to impress upon Japanese need for early signing. Kim said Park was still determined to sign before visit and some others in Korean Govt thought this still possible. He said he would report Bundy's representations to his Govt.

In immediately prior talks, Poats2 and Barnett warned Kim that, in absence signature, U.S. Govt could find it impossible to justify to members of Congress “unusual” commitment of U.S. assistance for next several years, which it remains our common view should be made at appropriate time.3

Request Embassies Tokyo and Seoul approach appropriate officials at their discretion and make representations favoring early signature.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Drafted by Norred, cleared by Fearey and Barnett, and approved by Bundy. Also sent to Tokyo and repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2  Rutherford M. Poats was Assistant Director for the Far East, Agency for International Development.

3  Brown took “strong exception” to this “warning” and found “this approach incomprehensible,” for “at no time in our talks with Koreans has commitment of continued support ever been connected with any specific deadline on ROK-Japan settlement.” Brown also mentioned that “such virtual ultimatum totally unnecessary,” because any delays in reaching an agreement could not be attributed to Korean reluctance to achieve normalization. (Telegram 1104 from Seoul, May 1; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66,POL JAPAN–KOR S)

362. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 362. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Korea 1

Washington, May 3, 1965, 8:16 p.m.

1080. On instruction from Seoul, Ambassador Kim told Barnett President Park determined to reach Korea-Japan settlement as soon as possible and, if Japanese have “sincere desire”, agreements can be signed before May 15. Kim added that in May 2 telephone conversation he urged President Park to effect signature Korea-Japan agreement package before U.S. State Visit. President Park told Kim he would do his best to achieve signature before arrival here.

Kim expressed personal doubt, however, it possible sign agreements before Park visit in view detailed negotiations necessary to prepare drafts and his suspicion of Japanese Foreign Office “stalling”.2 (He mentioned Ushiroku.) However, he stated emphatically agreements would be signed, at very latest, within week after President Park's return to Seoul from U.S. Possibly FonMin Lee, if his health permits, might stop off Tokyo to sign agreements on return from U.S. State Visit.

In event impossible achieve signature before State Visit, Kim asked our view usefulness letter from Park to President assuring him of Park's intention to secure early Korea-Japan settlement. In that context Kim expressed view that President Park should return to Seoul with “maximum results” from Washington meetings, particularly long term commitment.

Barnett told Kim that we do not doubt in least President Park's determination obtain signature and early ratification Korea-Japan agreements. Very important when Basic Relations Treaty and outlines other agreements were initialed, and we are now confident both Korean and Japanese Governments wish normalize relations as soon as possible. Barnett expressed the view Japanese shared sense urgency, and now we could only hope negotiators both sides would exert great efforts in striving for earliest signature.

Because U.S. intention make commitment to support Korea's security and economic requirements over period of years rather unusual, Bundy had told Ambassador Kim we would like very much to be in situation where Korea-Japan agreements had been signed. With signature it would be easier to do all that we wish to make visit greatest possible success. In view high degree confidence expressed by Korean and Japanese governments as well as by Ambassador Brown that agreement will soon be reached, Barnett said he did not think presidential letter as described by Ambassador Kim would be necessary.

Re substantive aspect visit Barnett said Park need not fear that Washington visit would be disappointing. Pointed out that there many aspects U.S.-Korea relationships unrelated to Korea-Japan settlement on which we will be focusing, such as our common interest and purposes in the Vietnamese situation, continuing success of Korean stabilization program, common hopes for economic growth in Korea, and expansion of Korea's international economic role. With a Korea-Japan settlement in sight, the visit is of course appropriate occasion for mutual pledges of continued cooperation in these and other areas.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Drafted by O'Donohue, cleared by Bennett, and approved by Barnett. Repeated to Tokyo and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 The Koreans were also concerned about their ability to negotiate a fishing agreement, since both Japanese Agriculture Minister Akagi and fisheries specialist Wada were in Moscow. The Koreans were puzzled by their absence, and some saw their departure as a deliberate act to delay signing an agreement, a view the Embassy sought to allay. (Telegram 1119 from Seoul, May 4; ibid.)

363. Editorial Note 363. Editorial Note

On May 17, 1965, President Pak met with President Johnson, who congratulated him on the progress of Korean negotiations with Japan (see Document 48). President Pak stated that negotiations could be completed in June and, despite internal opposition, believed an agreement would be concluded. President Pak met with Secretary Rusk on May 18 and briefly discussed the Korea-Japan negotiations. Secretary Rusk urged an early conclusion to the talks, but President Pak raised the issue of Tokto Island (Takeshima), to which both Korea and Japan laid claim, characterizing it as an intractable problem between the two countries. Secretary Rusk suggested erecting a jointly operated lighthouse, allowing both sides a share of the island and gradually diffusing the issue. President Pak commented that such a project “just would not work.” (See Document 50.)

364. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 364. Telegram From the Embassy in Korea to the Department of State 1

Seoul, June 15, 1965, 0600Z.

1316. Ref: (A) Deptel 1272; (B) Tokyo's 4210 to Dept.2 I told President Pak today of Washington's concern about the slow progress of the talks in Tokyo. We were not afraid of a breakdown, but were very worried at the amount of time it was taking to solve minor issues. If agreement were not reached by the 20th the matter could cause serious delay in view of the forthcoming Algiers conference,3 the elections in Japan, and the US-Japan Cabinet meetings in Washington. Everyone was agreed that this was a good psychological moment to conclude the agreement and it would be a pity if the moment were lost. This concern was personally felt by President Johnson, who had asked that President Pak be informed of his personal interest. I said that Ambassador Reischauer had been asked to express the same concern to Prime Minister Sato.

President Pak replied that he entirely shared our point of view that this was the psychological moment for settlement, which must not be lost. He had written a personal letter to Ambassador Kim, instructing him to conclude the agreement by June 15 and giving him full authority to do so. He was assured by Ambassador Kim that agreement could be reached in time for every issue, except that of Tokto.4 This had emerged as the sole remaining major obstacle to an agreement.

The Japanese were insisting that agreement on Tokto should be specifically mentioned in the agreement. This the Koreans could not possibly accept. It would present an almost insuperable obstacle to ratification of the agreement by the Assembly and its acceptance by Korean public opinion. They realize that Mr. Sato had told the Diet several times that settlement of the Tokto issue would be included in the agreement with Korea and therefore that he had a political problem, but this was nothing compared to the problem which would be presented in Korea were Tokto to be mentioned in the agreement.

To meet the Japanese problem, the Koreans were ready to include a paragraph at the end of the agreement which would say that any remaining issues unsolved by the agreement would be the subject of subsequent consultation. If the Japanese desire, as they had indicated that they did, that the matter be the subject of discussions with a third party as well as the two principals, the Koreans were ready to make provision for third party participation in the discussion of “remaining issues”.

The Japanese could say that Tokto was such an issue and that discussion about it was contemplated by the agreement. The Koreans could say that Tokto was not covered by the agreement. Both would be technically correct. This should help the Japanese was as far as the Koreans could go [sic]. The President stated flatly more than once that there was no give in this position.

I suggested it might be useful to have a further meeting between Foreign Ministers Shiina and Yi Tong-won. The President said that if the Japanese persisted in their position on Tokto there was no point in a Foreign Minister's meeting and that if they would accept the Korean proposal on Tokto there was no need for such a meeting, since Ambassador Kim had full authority to settle all the issues.

I suggested that our reports had indicated that there were a number of smaller issues which, though causing difficulties for the technicians, might very easily be settled at the political level. The President was not receptive to the idea of a further Foreign Minister's meeting. The President asked the United States to intercede with the Japanese on the Tokto issue. I said that Ambassador Reischauer had mentioned it to Mr. Sato, but had found him quite sticky.

Comment: It is quite clear that the Korean position against any mention of Tokto in the agreement with Japan is adamant. I believe that the government's appraisal of the adverse effect which any mention of this ill-fated subject would have on the prospect for ratification and especially upon the principle of mobilization of indispensable support from the members of the DRP is probably accurate.

Although Yi Tong-won told me yesterday he is quite prepared to meet again with Shiina if it would be helpful, I think it unlikely that President Pak would wish him to go to Tokyo unless it is quite sure that the Japanese will give on the Tokto issue. He might then be willing to have him go and his presence might be really helpful in buttoning up a number of lesser issues.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Tokyo and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Telegram 1272 to Seoul, June 12, (also sent to Tokyo) instructed Brown and Rei-schauer to meet with Pak and Sato, respectively, to urge a conclusion to negotiations. In telegram 4210 from Tokyo, June 14, Reischauer reported on his discussion with Sato, who was optimistic that an agreement could be reached very soon. (Both ibid.)

3 Algiers was the site of the upcoming Afro-Asian Conference, which Shiina and Ushiba were to attend.

4 The remaining issues were the length of time a fisheries agreement would remain in effect and the procedures to settle disputes, claims issues involving property rights and other legal issues, and the status of Koreans in Japan, as well as the issue of Tokto/Takeshima. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S)

365. Editorial Note 365. Editorial Note

Within days after Ambassador Brown met with President Pak and Ambassador Reischauer met with Prime Minister Sato to discuss the need for a speedy conclusion to negotiations, all outstanding issues between Korea and Japan were resolved. On June 22, 1965, the Foreign Ministers of Japan and Korea and their associates signed the text of the Treaty on Basic Relations between Japan and the Republic of Korea as well as five additional agreements covering specific issues, namely, fisheries, the status of Koreans residing in Japan, property claims and economic cooperation, cultural matters, and settlement of disputes. Documentation recording the last stages of the negotiations is in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. The texts of the agreements are ibid., POL 4 JAPAN–KOR S and POL 33–4 JAPAN–KOR S. The legislature of each country subsequently ratified the agreement, the Korean National Assembly in August and the Japanese Diet in December. The text of the agreement, which went into effect on December 18, is in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pages 787–788.

Initially violent student demonstrations accompanied the acceptance of the agreements in Korea, causing nearly all colleges and universities to close until August 20. Some colleges, universities, and high schools suspended classes temporarily. Factions of the political opposition in Korea also took to the streets and were dispersed only after the police used tear gas against them. (Telegram 1368, June 22, and telegram 8, July 2, from Seoul, National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL 23–8 KOR S) Some members of the People's Party in the Korean National Assembly chose to resign en mass to defeat ratification of the treaty. Documentation on the political opposition is ibid., POL 15–2 KOR S and POL 4 JAPAN–KOR S. Student demonstrations against the treaty and “one party government” resumed after August 20, when universities reopened. They were met by police using tear gas and in some cases by Korean Army troops. Although the public complained of the forceful suppression of the demonstrations, the students did not otherwise win general sympathy for their cause. (Airgram A–76 from Seoul, August 27; ibid., POL 2–1 KOR S)

In Japan political opposition to the treaty arose within the Socialist Party in November. Socialist criticism, however, was aimed at the way the Liberal Democratic Party pushed the package through the lower and upper houses of the Diet, rather than at the treaty itself. Documentation on political opposition in Japan is ibid., POL JAPAN–KOR S and POL KOR S-JAPAN.

366. Editorial Note 366. Editorial Note

On August 12, 1965, U.S. Government officials responsible for East Asian Affairs met to discuss the problem of opposition in the Republic of Korea National Assembly to ratification of a normalization treaty between Japan and Korea. The officials agreed that “the primary source of opposition to ratification of the normalization treaty with Japan lies in the 65 seats held by the People's Party in the 175 delegate ROK National Assembly.” They also noted that this opposition “compares with the pro-government Democratic Republican Party's total of 110 seats.” The officials identified the need to prevent the “People's Party from paralyzing National Assembly procedures and from increasing opposition sentiment in the population.” The People's Party was divided roughly into those moderately opposed to the treaty and hard-liners unalterably opposed to the treaty. The officials agreed that the principal hazard to treaty ratification was resignation in bloc of the People's Party members from the National Assembly, that would force an election prior to Assembly consideration. The officials then discussed in detail actions that the United States was taking and could take “to diminish the number of fanatics and to dampen the opposition of the moderates.” (Memorandum from Stuart to Hughes, Denny, and Evans, August 13, [text not declassified]; Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Country Files, East Asia and the Pacific General File, 1965 Weekly Far East Meetings, July to December)

367. Memorandum of Conversation 367. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, November 29, 1965.

SUBJECT

ROK and U.S. Relations with Japan

PARTICIPANTS

Foreign Minister Tong Won Lee, Republic of Korea

Ambassador Hyun Chul Kim, Korean Embassy

Mr. Nam Ki Lee, American Section Chief, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

The Secretary

Mr. William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

Ambassador Winthrop G. Brown

Mr. David H. Popper, Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Organization Affairs

Mr. Benjamin A. Fleck, Officer in Charge, Korean Affairs

ROK-Japan Normalization

1. The Secretary said he had great personal respect for the role played by the Foreign Minister in the negotiations for normalization of relations between the Republic of Korea and Japan. The Foreign Minister had displayed a high degree of wisdom and courage. The Secretary said he understood that the ratification instruments would soon be exchanged. He asked if the Minister saw any obstacles to good relations between the two governments arising in the near future.

2. The Minister replied that the instruments of ratification were scheduled to be exchanged on December 22 in Seoul. He foresaw no real problems arising. As he had mentioned to Mr. Bundy that morning,2 the negotiations were now over and the Korean people were trying to forget the sad memories of the past. Everything now depends on the sincerity and spirit of cooperation of each side. He said good relations with Japan were important to Korea but the Korean people are very sensitive and there would be trouble if the Japanese were too selfish.

3. The Secretary said that in view of the history of the last 60 years and the proximity of Korea, a small country, to Japan, a large country, the sensitivity of the Korean people is understandable. He pointed out that the United States has encountered similar feelings from time to time on the part of the Canadians and Mexicans. However, today's Japan is not the same Japan as that with which the Korean people had been acquainted prior to 1945. Great changes have taken place in Japan since then.

4. The Minister replied that he agreed and that his government, as well as Mr. Bundy and Ambassador Brown, has made great efforts to convince the Korean people of this truth. However, it is now up to Japan to demonstrate sincerity in its dealings with Korea.

5. The Secretary asked whether the Minister was suggesting that Japan adopt a “low posture” toward the Republic of Korea. The Minister replied that his government only wished the Japanese to adopt a “normal posture.” The Secretary said the United States would help, when appropriate.

Korean Proposal for Tripartite Consultations

6. The Foreign Minister stated that the United States is the big brother of the Republic of Korea and of Japan. The two younger brothers have quarreled with each other in the past. It might be useful if the elder brother would now bring the younger brothers into a family atmosphere to talk over family matters. He said he was not asking for a commitment or for institutionalized meetings. He said that his government is confident that U.S. policy toward the Republic of Korea will not change as a result of normalization of ROK-Japan relations.

7. The Secretary replied that in view of the great span of Korean and Japanese culture and history, the Minister was extremely flattering to speak of the United States as an elder brother. He said the Minister was quite right in assuming that there would be no change in U.S. policy. The United States has an unlimited commitment in Korea. If the United States Government were to relinquish any of its responsibilities in Korea, they would be turned over to the Republic of Korea and to no one else.

8. The Secretary went on to say that the effect of World War II on the Japanese had been radically different than its effect on the Koreans. The Japanese Government had renounced the use of force and had prohibited the establishment of armed forces. It was politically impossible for the Japanese Government to emulate the example set by the ROK Government in Viet-Nam. Japan was only gradually assuming the responsibilities appropriate to a country of its size and strength. The United States is encouraging it to do so, but the process will take a little time.

9. The Minister recalled that he personally had told Japanese Prime Minister Sato that it is time for Japan to share some of the responsibilities of the United States in Asia. Sato had agreed but had said that there are legal and domestic difficulties in the way. The Secretary remarked that we have been encouraged by recent Japanese actions such as the decision to participate in the Asian Development Bank.

Foreign Ministers Conference

10. The Foreign Minister recalled that a year ago he had invited the Foreign Ministers of 10 Asian nations to attend a Foreign Ministers Conference in Seoul. Most replies had been favorable but the Japanese had adopted a negative attitude toward the proposal. He believed, however, that the Japanese attitude was being modified. Ambassador Kim Tong-cho had recently reported from Tokyo that the Japanese are now indicating an interest in participating in the conference. He said in his view the conference should not discuss specific problems. His idea in proposing the conference was to have Asian Foreign Ministers sit down together and hold a general discussion of Asian affairs and seek methods of cooperation.

11. The Secretary asked if the Minister had any date in mind for convening the conference. The Minister replied that he was going to be talking with Japanese Prime Minister Sato and Foreign Minister Shiina in Tokyo on his way back to Seoul. He intended to consult with them concerning a specific date and obtain their views regarding what type of conference should be held. He believed their desires should be carefully considered.

12. The Secretary observed that some subjects can be discussed more effectively if the United States is not present. The Minister replied that his government would remain highly dependent on continued U.S. support to make the conference successful.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Drafted by Fleck and approved in S on December 21. The memorandum is Part II of V.

2 A memorandum of their conversation is ibid.

368. Memorandum of Conversation 368. Memorandum of Conversation1

Kyoto, Japan, July 6, 1966, 1 p.m.

SUBJECT

Korea

PARTICIPANTS

Foreign Minister Shiina

Ambassador Ryuji Takeuchi

Nobuhiko Ushiba, Deputy Vice-Minister, Foreign Ministry

Takeshi Yasukawa, Director, North American Affairs Bureau, Foreign Ministry

Heishiro Ogawa, Director, Asian Affairs Bureau, Foreign Ministry

Nobuyuki Nakashima, Deputy Director, North American Affairs Bureau, Foreign Ministry

Makoto Watanabe, North American Section, Foreign Ministry

Secretary of State Dean Rusk

Ambassador Edwin O. Reischauer

William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State

Richard L. Sneider, Country Director, Japan

J. Owen Zurhellen, Counselor of Embassy, American Embassy, Tokyo

1. Foreign Minister Shiina brought up a problem concerning Korea. He said that Japan's relations with the Republic of Korea were going well except for one headache. This was the problem of the export of plants to North Korea and the entry of North Koreans into Japan in connection therewith. To accomplish the export of plants to North Korea it was absolutely necessary for technicians to come to Japan and carry out inspections. This was the usual business practice. The Japanese Government had delayed this matter for over three years on the grounds that the trea- ties to normalize relations with the Republic of Korea were in process. Now that the normalization had been accomplished this was no longer a possible out and the GOJ had to do something. The ROK, however, said that Japanese-ROK relations would suffer fundamentally if Japan admitted North Koreans to this country and carried out the plant exports. Mr. Shiina thought, however, that relations with the ROK had grown roots to the extent that no catastrophe would result from Japan's actions, but he had to admit there would be some difficulty.

2. Mr. Shiina said he did not want to involve the Secretary in this matter or ask him to bring it up in Korea. If the Koreans brought this problem up with the Secretary, however, he hoped the Secretary would not indicate that he had discussed it with the Japanese. The problem concerned not only the admission of North Koreans to Japan but financing of the exports by private means. There was no intent to use Japanese Export-Import Bank financing. Moreover, the GOJ action in this case would not set a precedent and future similar matters would be handled on a case-by-case basis.

3. Secretary Rusk asked whether Japan-North Korean trade was important. Mr. Shiina replied that the trade itself was not important but it appeared to Japan that it was only natural for such deals to be approved and the GOJ could not delay further since the matter had been postponed already for three years.

4. Secretary Rusk said that he had infinite confidence in the ability of foreign office officials to delay matters!

5. Mr. Shiina said that even the governing Liberal Democratic Party favored admitting the North Korean technicians and it would be difficult for the government to hold the line any longer.

6. Secretary Rusk said that this was surely a mosquito bite from the overall point of view of foreign trade but it should be remembered that malaria can develop from a mosquito bite. He thought Japan's relations with South Korea were of far greater magnitude and importance than those with North Korea.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, JAPAN–KOR S. Secret. Drafted by Zurhellen and approved in S on July 25. The memorandum is Part 3 of 5. Rusk visited Japan July 4–7 to attend the U.S.-Japan Joint Committee on Trade and Economic Affairs held in Kyoto.

369. Airgram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 369. Airgram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 1

Tokyo, February 14, 1967.

A–1065. Subject: Japanese-Korean Relations in the Year Since Normalization

Introduction and Summary

1. The first anniversary of the ratification of the treaty and agreements which normalized relations between Japan and the Republic of Korea came on December 18, 1966. The anniversary occasioned a flurry of background articles in the Japanese press, but there were no major public celebrations in Tokyo (the Korean Embassy selected last June 22, the anniversary of the signing of the agreements, as the occasion for an enormous party to which the conservative establishment of Japan came in their hundreds), and the day was a quiet reflection of the matter-of-fact acceptance by most Japanese of the controversial settlement with their closest neighbor.

2. The Embassy's overall impression is that, in the year since the restoration of formal diplomatic relations, there has been a significant broadening and deepening of private and unofficial contact and understanding between the two countries, although the Korean minority in Japan remains unpopular and the state of Japanese media and scholarly coverage and research of Korean affairs can only charitably be termed modest in comparison with Japanese interests there. On the official side, not only has a great deal been done to clean up the detailed problems surrounding implementation of the Treaty settlement, but problems which have arisen de novo during the year have for the most part been solved—although not, of course, without stresses and strains. Basic differences remain between the two countries in terms of their disparate levels of economic development and the gulf in their attitudes toward Communism (or, more precisely, the gulf in the range of attitudes and actions required of the two governments by their publics' differing estimates of the threat which Communist power poses to their national interests). The huge trade gap (in Japan's favor) remains a continuing problem, and Korea's intensified efforts during the past year to obtain commitments from Japan for larger imports of specified commodities (e.g., laver, cuttlefish) and for other concessionary trade treatment were only moderately successful. There are indications, however, that the two governments have evolved working relationships which not only recognize these differences realistically, but may even surmount them in favor of increased cooperation in multilateral forums for Asian economic development and in the United Nations vis-à-vis preservation of the ROK's special position there.2

[Here follows a detailed discussion of Korea-Japan relations.]

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Central Files 1964–66, POL JAPAN–KOR S. Confidential. Drafted by Armstrong; cleared by Farrior and in draft by Ainsworth, Gallagher, Baker, Fahs, and Nickel; and approved by Zurhellen. Repeated to Seoul, Consulates in Fukuoka, Kobe-Osaka, Nagoya, and Sapporo, CINCPAC for POLAD and HICOM for POLAD.

2 Department of State intelligence analysts shared the Embassy's favorable impression of Korea-Japan relations, concluding that the two governments have created a “relatively amicable relationship” since normalizing relations. (Intelligence Note 1022, December 22; ibid.)

Index Index

Afghanistan, 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

Africa, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51], 188–190 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 90], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 109]

Afro-Asia-Latin American People's Solidarity Organization, 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Afro-Asian Conference, Algiers, June 1965, 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 364]

Agency for International Development (AID), 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52], 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 59], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 76], 180n [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 123], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 140], 400n [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 185] Korean Reconstruction Bank loan, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]-187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]-425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

Power system improvement, loans for, 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]-243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 115]

Program loans to ROK through, 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 76], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 78]-167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

ROK defense budget support by, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 19]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Supporting Assistance grants, 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 341]

U.S. policy toward Korea, 433n [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 201]

Agreements with the United States: Germany, Federal Republic of-U.S. Status of Forces Agreement, 46n [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 36]-68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 38], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 47], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 48], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 50], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 83], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 84]

Japan-U.S. Status of Forces Agreement, 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 45], 177n [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 84]

Pakistan-U.S. Status of Forces Agreement, 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88]

Philippines-U.S. Status of Forces Agreement, 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 36]-68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 45], 176n [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 83]

ROC-U.S. Status of Forces Agreement, 46n [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 36]-68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 38]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 38], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 45], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 84]

ROK-U.S. Mutual Defense Treaty, October 1953, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 81], 355n [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 167], 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 173], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 174], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 372n [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 177], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 213] U.S. position, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 3], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 42], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 47]-97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 48], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 175]-369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181]

ROK-U.S. Status of Forces Agreement, 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]-146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 83], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 84], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88] Criminal jurisdiction provision, 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 21]-46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 38]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 38], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 50]-103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 50], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 83]-176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 83]

Labor provision, 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 45], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 50]-103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 50], 146n [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 83], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88]

NATO-Netherlands formula, 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 83], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88]

ROK position, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3]-13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 84]-179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

Signing of, 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88]-186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

U.S. position, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 4], 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 21]-46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 36]-68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 48], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53]

Agriculture, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 87], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 116]-249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 116]

Ainsworth, Thomas W., 801n [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Aircraft, ROK request for, 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 132], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 141], 326n [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 187]-406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 187], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 226]

Alaska, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17]

Albania, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236]

Algeria, 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 236]

ANZUS meetings, 401n [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]

Armstrong, Oscar V., 713n [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]

Armstrong, Rodney E., 801n [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Asia, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 42], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 190]

Asian Development Bank, 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 90]-190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 367]

Asian People's Anti-Communist League, 54n [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 28]

Australia, 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 90], 199n [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 93], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 209], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 209] Military role in Vietnam of, 75n [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 39], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 48], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96], 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 134], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 140]

Ayub Khan, Muhammad, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 225], 523n [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 228]

Bacon, Leonard L., 746n [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 333], 751n [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 336], 758n [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341]

Baird, Charles F., 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]

Baker, James E., 801n [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Ball, George, 94n [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 270]-615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 271], 767 [Pg. 767 is part of Doc. 347], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356] Pueblo crisis, 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]-563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 244], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248], 590n [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 259], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 275]

Ball Committee, 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 259]-591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 270]-615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 271]

Ball Mission, 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 110], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 181]

Bardach, Henry, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 209]

Barnett, Robert W., 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 25, Doc. 26, and Doc. 27], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51], 125n [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 758n [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341], 776n [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 352], 790n [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 361], 791n [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 362] Japan-ROK settlement, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 335]-751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 336], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 338]-755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 338], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 342], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 351], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356]

Bates, William H., 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248]

Bator, Francis X., 21n [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 9], 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]

Battle, Lucius D., 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 218]

Bay of Pigs, 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250]

Beach, Gen. Dwight E., 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 99] 262n [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 123] U.S.-ROK relations, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49], 196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 92]

Vietnam War, 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 87], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 134] ROK combat troops in, 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 55], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 63]-136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 64], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 82] U.S. funding of, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52], 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 56], 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 69], 152n [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 73], 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 75], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 76]

Bean, Maurice, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 119]

Belgium, 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 356]

Bell, David E., 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 78]-167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

Berger, Samuel D., 156n [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 315n [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 371n [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 392n [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 182], 466n [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 216], 495n [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 537n [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 538n [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 237], 575n [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 576n [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 578n [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 252], 594n [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 262], 604n [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 265], 622n [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 275], 634n [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282] DMZ incidents, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

DPRK infiltration into ROK, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 119], 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 220]

Economic stability in ROK, 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]-39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18]

Japan-ROK settlement, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 336]-753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 343]-762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

Kim Chong-pil controversy, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 10]-24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15]-34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17]

Kim Song-un visit to U.S., June 1966, 181n [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

Korean unification, 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Military force reductions, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

Pueblo crisis, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217]-470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 228], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 278]

Pueblo negotiations, 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]-584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 256], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 264]-601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 264], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 272]-617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 272], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 276]-627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 278]

ROK student demonstrations and martial law, 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13]-28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15]-32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]

U.S. military and economic aid to ROK, 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 71], 271n [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 125], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 133], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341], 759n [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 341]

Vance mission, 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 164]

Vietnam, 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 133], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 182]

Vietnam War, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 5], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

Berlin, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 223]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 223], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 273]

Bernstein, Joel, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 42], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 42], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 69]

Black, Robert B., 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

Blouin, Adm. F. J., 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 331], 776n [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 352]

Blue House, attack on (January 1968), 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 145], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 146], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155]-330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 156], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 181], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 184], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 207], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 213] Pueblo crisis, in relation to, 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 219], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 235]

Soviet role in, 478n [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218]

UN consideration of, 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 220]

U.S. position, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 148], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 260]

Bohlen, Charles E., 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 275], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 278], 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 652n [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 290], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 297], 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 307], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 311]

Bolivia, 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]

Bonesteel, Gen. Charles H., III, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 156], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 169], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 181], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181]-391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 185], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 193], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273] DMZ incidents, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 123]-266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 123]

DPRK infiltration into ROK, 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]-265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 123], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 125], 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 176] ROK retaliation, 343n [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 161], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 180]-383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181]

DPRK military posture, 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 209]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 209]

Internal security in ROK, 278 [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 129], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 132], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]

Pueblo capture, 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]-464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220]

U.S. military aid to ROK, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 137], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 138], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 140], 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 209]-450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 209]

U.S. military strength in ROK, 226n [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 209]

U.S.-ROK relations, 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 158], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 159]-342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160]

Vance mission, 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]-370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 176], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 181]

Vietnam War, 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 99]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 99], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 101]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 101], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 107], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 108], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 134], 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]

Boyes, Capt. Jon L., 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52], 156n [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

Brazil, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223]

Breeches Buoy plan, 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 319], 739 [Pg. 739 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

Brown, Carroll, 646n [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 713n [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 719n [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320], 724n [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 322], 726n [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 731n [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 737n [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328],744n [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 331]

Brown, Gen. George S., 215n [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 100], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 243]-561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 243], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248]

Brown, James L., 620n [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Brown, Winthrop G., 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51], 160n [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 76], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 96], 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 96], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 133], 392n [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 182], 657n [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 701n [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 313], 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 707n [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 316], 762n [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344] Election in ROK, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 116]-252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

Foreign Ministers Conference proposal, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]-44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Foreign relations of ROK, 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

Internal security in ROK, 278 [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

Japan-ROK settlement, 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 348], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 350]-774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 777n [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 355], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 360]-789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 360], 790n [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 361], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 364]-795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 367]-798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 367]

Kim Chong-pil controversy, 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 29]

MAP transfer program, 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 57]

Military force reductions, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 54]-118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Military pay levels in ROK, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 42]-84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 42], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 57]

Pak visit to U.S., May 1965, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 51]

Pueblo negotiations, 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]-653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 296], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 298], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 312]-700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313]

ROK role in Vietnam War, 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 87] Combat troops, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 37], 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 41], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 55], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62]-141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 67], 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 74], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 77]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 79], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 80], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 82], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 93]-200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 97], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 100]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 101], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 107]

Noncombat troops, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 30], 231n [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 107]

U.S. funding for ROK troops, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52], 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 56]-121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 75], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 78]

U.S. position, 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]-407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

U.S.-ROK talks on, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 43], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 43]-90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 46], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 78]-167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

Status of Forces Agreement, 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 21]-46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 45], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 48], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]-146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 83]-176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 83], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88]

UN Korean debate, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 95], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 102]-224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

U.S. defense commitment to ROK, 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 81]

U.S. economic aid to ROK, 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 50], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 71]

U.S. military aid to ROK, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 42]-84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 42], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 71], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 209]-450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 209]

U.S. military strength in ROK, 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 105]

U.S.-ROK relations, Joint U.S.-ROK working group

Bucher, L. M., 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 212], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 237], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 310], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 327]-737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 331] Confession of, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 218]-480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220], 537 [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 262]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 626n [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Budget, U.S. Bureau of (BOB), 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 433n [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 201]

Bunche, Ralph, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 248]

Bundy, McGeorge, 3n [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 21n [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 9], 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 35n [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17], 271n [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 125], 288n [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133] Development Loan commitment to ROK, 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]-91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

Japan-ROK settlement, 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 342], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 346], 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 348], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 357], 798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 367]

Pueblo crisis, 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244]-567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 244]

ROK role in Vietnam War, 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 78], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 192]-416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

Bundy, William P., 41n [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 49n [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 77n [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 82], 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 202n [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 97], 215n [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 100], 269n [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 124], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 404n [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 407n [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 414n [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 417n [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 193], 447n [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 459n [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 212], 464n [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 466n [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 216], 593n [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 261], 758n [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341], 790n [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 361] DPRK infiltration into ROK, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86]-181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 272n [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 125], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 182]

Japan-ROK settlement, 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 342], 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 350], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]-775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 351], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 367]-798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 367], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368]

Korean DMZ incidents, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]-226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

Political situation in ROK, 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 116]

U.S. military aid to ROK, 285n [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 132], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 140], 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 182]

U.S. military strength in ROK, 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

U.S.-ROK relations, 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 780n [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 354]

U.S.-ROK Status of Forces Agreement, 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 21], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 38], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 83]

Vietnam War, ROK combat troops for, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 39], 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 61], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 107]-232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 253n [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 117], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 128], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 134], 293n [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 134], 295n [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Visits: Seoul, October 1964, 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Seoul, October–November 1966, 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 96]-208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 97]

Seoul, December 1966, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106]

Bunker, Ellsworth, 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 202]

Busby, Horace, Jr., 90n [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Cambodia, 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 206], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]

Canada, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 96], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223]

Canberra, 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 275]

Carey, Hugh L., 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 275]

Carroll, Lt. Gen. Joseph F., 464n [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

Carter, Lt. Gen. Marshall S., 464n [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 331]

Central Intelligence Agency, ROK (KCIA). See under Korea, Republic of.

Central Intelligence Agency, U.S. (CIA), 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 93], 209n [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 98], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 120]-259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171], 400n [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 185], 431n [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 200], 555n [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 241], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 689n [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 308], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359] Pueblo crisis, 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]-465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 215], 572n [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 331]

U.S.-ROK relations, 175n [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 83], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 433n [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 201]

Chae Myung-shin, Gen., 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 82]-174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 82], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 124], 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190]

Chaffee, John, 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 331]

Chang Ch'ang-kuk, Gen., 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 181], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181]

Chang Ki-yong, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 42], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 97], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 124] ROK role in Vietnam War, 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 65], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 73], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 74], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 76]

U.S. economic aid to ROK, 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 51], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71]-149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 71], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77]

U.S. visit, May 1965, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51]

Chang Kyong-sun, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13]

Chang Sang Moon, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358]

Chang U-chu, Maj. Gen., 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

Chang Wu-ju, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52]

Cheju-do, 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 186], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 187], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 337]

Chiang Ching-kuo, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 90]

Chiang Kai-shek, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17]

China, People's Republic of (see also PRC subheadings under other subjects), 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 5n [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 92], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 96], 221n [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 102], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]-226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 229n [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 106], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 122] 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 333], 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354] Japan, relations with, 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 352]-777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

War in Korea, possibility of, 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 145], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 200]-429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 200], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 200], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 452n [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 209], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 211], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 217], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 226]

China, Republic of, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]-44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 96], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 109], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223]

Cho Sang-ho, Col., 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51]

Choe Kyu-ha, 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 133], 372n [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 177], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 181], 401n [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185], 672n [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 300] DMZ incidents, 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 133]

U.S.-DPRK MAC meetings, 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 162], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 166]-354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 166]

Vance mission, 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 162]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 164], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 174]-367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 174], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 176]-371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 181]

Ch'oe Yong-hui, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 193]-418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 202]

Chong Il-kwon, 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 18], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 122], 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 129], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 180], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 183], 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199] Clifford/Taylor Mission, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 124]-268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 124], 269n [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 124]

DPRK infiltration into ROK, 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 145], 451n [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 209]

Japan-ROK settlement, 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 333], 758n [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 343]-762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 347], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 355]

Pueblo crew release, 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 326]-736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 327]

ROK participation in Vietnam War, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 43], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 108], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 132]-288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133] Troop increases, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62]-137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 65], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 68], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 142]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Troop withdrawal, 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 180]

U.S. funding of, 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 43]-89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 43], 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 56]

U.S. military aid to ROK, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]-286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 132]

U.S–DPRK MAC talks, 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156]-334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 156], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 166]-354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 166]

U.S.-ROK relations, 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 132], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 161]-345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 161]

Vance mission, 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 162], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 176], 372n [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 177], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179]-376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 181]-386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 181]

Visits, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 110]-239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 112], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]

Chong Il-yong, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 43]

Choson Ilbo, 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Christian, George: Pueblo crisis, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 225], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 228], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228]-528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 275] Media relations, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 223], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 223], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 228]

Church, Frank F., 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 223]

Churchill, Winston L. S., 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 167], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Ciccolella, Richard G., 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 99]

Clark, Gen. Mark, 562n [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248], 590n [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 259], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 270]-614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Clifford, Clark, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 180], 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 181], 395n [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 407n [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 412n [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190], 433n [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 201], 640n [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 642n [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285] Congressional hearings on nomination of, 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225]

Pueblo crisis, 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 217], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 225]-514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 226], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 228], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 244], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 275], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 331] Capture of the Pueblo, 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217]

Diplomatic solution, 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 228]

Location of seizure, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 217], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 244], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 248]-574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248]

Public opinion on, 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 225]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 225]

UN consideration of, 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 220]-488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220]

Pueblo negotiations, 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 244], 634n [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 292], 703n [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 314], 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 324]

Vietnam War, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 123]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 134], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 136], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 202]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 202]

Colby, William E., 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 82], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 119], 262n [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 123]

Combs, Maj. Gen. Cecil E., 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 290], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 296], 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]

Congress, Acts of, 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 228] Public Law 480, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 3], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 4], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 205]-442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 209], 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]-454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 341]

Congress, U.S. (see also Congressional subheadings under other subjects), 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 19], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 51]-110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52], 280n [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 129], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 132], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 140], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 202], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 361] Pueblo crisis, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 223]-503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 228]-528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 241], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 244], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248]-575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 331]

Military buildup in response to, 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 239], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 242]

ROK aid program, 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 48]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 48], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 50], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51]-109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 51], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 132], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 194]-421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Vietnam War, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 137]

War-making powers, 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 174]

Cooper, Chester L., 156n [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Corfu Channel, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236]

Crane, Paul, 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 48], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51]

Cuba, 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250]

Cuban missile crisis, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 220], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 223], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 228], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 228], 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Cuthell, David C., 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86]

Cyprus, 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 218], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Czechoslovakia, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 229], 693n [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Defense, U.S. Department of, 91n [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 173n [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 82], 196n [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 110], 294n [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 135], 407n [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 433n [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 201], 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 463n [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214] Defense against DPRK actions, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 200], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 209]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 209]

Military force reductions in ROK, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17]-36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17]

Offshore procurement, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 59], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 66], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 76]

Pueblo crisis, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 213], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 216], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 243]

Pueblo negotiations, 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 292], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 296]

ROK troops in Vietnam War, 131n [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190]

Status of Forces Agreement with ROK, 177n [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 84], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88]

U.S. military aid to ROK, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 68], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 71], 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 75], 305n [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 141], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 187], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 192], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 211]

Defense Intelligence Agency, 196n [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 274n [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 127], 459n [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 212], 463n [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 480n [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218], 555n [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 241]

Denmark, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223]

Denney, George C., Jr., 180n [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86], 225n [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 256n [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 119], 271n [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 125], 274n [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 127], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 206]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 464n [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 366]

Depuy, Gen. William E., 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 209]

Dirksen, Everett McKinley, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 225], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248]

Dobrynin, Anatoliy F., 289n [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 133], 592n [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 260], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 266], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 275], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 278], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 282], 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 285], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 286], 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 307], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]-696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 311]

Dodd, Thomas A., 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218]

Doherty, Edward W., 4n [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 13n [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 10], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 42], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43]-89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 43], 337n [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 158], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 604n [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 265]

Dominican Republic, 101n [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 51], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228]-528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

Donga Ilbo, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]

Doo Sun Choi, 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 340]

Dulles, Allen, 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250]

Dulles, John Foster, 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181]

East Asia, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 92]

Eastern Europe, 221n [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 102], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229]

Eaton Board, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 271]

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228]-528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 244], 613n [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 270]

Emmerson, John K., 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356]

Enthoven, Alain, 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]-327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Ernst, Roger, 125n [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

Ethiopia, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 92], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223]

Europe, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 90]-190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90]

Evans, Allan, 180 n, 225n [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 256n [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 119], 271n [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 125], 271n [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 125], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 366]

Fahs, Burton, 801n [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Far East, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 200]

Farrior, John M., 801n [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Fearey, Robert A., 45n [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 21], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51], 156n [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 753n [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 338], 758n [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341], 776n [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 352], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358], 790n [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 361]

First National City Bank of New York, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90]

Fleck, Benjamin A., 4n [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 13n [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 156n [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 127]-275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 127], 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 404n [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 466n [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 216], 701n [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 313], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 367]

Fleming, Bob, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221]

Ford, Gerald, 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248]

Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 271]

Foreign Ministers Conference (ASPAC), Seoul, June 1966, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]-44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 90]-190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 229n [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 106], 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Forrestal, Michael V., 3n [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2]

Foster, John, Jr., 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 138]

Fowler, Henry H., 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 187n [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 115], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223]

Fowler, Joe, 454n [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

France (see also France and French subheadings under other subjects), 5n [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 94], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 242]

Freedom Defense Volunteer Corps, 54n [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 28]

Friedman, Alvin, 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 61], 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 75], 156n [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160]

Friedman, Lt. Gen. Robert J., 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 209]

Fulbright, J. William, 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 181], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228]

Gaither Report, 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 270]

Gallagher, Elizabeth, 801n [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Gardosik, Maria E., 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 164], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Gaud, William S., 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 78], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Gendreau, Charles A., 459n [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 212]

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 90], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 132], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 338]

Geneva Accords, 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 123], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Geneva Conventions of 1949, 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 234]

Geneva Conventions of 1958, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 276]

Gentner, Adm. William E., 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 38]

Germany, Federal Republic of (see also German Federal Republic subheadings under other subjects), 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 94], 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 96], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 242]

Ghana, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 90]

Gladding, Capt. Everett, 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 331]

Glassboro Summit, June 1967, 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122]-260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 122], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Godley, G. McMurtrie, 693n [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Goldberg, Arthur, 221n [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 102], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 109] Pueblo crisis, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217], 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 223]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 223], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 225]-510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 225], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 228]-523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 228], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 252] UN consideration of, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 221], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]-507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 225], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 229]

Pueblo negotiations, 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 236]-546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 236], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 264] International Court of Justice role in, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244]-567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 244]

Thant's “good offices” initiative, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 248]

Goodpaster, Gen. Andrew A., 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228]-528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

Gorton, John G., 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 194]

Green, Marshall, 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 41n [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 45n [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 21], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 50], 523n [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 228], 751n [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 336], 758n [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341], 781n [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 355] Japan-ROK settlement, 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358]

Greene, Fred, 464n [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

Greenland, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 213]

Greenleaf, Col. Abbott C., 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 164], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Gromyko, Andrei A.: Pueblo crisis, 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 227]-521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 230]-535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 231], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]-553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 240], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 244], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 260], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 266], 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]-675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

Pueblo negotiations, 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]-553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 240], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 248], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 278], 636n [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 282], 642n [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285] Soviet intermediary role, 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 212], 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 644n [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 285], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 286]-646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 686n [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 691n [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

Gronouski, John A., 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 273]

Guam, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

Guevara, Che, 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Habib, Philip C., 4n [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 10], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 119], 404n [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]

Hallstein doctrine, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 90]

Hand, Lloyd G., 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 80]

Harriman, W. Averell, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 80], 187n [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 751n [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 336]

Harris, Lt. Stephen, 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 261], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 331]

Harvard University, 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17]

Heinz, Adm. Luther C., 156n [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Helms, Richard N., 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 99], 262n [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 123], 356n [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 447n [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 455n [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 211], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 549n [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 241], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 275]-623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 275] Pueblo crisis, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]-506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 225], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 331] Capture of the Pueblo, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 213]-463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217]

DPRK actions, possible, 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 225]-510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 225], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 226]

DPRK motives, possible, 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]-465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 215], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 217]-471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 218]-480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218]

Intelligence-gathering, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 217]-475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]-522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 228]

Military responses to, possible, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 225], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 226], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 229]

Hilliker, Grant G., 77n [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

Ho Chi Minh, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 124]

Hodges, Luther H., 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]

Hodges, Wayne D., 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 296]-664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 296], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 300]-673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 300], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 310]

Holt, Harold, 301n [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 139], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 140]

Homme, Robert O., 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Hong Jong-chul, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 181]

Honolulu Conference, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 80]

Horner, Jack, 529n [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 228]

Horning, Donald F., 90n [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Hot line, U.S.-Soviet, 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 221]-495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244]

Houdek, Robert G., 368n [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 175]

House of Representatives, U.S., 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 331]

Howze, Gen. Hamilton H., 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 42], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 42] Military force reductions, 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 54]-116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 54]

Student demonstrations in ROK, 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]-18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13]-28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15]-33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 18]

U.S.-ROK Status of Forces Agreement, 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 21]-46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 38], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 45]

Vietnam War, 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 43], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 55]

Hughes, Thomas L., 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 180n [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86], 225n [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 256n [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 119], 271n [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 125], 274n [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 127], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 464n [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 366]

Humphrey, Hubert H., 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 71], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 76], 181n [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 122], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 132]-287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 132], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 180], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 180]-383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181] Visits: Saigon, October 1967, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]-288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

Seoul, January 1966, 133n [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 63], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 67]-144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 69]

Seoul, February 1966, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 80]-171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 90]

Seoul, June 1967, 253n [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 117], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 120]-261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 134]

Hungary, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 236]

Hyland, Adm. John J., 555n [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 241]

Ikeda, Hayato, 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 332], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 336], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 338], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 349], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 349], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Im, Gen., 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179]

India, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

Indonesia, 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 48], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 90], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 96], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 760n [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 342] Pueblo crisis, 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 228], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 298]

Institute for Technology and Applied Science, 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 51]

Intelligence gathering (see also under Pueblo crisis ), 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 331]-744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 331]

Intelligence Memorandum No. 1620/66, 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 98]-210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 98]

Intelligence Notes: No. 67, 478n [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218]

No. 75, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

No. 76, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

No. 78, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

No. 94, 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 123]

No. 829, 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 206]

No. 870, 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

International Court of Justice (ICJ), 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 176], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244]-568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 244], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 252]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 284]

International Red Cross, 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 226], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 229], 692n [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 310]

Israel, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 183], 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 221], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228]

Japan (see also Japan-Republic of Korea settlement), 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87], 196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 96]-206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 109], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 136], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 211], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 332] Economic sanctions on DPRK, 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 220], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 242], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244]

Korea Republic of, relations with, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 3]-10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 349]-773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 350], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 351]-776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 352] Japanese control, ROK fear of, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53]

Trade, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 90], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 205], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 369]

Treaty on Basic Arrangements, February 1965, 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 357]-785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 362], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365]-797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 367]

U.S. position, 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]-802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 369]

Korean residents in, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3]

Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 332], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 351], 781n [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 355], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365]

Logistical support for Vietnam Republic, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 57]-123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 57], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 69]

Military force reductions in ROK, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]

Socialist Party, 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365]

Japan-Republic of Korea settlement, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 33], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 63] Draft treaty, initialing of, 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 357]-785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]

Fishing, 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 338], 793n [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 364] Fishing Cooperation Loans, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 336]-752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 337], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 338]-755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 338]

Lobbying by fishing interests, 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 338], 761n [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 343], 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 353]

Regulation of, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 333]-748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 333], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 335]-751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 336], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 338]-756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Japanese apology to ROK, 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 353], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 357]

Japanese position, 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 336], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 338], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]-775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 351], 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356]-783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 356], 793n [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 364]

Japanese public opinion, 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 332], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 349]-771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 349]

Kim Chong-pil return, effect of, 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 29]

Kim-Ohira memorandum, 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 349], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 349]-772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 350]

Korean residents in Japan, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358], 793n [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 364], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365]

Limited normalization, 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 343]-762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 347]

Martial law in ROK, effect of, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Pak visit to Washington, May 1965, 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]-780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 354]

Peace Line, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 333]-749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 356]

Property claims payments, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3]-6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 349]

Prospects for agreement on, 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 355]

ROK military role in Vietnam War, effect of, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 5], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 37]-70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 37], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 43]-87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 43], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 46], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53]

ROK position, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 25, Doc. 26, and Doc. 27], 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 338], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 345]-764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 345], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 350]-773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 350], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]-775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 351], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 360]-789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 360], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 367]-799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368] Japanese domination, fear of, 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341], 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 353]

Political opposition's views, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 3]-9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 335], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 350], 787n [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 788n [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 360]

Political risk, 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 349]-771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 349]

Signing of treaty, 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368]

Student demonstrations in ROK against, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 96], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365]

Tok-to Island, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 356], 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]-794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 364]

Treaty on Basic Arrangements, February, 1965, 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 357]-785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 362], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365]-797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 367], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368]

Tripartite meeting proposal, 767 [Pg. 767 is part of Doc. 347], 798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 367]

U.S. position, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 4], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 48], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 335], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341]-760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 342], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 345] Desire for early agreement, 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 338], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]-757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 340], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 342], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356]-783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 356], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 361]

Negotiating tactics with ROK, 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 352]-777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

U.S. role in negotiations for, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 336]-753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341]-759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 341], 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 349], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 352]-777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 356] U.S.-Japan talks, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 335], 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]-756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 779n [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368]-801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

U.S.-ROK talks, 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358]-787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 367]-799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Japanese Export-Import Bank, 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368]

Jenkins, Alfred, 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]-262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 123], 433n [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 201], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]-584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 256], 625n [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 276], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]-651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 312], 719n [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320]

Jenkins, Walter, 230n [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 107]

Jessup, Philip, 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236]

Johnson, Charles, 21n [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 9]

Johnson, Rear Adm. Frank L., 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 241], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 331]

Johnson, G. Griffith, 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356]

Johnson, Gen. Harold K., 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 99], 262n [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 123]

Johnson, Lady Bird, 97n [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 48], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 51]

Johnson, Lyndon B., 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 51], 278n [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 297n [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 137], 343n [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 161], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 447n [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 211], 464n [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 537n [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 237], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 576n [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 594n [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 262], 620n [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 626n [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 631n [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 632n [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 640n [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 719n [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320], 722n [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 321] Clifford/Taylor Mission, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 124]-269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 124]

DPRK infiltration in ROK, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 96], 311n [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 145], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 180], 427n [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 200]

Elections in ROK, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 110], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114], 244n [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 116]

Glassboro Summit, June 1967, 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122]-260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 122]

Humphrey visit to Seoul, July 1967, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 122]-261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

Japan-ROK settlement, 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 340], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 345]-765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 346]

Korean Reconstruction Bank loan, 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]-425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

Messages: From Kosygin, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 230]-534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 230], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 260]

To Kosygin, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 221]-495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223]-505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 226]-521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 584n [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 256], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 264], 606n [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 266], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]-611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 269]

From Pak, 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171]-361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 173]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 173]

To Pak, 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]-323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 151], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 158], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 159]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 159], 365n [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 173], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 585n [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 257], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 345]-765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 346]

Military force reductions, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 21n [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 9], 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 54]

Pak visits to Washington: May 1965, 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 43], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 46]-95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 48]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 48], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50]-102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 50], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51]-109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 51], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 354]

Proposed, 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 186], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 194]

Pueblo crisis, 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]-377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 180], 469n [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 217], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 225], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 252], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 258], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 270]-615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 271] Capture of the Pueblo, 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]-463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 218]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 218], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 243]-562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Confessions of the crew, 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 261]

Congressional response to, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 223], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248]

Diplomatic situation, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 229]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 229]

Intelligence gathering, 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 229]-532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 275]

Location of seizure, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 218], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244]-565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 248]

Military responses to, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 151], 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 221]-494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 221], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 223], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 225]-519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 226], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 228]-526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 228], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 243], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244]

Presidential speech on, 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 228], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228], 538n [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Release of the crew, 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

UN consideration of, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 221], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 228]

U.S. electoral implications of, 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 167]-356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179]

Pueblo negotiations, 580n [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 642n [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285] International Court of Justice role in, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244]-567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 244]

Letter from Pueblo crew, purported, 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 288], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission role in, 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 236]-546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 236]

Receipt, signing of, 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 308], 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 707n [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 316], 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 727n [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 324]

Soviet intermediary role, 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 223], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

Thant's “good offices” initiative, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

U.S. strategies for, 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 235], 629n [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 279], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 297]

ROK raids into DPRK, 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 180]-381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 180]

ROK view of, 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

ROK-U.S. relations, 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 72], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 402n [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

ROK-U.S. Status of Forces Agreement, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 73n [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 38], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 48]

United Nations, 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 109]

U.S. commitment to freedom, 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 132]

U.S. economic aid to ROK, 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 48]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 48], 140n [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 71], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 187n [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]-243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 115], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 205]-442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]-454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

U.S. military aid to ROK, 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 71], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 140]-306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 141], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 159]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 159], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 180]-379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 180], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 194]

Vance mission, 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 162], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 164]-349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 174], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

Vietnam War, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 112]-241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 117], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 129], 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222] ROK combat troops in, 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 41], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 67], 161n [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 77], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 252n [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 126], 291n [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 134], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 142]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

ROK noncombat forces in, 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 5], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 202]

U.S.-ROK talks on, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 96], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 101], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 110]-237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 110], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 139]-305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 141], 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]-420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 194]

Visits: Guam, March 1967, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 110]-237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 110], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 112]

Honolulu, April 1968, 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]-416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 194]-423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 680n [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 304]

Korea, possible, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 90]

Manila, October 1966, 199n [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 93], 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]-202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Seoul, October–November 1966, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 93]-200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 95]-208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 97], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 101], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 106]

Withdrawal from 1968 election of, 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]-411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 190], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Yi Tong-won visit, March 1965, 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

Johnson, Tom, 460n [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 476n [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 218], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 221], 497n [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 223], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 275]

Johnson, U. Alexis, 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 35n [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17], 181n [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87] Pueblo crisis, 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 530n [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 229]

Pueblo negotiations, 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 689n [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 308]

ROK role in Vietnam War, 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) (see also JCS position under other subjects), 173n [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 82], 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160], 356n [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 395n [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 463n [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214] Counterinfiltration proposals, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 138], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 140]

Memoranda: JCSM-440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]-64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17]

JCSM-683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

JCSM-815 [Pg. 815 is part of Index]-64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 22]-49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

JCSM-53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 318n [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Military aid to ROK, 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Military force levels in ROK, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 452n [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 209], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 289]

Pueblo crisis, 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 172], 480n [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 225], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 225], 574n [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248] Military response to, 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 223], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 225], 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244]

Operational plan for Pueblo, 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 241]-556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

Status of Forces Agreements, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 38]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 38], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 83], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88]

U.S. policy toward Korea, 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 22]-49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 185], 433n [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 201]

Joint Intelligence Committee, 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250]

Joint Intelligence Team, 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 331]

Joint Reconnaissance Center Staff, 555n [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 241]

Joint Strategic Objectives Plan (JSOP), 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 19]

Joint U.S.-Japan Committee on Trade and Economic Affairs, 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 747n [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 333]

Joint U.S.-ROK Defense Meeting, May 1968, 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 185]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

Jorden, William J., 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]-187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Kanazawa, Masao, 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356]

Katzenbach, Nicholas deB., 187n [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 371n [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 181], 392n [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 182], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185], 404n [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 464n [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 484n [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 220], 495n [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 537n [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 538n [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 237], 549n [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242], 575n [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 576n [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 594n [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 262], 604n [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 265], 640n [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 642n [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 646n [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 657n [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 680n [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 304], 719n [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320], 724n [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 322] Counterinfiltration equipment airlift, 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 154]

Pueblo crisis, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 217], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 225], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226]-515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 226], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298] Capture of the Pueblo, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 220]

Congressional response to, 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 244]

Diplomatic situation, 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 228]-524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 229]-532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229]

Intelligence gathering, 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 229]-532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229]

Legal issues, 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 220], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 252]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Location of seizure, 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 244]-565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244]

Military responses to, 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 180], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217]-475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225]-509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 225], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 226]-516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 226]-519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 226], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 228], 584n [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 256]

UN consideration of, 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]-506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 225], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 236]

U.S. policy, 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]-402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

Pueblo negotiations, 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 241], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 324]-731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325] Receipt, signing of, 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 308]-689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 308], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 314]-704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]-713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]-728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 324]

Release of prisoners, 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 327]-737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Soviet role as intermediary in, 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]-696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 311]

Strategies for, 629n [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 279], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

U.S. policy toward ROK, 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 211]-458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 211]

U.S.-ROK relations, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 181], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 185]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]

Kennedy, Edward M., 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248]

Kennedy, John F., 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47]

Kennedy, Robert F., 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250]

Kennedy Round, 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 132]

Kent, Sherman, 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122]

Khanh, Maj. Gen. Nguyen (Nguyen Khanh), 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 28]

Killen, James S., 13n [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18]

Kim Chong-kap, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50]

Kim Chong-O, 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 55n [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 30]

Kim Chong-pil, 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 22], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 67], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 109] Japan-ROK settlement, 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 29], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 349], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 349]-772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 350]

Political opposition to, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 10]-24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341]

Resignation of, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15]-34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 349]

Return to ROK of, 38n [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 18], 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 29], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 354]

U.S. view of, 13n [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

Kim Chong-yul, 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 333]-749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 338]-756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]-775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 351], 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 353]

Kim Dong-bin, Lt. Gen., 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 87]

Kim Dong-jo, 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 133], 335n [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 157], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 164], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 350], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 355], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 361], 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Kim Hak-yol, 207n [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 96]

Kim Hyon-chol, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

Kim Hyong-uk, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 176], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 181]

Kim Hyun-chul, 56n [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 29], 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 61], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 367] U.S.-ROK relations, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 87], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106]

Kim Il Sung, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 138], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 168], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 181] DPRK infiltration into ROK, 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 123], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 148], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 181], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

DPRK military posture, 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 146], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 184], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 200], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 200]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 200], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 209]

Korean unification, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 181], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 268]

ROK attitude toward, 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 161]-344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 161], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 176], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 177], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 182]

U.S. view of, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 165], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 200]

Vietnam War, 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 98], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]-448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 219]

Kim Kwang-hyop, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 91]

Kim Song-un, 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 124], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 181], 412n [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214] DPRK infiltration into ROK, 275n [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 127], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 156], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]-464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

Internal security in ROK, 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 129], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 135], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 183]

Military force levels, 62n [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 33], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52]

Troop pay levels, 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 42]-84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 42], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51], 123n [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 57]

U.S. military aid to ROK, 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 42]-83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 42], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52]-112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71], 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 75]-156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

U.S. view of, 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 180], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 181]

Vance mission, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 176], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 374n [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 181]-386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 181]

Vietnam War, 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 87] ROK combat troops in, 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 56], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62]-137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 65], 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 69], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 73]-155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 75], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 76]-158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 76], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 80], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 82], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 107], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 126], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 128], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 137], 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 140], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 142]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

ROK noncombat troops in, 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Visits to the United States: May 1965, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52]-113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

June 1966, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]-185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88]

March 1967, 235n [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 110], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

Kim Tong-cho. See Kim Dong-jo .

Kimchi, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 110]-239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 112], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 140], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 140]

Kishi, Nobusuke, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 96]

Kissinger, Henry A., 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17]

Kohler, Foy, 187n [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 289n [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 133]

Komer, Robert W., 776n [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 352] Japan-ROK settlement, 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 340], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 342], 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 346]

Military force reductions, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2]-4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]

Student demonstrations, 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Korea, Democratic People's Republic of (DPRK) (see also DPRK subheadings under other subjects), 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 90], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 102], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 123]-263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 123], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 200], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 200], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251] Attack on, possible, 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 145], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]-358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 172], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 177]-373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

Economic sanctions on, 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 242], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244]

Fish-factory ships from the Netherlands, 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 331]

Japan, relations with, 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 220], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368]-801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Military capabilities of, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 181], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 201], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

PRC, relations with, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 184], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 200], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 225], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 239]

ROK view of, 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 129]-280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 129]

Soviet Union, relations with, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 133], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 209], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217] Mutual Defense Treaty, 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 184], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 200], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 225], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 239]

Threats of war by, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 285]-644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 285]

UN role for, 204n [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 95], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 206]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

UNC-sponsored broadcasts to, 221n [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 102]

U.S. captive pilots, treatment of, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217]

U.S. recognition as a state of, 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 244]

War preparation in, 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 200]-429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 200]

Korea, Republic of (ROK) (see also Japan-Republic of Korea settlement; and ROK subheadings under other subjects), 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181]-391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 209], 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210] Central Intelligence Agency (KCIA), 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 116]-247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 116], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 120], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 123], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

Civil Defense Bill, 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

Corruption in, 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 22], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 116]-249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 116]

Coup d'etat, possible, 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 22]-49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

Democratization in, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 4], 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

Disaster aid to the United States by, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51]-107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 51]

DPRK military policies toward, 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]-283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 130], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]-399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

DPRK military threat to, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 101], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 138]

Economic situation, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 71], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 76], 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 96], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111] Agriculture, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 87], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 116]-249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 116]

Economic stability and development, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 87], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 341], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 352] U.S. position, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 4], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]-39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 78], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 87]-184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87], 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 211]

Foreign direct investment, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 110], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]

Lessening of dependence on the United States, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 201], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 211]-458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 211]

Europe, relations with, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90]

Exports, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18], 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 59]-128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 69], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 76], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 90], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 132]

Fishery resources, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 3]-10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

Foreign direct investment in, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 110], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]

Foreign relations of, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]-44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51], 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 95], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 144]

Internal security, strengthening of, 278 [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 132], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 135]-295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 181] Homeland reserve force, 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 412n [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190], 417n [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 193], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]-424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 209]

Japan, relations with: Economic aid, 9n [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 350], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 351]-776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 352]

Fishery resources, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 3]-10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3]

Japanese control, ROK fear of, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53]

ROK seizure of Japanese fishing boats, 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 349]-773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 350], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 351]

Trade, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 90], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 205], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 369]

Treaty on Basic Arrangements, February 1965, 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 357]-785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 362], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365]-797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 367]

U.S. position, 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]-802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 369]

Japanese defense role in, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 201]-434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 201], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 211]

Korean Logistics Service Corps, 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 133], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 134], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 141]

Korean National Police (KNP), 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 123], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 125]-272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 125], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 135], 412n [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190]

Military budget levels, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 87]-184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87]

Military capabilities of, 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 194]-421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 201]

Military force levels, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]-651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290] Increases in, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 92], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 193]-418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

Maintenance of, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 4], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 19], 62n [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 33]

ROK position, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3]-8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 3], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52]

U.S. position, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 47], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

Military pay levels, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 32] ROK position, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 42]-83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 42], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52]-112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52]

U.S. position, 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 42]-84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 42], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51]-109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 51], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 57], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77]

Political situation, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 25, Doc. 26, and Doc. 27], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 200], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368] Assassinations, possible, 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 120]-258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 120]

Civil Rule Party, 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 32]

Combat troops for the Vietnam War, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 37], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 131n [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 73], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 101]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 101], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 134]-292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 134], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 142]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

Democratic Party, 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 32]

Democratic-Republican Party, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15]-31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198] Japan-ROK settlement, 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 788n [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 360], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 366]

National Assembly election of 1967, 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 118], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 123]

Presidential election of 1967, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 116]-251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 116]

Vietnam War role of ROK, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 37], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 57]-123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 57], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 63], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

Elections of 1967, 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 84], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106], 242n [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115] Campaign strategies, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 116]-245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 116]

Corruption as issue in, 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 116]-249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 116]

Economic issues in, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 116]-249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 116]

Election laws, 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 116], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 116]

Japan-ROK relations, effect on, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 110]

National Assembly elections, 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 118], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 123]

U.S. view of, 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 106], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 116]-252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 201]

Vietnam combat role for ROK, effect on, 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 72], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 101]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 101], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 107]-232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Elections of 1971, 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 211]

Kim Chong-pil controversy, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 10]-24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341]

Labor issues, 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 45]

Masses Party, 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

New Democratic Party (NDP), 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 116], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 122], 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 118], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]-424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

Opposition tactics, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 63]-133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 63]

People's Party, 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365]-796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 366]

Political opposition to Japan-ROK settlement, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 3]-9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 335], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 350], 787n [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 788n [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 360]

Splinter parties (ROK), 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 116]-247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 116]

Student demonstrations, 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]-20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]-32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 18], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 31]-59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Vietnam War participation by ROK, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 43]-86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 43]

PRC military threat to, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 101], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201]

Security conditions in, 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 120]-259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122]

UN military role in, 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 91]-196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201]

United States, relations with, 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 66], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 123], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 152] Bilateral annual ministerial meetings, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106]-229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 106]

Criminal jurisdiction, 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 21]-46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 38]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 38], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 50]-103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 50], 146n [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

Defense ministerial meetings, 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 185]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

Exchange rates, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 4]

Joint U.S.-ROK working group, 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 133]

Pueblo crisis, effect on, 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 235]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

ROK Aide-Mémoire, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

ROK lack of confidence in the United States, 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 95]-204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 95], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 97], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156]-336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 157]

U.S. covert activities in, 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 25, Doc. 26, and Doc. 27]-53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

U.S. defense commitment to: ROK position, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 43]-86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 43], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 174], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 180], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181]

U.S. position, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 42]-82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 42], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 81], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 190], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 201]-434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 201]

U.S. economic aid to 6, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 211] Development Loan Fund commitment, 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 43]-87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 43], 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 43]-91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 50]-105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 50], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 66], 140n [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 71], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 76], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 78], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]-243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 115], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201]

Food, 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 205]-442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Korean Reconstruction Bank loan, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]-187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]-425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

Merchant ship loans, 144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 69], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71]

Program loans, 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 76], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 78]-167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

Reduction in, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 87]-184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87]

ROK request for, 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 48], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 71], 207n [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 96]

U.S. position, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 4], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 48]-98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 51], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71]-149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 71]

U.S. military aid to (see also Military Assistance Plan), 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 182], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 187], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 211], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 297] Airfields, 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 180], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 186], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 187]

Ammunition and ammo production facilities, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 76], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 154]

Construction projects, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 141]

Counterinfiltration aid, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 138], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 152]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 154], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 159]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 159], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 165], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 185], 428n [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 200] ROK request for, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 133], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 137], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 140]-304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 140], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190]

U.S. position, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 76], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 125]-272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 125], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 127]-275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 127], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 141]-306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 141], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 181], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 187]

Destroyers, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 110], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]-285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 132], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 139], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 140]-305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 141], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 148], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 154], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 159], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 187], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 235]

Equipment modernization, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 75]-156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 76], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 133]

Increases in, 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 180]-379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 180], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 180], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 181]-391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

JCS position, 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Military budget support, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 209]-450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 209]

ROK request for, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 71], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 180]-379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 180], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 194]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

ROK Vietnam War role, effect of, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 37]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 37], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 43], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 66], 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

U.S. position, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 125]-272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 125]

U.S.-ROK talks on, 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]-84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 42], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 68], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 194]

Vehicles, 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 132], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 158], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 209]

Weaponry, 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 132]-286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 132]

U.S. policy toward, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 69], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 90], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 181], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 201]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 211]-458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 211]

Vietnam Republic, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 37], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 42], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52]-113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 57], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 76], 162n [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77]

Withdrawal of U.S. troops from, 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 180], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 180], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 180]

Korea Herald, 417n [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 193]

Korea Republic, 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 76]

Korea Times, 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 56], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 76], 417n [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 193]

Korean Armistice Agreement, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 102], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 129], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 262]-595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 262]

Korean Armistice Declaration, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 144]

Korean Oil Corporation, 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 66]

Korean Task Force, 412n [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190], 530n [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 229]

Korean unification, 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32] DPRK position, 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 123], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 127], 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 181], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 200], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 268]

ROK position, 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]-426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

Soviet position, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 91], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 269]

U.S. position, 13n [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 47], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 201]

Korean War, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 39], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 91]

Korean Working Group, 522n [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 228], 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 258], 625n [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 276]

Koren, Henry L.T., 180n [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86]

Kornienko, Georgi M., 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 286]

Kosygin, Alexei N., 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 221], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228] Pueblo crisis, 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 230]-535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 231], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 266], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 268]-612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 269], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 273]

Pueblo negotiations, 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 286] Johnson's messages to, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 221]-495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223]-505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 226]-521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 584n [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 256], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 264], 606n [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 266], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]-611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 269]

Messages to Johnson, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 230]-534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 230], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 260]

Kuleiakin, Viktor S., 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

Kuter, Gen. George, 590n [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 259]

Kuznetzov, Vasiliy, 462n [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 213], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217], 499n [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 223], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 227], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 231], 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 307]

Kyonghyang Sinmun, 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 209]

Lakeland, Albert A., Jr., 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

Laos, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 345]

Las Vegas Review-Journal, 560n [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 243]

Lathram, L. Wade, 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]-735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 326]

Latin America, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 90], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90]

Leddy, John M., 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Lee Nam-ki, 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 367]

Lee Tong Won. See Yi Tong-won.

Leonard, James F., 447n [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 622n [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 275], 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 713n [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 719n [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320], 724n [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 322], 731n [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 737n [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Lim, John, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 43]

Little Summit on PRC nuclear capabilities, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 122]

Locke, Eugene M., 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Lodge, Henry Cabot, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 38], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 110] Pueblo crisis, 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 244]

Vietnam War role for ROK, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 41]-80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 46], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

Luxembourg, 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 356]

McAfee, William, 225n [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

MacArthur, Gen. Douglas, 757n [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 340]

McCafferty, Arthur, 631n [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 632n [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

McCain, Adm. John S., Jr., 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]-448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

McCone, John A., 21n [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 9]

McConnell, Gen. John P., 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 243]

McDonald, Adm. David, 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 244], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248], 590n [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 259]

McKee, Gen. Seth J., 262n [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 123], 529n [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 228]

McNamara, Robert S., 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 49n [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 36], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87], 274n [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 127], 288n [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 295n [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 315n [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 335n [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 157], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 180], 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 181], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 181], 459n [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 212], 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 237], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 241], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 609n [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268] Kim Song-un visits, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52]-113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

MAP transfer program, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 50], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 51], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 57]

Military force levels in ROK, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 9]-22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17]-38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]-327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Military pay levels, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52]

Pueblo crisis, 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 217], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]-506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 225], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 270], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 275] Capture of the Pueblo, 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]-462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 213], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 218], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 218]-480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 228], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 243]

Confessions of the crew, 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248]

DPRK motives, possible, 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217]-471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 218]

Intelligence gathering, 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223]

Location of seizure, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 218], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244]

Military responses to, possible, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217]-474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 217], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 228] Aircraft deployment to ROK, 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 221], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 225]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 225], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 226]-516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 226]-519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 226], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 228]

Callup of reserves, 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 223]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 223], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 243], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244]

Mining of Wonsan harbor, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226]-515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 226]

Replacement by USS Banner, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220]-490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 220]

Tour of duty extensions, 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225]-508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 225], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 228]-526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 228]

Soviet prior knowledge of, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 226]

Pueblo negotiations, 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 235], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 292]

ROK role in Vietnam War, 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 167n [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 87]-183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 87], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 139] U.S. funding of, 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 71], 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 75], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 110], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 112]

Status of Forces Agreement with ROK, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 36], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 83], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88]

U.S. economic aid to ROK, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 87]-184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87]

U.S. military aid to ROK, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 137], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 154]

Visits: ROK, proposed, 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 63], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 63]

Seoul, December 1966, 229n [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 106]

McNaughton, John T., 239n [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 112] ROK combat troops in Vietnam War, 131n [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62], 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 75]-156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 107]-232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Status of Forces Agreements, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 38]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 38], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 83]-176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 83], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88]

U.S.-ROK relations, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 184n [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87]

Macomber, William B., Jr., 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 181]

McPherson, Harry C., Jr., 90n [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Malaysia, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 39], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 48], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86], 199n [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 93] 205, 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

Malik, Adam, 523n [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 228]

Malik, Yakov, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223]

Malitza, Mircea, 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 248]

Manila Conference, October 1966, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 90]-189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 90], 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]-202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 96]-206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96]

Mansfield, Mike, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 176], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236]

Marcos, Ferdinand, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 90], 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

Marks, Leonard, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 218]

Media in Japan, 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 351]

Media in the ROK, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 18], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 116]-248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 116], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 123], 285n [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 132], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 329], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 354]

Media in the United States, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 228]

Meehan, Francis J., 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Meeker, Leonard, 466n [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 216], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 220]-487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 220], 538n [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 544n [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236], 576n [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 578n [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 252], 594n [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 262], 604n [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 265], 713n [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 731n [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

“Meet the Press,” 609

Mekong Valley development program, 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Middle East, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 122], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217], 482n [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 219], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 221], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 269]

Miki, Tadeo, 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 222], 523n [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 228], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356]

Military Armistice Commission (MAC) meetings, 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 212], 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 216], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 254]-582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 593n [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 261], 597n [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263] Blue House attack discussion, 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 173], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 213], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 216]

Open sessions: November 4th, 1966, 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 98]

January 24th, 1968, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 144]-311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 145], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 466n [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 216], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 263], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 276]

February 7th, 1968, 688n [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 308]

February 14th, 1968, 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 274]

February 19th, 1968, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 285]

March 25th, 1968, 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 300]

DPRK position, 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 237]

ROK position, 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 152], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155]-334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 156], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 161]-346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 162], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 166]-354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 166]

U.S. position, 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 152], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 159]-340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 159], 354n [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 166], 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 167], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 169], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 181], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 235]

Senior Members meetings on Pueblo crisis: 1st (February 2, 1968), 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 251], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 256]

2nd (February 4, 1968), 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 152], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 261]-603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 264]

3rd (February 5, 1968), 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 265]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

4th (February 7, 1968), 610n [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 268], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 272]

5th (February 10, 1968), 617n [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 272], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 274]

6th (February 14, 1968), 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 275]-626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 628n [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 278]

7th (February 16, 1968), 625n [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 276], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]-627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 630n [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 279], 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 318]

8th (February 20, 1968), 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]-634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 282]

9th (February 26, 1968), 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 282]-636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 282], 637n [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 283], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]-642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 656n [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 293]

10th (March 4, 1968), 637n [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 283], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]-652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 290], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 291]

11th (March 9, 1968), 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 291], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 293]-657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]

12th (March 21, 1968), 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 296], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 297]-666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 297], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 299]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 302], 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 304]

13th (March 28, 1968), 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 296], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]-677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 302]

14th (April 11, 1968) 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 303]-679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 303], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 318]

15th (April 22, 1968), 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 304]-684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 306], 685n [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 306]

16th (May 8, 1968), 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

17th (May 28, 1968), 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 309]-691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 318]

18th (June 27, 1968), 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

19th (July 10, 1968), 693n [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

20th (August 29, 1968), 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 312], 700n [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 313]

21st (September 17, 1968), 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 313], 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

22nd (September 30, 1968), 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]-709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]

23rd (October 10 1968), 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]-718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 319]

24th (October 23, 1968), 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320]-723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 321]

25th (October 31, 1968), 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 322]-727 [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 324]

26th (December 17, 1968), 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]-736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 327]

27th (December 19, 1968), 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]-739 [Pg. 739 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

28th (December 22, 1968), 739 [Pg. 739 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]-740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

29th (December 23, 1968), 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

ROK position, 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 264], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 272], 618n [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 278]

U.S. instructions for, 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 234]

Military Assistance Plan (MAP), 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 4], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18], 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 22], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 59], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 352] Counterinfiltration aid, 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 123], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 141]

Increase in funding for, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 158], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 165], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 181]-391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

Prospects for funding under, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 137], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 211]

Pueblo crisis, response to, 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 154], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 228], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 237]

Reductions in funding for, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3]-12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 25, Doc. 26, and Doc. 27], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 209]-450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 209]

ROK aid requests, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Transfer program, suspension of: ROK position, 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 37], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 42]-86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 43], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 50], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 51], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52]-112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52]

U.S. position, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 19]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 47], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 50], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 57], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 76], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 209]

Military force levels, U.S., 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 105], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 211] Increases in, 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]-327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 209]

JCS position, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 19], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 452n [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 209], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 289]

Maintenance of, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 4], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 19], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]-650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 289]

Reductions in, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3]-8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 3], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 54]-118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 81] U.S. position, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 9]-22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17]-38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 47], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 201]-435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201]

U.S.-ROK relations, effect on, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 92]-198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 92], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201]

Withdrawal of U.S. troops from ROK, 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 180], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 180], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 180]

Military situation on the Korean Peninsula (see also Military Armistice Commission (MAC); Pueblo crisis), 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 3], 221n [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 102], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 110], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 119]-259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 123], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 174], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 209], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 235], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 275], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 331] Communications systems, improvements in, 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181]-391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 182], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 185]

Counterinfiltration, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 137], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 138], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 146]-315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 152]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 154], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 159]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 159], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 165], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 174], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 180], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 181], 428n [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 200], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 235]

DMZ incidents, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 37], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 96], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 128], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 130], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144] DPRK position, 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 98], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 102]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 102], 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 133]

Increase in, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 101], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]-226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 120], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 123]-266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 123], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 200], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

Intelligence assessments of, 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 98]-210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 98], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 200]-429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 200], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 211]

Retaliation for: ROK position, 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 129]-282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155]-330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217]

U.S. opposition to, 280n [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 129], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 129], 282n [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 132], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 156]

Soviet position, 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 130], 289n [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 133]

U.S. position, 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]-283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 130], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 200]

DPRK infiltration in ROK, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86]-181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 123], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 207] Assassins, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 119], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 120]-259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122]

Barrier system proposal, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 138], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 154], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 185], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 209]

Blue House attack, January 1968, 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 145], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 146], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155]-330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 156], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 181], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 184], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 207], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 213], 478n [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 220] Pueblo crisis, in relation to, 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 219], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 235]

U.S. position, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 148], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 260]

Boat landings, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 146], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 180], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 181], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

Guerrilla bases, establishment of, 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 130], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 184]-399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 207]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

Increase in, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 123]-263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 123], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

Joint unconventional warfare group, 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]-352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 165]

Railroad line sabotage, 275n [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 127], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 128]

ROK obsession with, 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]-360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 176], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 269], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 285]

Seizure of territory, 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 200], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 200]

Suicide teams, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 146], 343n [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 161]

Training of operatives for, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 123], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 132], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 181]

Ulchin raid, 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 207]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 325]

U.S. position, 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 91], 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 235]

Wonju conference on, 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

DPRK intentions and capabilities, 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]-283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 130], 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Joint Defense Declaration, proposed, 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179]

Martial law declaration, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13]-27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13]

Military balance of power, 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 201], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 213]

ROK attacks on DPRK, 672n [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 300] DPRK infiltration, retaliation for, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 226] ROK position, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 145]-313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 161]-345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 161], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 174]-367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 174], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 180]

U.S. opposition to, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 145], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 181]-387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 181], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 182]-393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 182]

Raids, 205n [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 96], 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 98], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 180], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 180], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 181], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 181]

U.S. military aid as factor in, 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 182]

ROK fishing boat seizure by DPRK, 445n [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

ROK Homeland reserve force, 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 412n [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190], 417n [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 193], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]-424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 209]

U.S. policy, 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]-402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

U.S. reconnaissance activities, 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181]-391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 182], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 185]

U.S.-ROK military exercises, Soviet position, 221n [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 102]

War, likelihood of outbreak, 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 145], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 181], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 200]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 200], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 452n [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 209], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 211], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 217], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 226]

Mills, Wilbur, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223]

Min Ki-shik, Gen., 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13]

Ministerial Meeting for Asian and Pacific Cooperation (ASPAC), Seoul, June 1966, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]-44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 90]-190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 229n [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 106], 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Monroney, Mike, 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Moon Sun-myung, 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 182]-395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Moorer, Adm. Thomas H., 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 218], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 243], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 331]

Mun Hyong-tae, Lt. Gen., 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 87]

Mun Tok-chu, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 50]-106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51]

Mundt, Karl, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244]

Murphy, Edward R., 626n [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 331]

Mutual Defense Treaty, ROK-U.S. See under Agreements with the United States.

Myers, Ronald P., 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 110]

Na Yung-kyun, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13]

Nakagawa, Susumu, 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356]

Nakashima, Nobuyuki, 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368]

Nam Sung-in, Col., 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 87]

National Intelligence Estimate (NIE 42/14.2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]-65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 35]), 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 31]-59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

National Security Action Memorandum (NSAM) No. 298, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 9]-22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17]

National Security Agency (NSA), 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 218], 555n [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 241], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 331], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 331]

National Security Council meetings, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 217], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 218]-481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Naval Court of Inquiry, 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 331]

Naval Security Group, 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 331]

Negotiations over the Pueblo crisis (see also Pueblo crisis ), 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 235]-541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 235], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 276], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289] Apology demand by DPRK, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 276], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]-634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 293], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 297], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 303] Receipt, signing of: DPRK draft text, 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 306], 690n [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 309], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 316]-708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 316]

DPRK position, 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 319]-719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320]

Espionage admission, 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]-710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 317]

Release of crew simultaneously with, 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 312]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 313], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 315]-708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 316], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 317], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 320]

Signing of overwrite, 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 308]-689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 308], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 312]-700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 314]-704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 317]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 318], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 318], 717n [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 319], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 319]-729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 324]

U.S. alternatives to, 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]-713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 325]-733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 325]

U.S. proposal for text of, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 251], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 272], 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 300]-674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 304]

U.S. refusal, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 237], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 251]

U.S. statement at time of signing, 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]-738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 329]

ROK position, 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]-658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 295]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 296], 672n [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 300]

U.S. responses to, 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 276], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 283], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 297], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 324]-731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325] Board of Inquiry, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]-635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 282]

Expressions of regret, 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]-658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 295]-666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 297], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 299]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Opposition to false apology, 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 289]-651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 317], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 318]

Support for, 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 290]-653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

British role as intermediary in, 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 282]-637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 283], 645n [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 286]

Confessions of crew, 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]-654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 291]

Crew release, 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 290], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 307], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 312], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 312]-700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313], 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 326]-740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331] DPRK position, 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 306]-686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 319]-718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 319]

Receipt signed simultaneously with, 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 312]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 313], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 315]-708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 316], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 317], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 320]

U.S. proposals, 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 300]-673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 300]

Documents presented to U.S. delegate, 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]-627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]-641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 284], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 288], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 292], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

DPRK negotiating tactics, 580n [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 256], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 272]-618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 275]

Failure of, possible, 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]-654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 291], 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 304]

Government-to-government talks, 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 263], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 264], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 264]-603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 264], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 265], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 267]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

Helicopter case (1964), 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 290], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 685n [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 306], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 312], 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]

Impartial fact-finding committee, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 229], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 252], 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 257], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 272], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 282], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 283], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 284]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 285], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 288], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]-652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 290], 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 311]

International Court of Justice role in, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244]-568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 244]

International law, emphasis on, 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250]

Japanese role as intermediary in, 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 282]-637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 283]

Military Armistice Commission meetings. See Senior Members meetings on Pueblo crisis under Military Armistice Commission (MAC) meetings.

Names of casualties, 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 254], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 263], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 264], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 267]-608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 267], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 278]

Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission role, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 229], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 232]-538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 235], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 236]-546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 236], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]-571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 282]-636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 282], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 283], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 289], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 290], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 297]-666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 297]

Opening of, instructions for, 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 216]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 216]

Publicity for, 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 310], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 319]-718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 319], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 320], 739 [Pg. 739 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

Return of sailor's body, 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 226], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 229], 537 [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Secrecy in, importance of, 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 159], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 318]-715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 318], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 319]

Soviet role as intermediary in, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217], 496n [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 222] Clandestine channels, use of, 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242]

Soviet position, 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 213], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217], 478n [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 223], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 227]-521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 240], 686n [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 307], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 311]-695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 311]

U.S. oral démarche, 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]-646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

U.S. position, 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 215], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 223], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 231], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 266], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 297], 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 307], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]-696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 311]

U.S. request for, 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 212]-460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223]-505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 278], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 282], 691n [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

Thant's “good offices” initiative, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 223], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 248]

U.S. instructions for MAC meetings, 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 216]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 216], 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 234], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 251]

U.S. strategies and tactics for, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 237], 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 257]-586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 257], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 264], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 291], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 296], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 297]-666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 297] DPRK claims, falsity of, 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 297]-668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

Military action as pressure tactic, 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 276]-626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 279]-631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 290]

ROK force buildup as pressure tactic, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]-651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Stonewalling, 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 296], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 297]

Trial of crew, 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 298]

U.S.-ROK relations, effect on, 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 235]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 237]-549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 585n [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 257]

Netherlands, 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 331]

Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission (NNSC), 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 99] Pueblo negotiations, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 229], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 232]-538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 235], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 236]-546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 236], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]-571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 282]-636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 282], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 283], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 289], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 290], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 297]-666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 297]

New York Times, 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 243], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 331]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 331]

New Zealand, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 199n [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 93], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 209] Military role in Vietnam of, 75n [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 39], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 48], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96], 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 134]

Newman, George S., 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 124]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Newsweek, 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 303]

Nguyen Cao Ky, 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 107], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 112], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 132]

Nguyen Khanh, Maj. Gen., 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 28]

Nguyen Van Thieu, Gen., 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]-410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

Nickel, Edward J., 801n [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Nitze, Paul, 320n [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 181], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]-402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 202]-439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 209], 464n [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 495n [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 241] Pueblo crisis, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 213], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 217], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 220], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 226], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

Nixon, Richard M., 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 311], 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]-732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 325]

Norred, Christopher A., Jr., 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 758n [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341], 790n [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 361]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 43], 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 220]

Norway, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 269]

Nuclear Proliferation Treaty (NPT), 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Nuclear war, 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 239], 613n [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 270], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 275]

Nuclear Weapons, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 138], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 182], 452n [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 209], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 350]

O'Donohue, Daniel A., 192n [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 164], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 781n [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 355], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 362]

Office of National Estimates, 209n [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 98], 532n [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229]

Office of Special Investigations (OSI), 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]

Offshore procurement, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 59]-128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 71] ROK position, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 3], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 63], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 132]

U.S. position, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 57], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 66], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 76], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 78]

Ogawa, Heishiro, 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368]

Ohira, Masayoshi, 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 332], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 335]-751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 336], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 338]-756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 349], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 349]

Ohno, Bamboku, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 10]

Okinawa, 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 186], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220] Bombers based in, 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 221], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 222], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 228]

Storage of military equipment on, 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 187], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 192], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 202], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204]

U.S. military forces in, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 211]

Olympic Games, Tokyo (1964), 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 332]

Organization of American States (OAS), 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 220]

Pacific region, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 92]

Pak Chong-hui, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51] Assassination attempts on, 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 120], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 145], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 184], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 220]-487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 220], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 260], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 268]

Clifford/Taylor Mission, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 124]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

DPRK infiltration into ROK, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86], 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 125], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]-360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 176], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 235] ROK position, 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 123], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 125], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 451n [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 209]

ROK retaliation for, 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 132], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 145]-313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155]-330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 161]-344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 161], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 164], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 181], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 209]-451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 209], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 225], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Elections of 1967, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 118] Presidential, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106]-229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 106], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 110], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 116]-246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 116], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 116]-253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 117]

Homeland reserve force, 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]

Inauguration of, 1967, 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 120]-260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 122]

Internal security in ROK, 278 [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 135], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]

Japan-ROK settlement, 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 87], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 335], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 343], 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 347], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 355] Desire for, 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 338], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 345]-764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 345], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 350], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356]

Johnson, personal relationship with, 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Johnson visit, October–November 1966, 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]-201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 94]

Kim Chong-pil controversy, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 10], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15]-34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17], 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 22], 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 29]

MAP transfer program, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 50], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 51]

Martial law, declaration of, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13]-29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 14], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15]-32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]

Messages from Johnson, 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]-323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 151], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 158], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 159]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 159], 365n [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 173], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 585n [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 257], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 345]-765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 346]

Messages to Johnson, 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171]-361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 173]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 173]

Military force reductions, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 33], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52]

Pueblo crisis: Comparison with Blue House attack, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155]-330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 173]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 173]

Deployment of U.S. aircraft to ROK, 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190]

MAC meetings on, 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 152]-325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 152]

UN consideration of, 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 223], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223], 541n [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 235]

Pueblo negotiations, 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 235], 593n [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 261], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 316] Apology demand by DPRK, 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 235]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 672n [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 300], 698n [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 312]

ROK attack on DPRK, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 182], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 209]

Rusk visits to ROK, 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88], 749n [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Status of Forces Agreement, 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 84]

Student demonstrations, 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13]-27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13]

United Nations, 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 109]

U.S. defense commitment to ROK, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 42], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

U.S. economic aid to ROK, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 71], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 78], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 115]

U.S. military aid to ROK, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 110]-238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 140]-305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 141], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 194]-421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 235]

U.S. view of, 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 180]-380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 180], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 180]-385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 181], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 181]

U.S.-DPRK MAC talks, 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155]-332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 161], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 166]-354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 166]

U.S.-ROK relations, 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 152], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 181]

Vance mission, 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164]-349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 166], 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 167]-356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 174], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 175]-372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 177], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179]-376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 181]-389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181]

Vietnam War, 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 134], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 194] ROK combat troops in: Anti-infiltration division, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 100]-216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Decision to send, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 37], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]-80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 43], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 46], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 55]

Increases in, 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 63], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 76], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 78], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 80], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 82], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 128], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190]

Opposition to increased numbers of, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 137]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 137]

Political problems with, 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 126], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 134]-293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 134], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 142]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

ROK position, 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]-217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 101], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 107]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 108], 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 188]-409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Timing for arrival of, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 140]

U.S. funding for, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 110]-240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 112], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 128]-278 [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

U.S. request for, 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 72]-153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 73], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 93], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 101], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]-254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

Withdrawal of, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 158], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 180]

ROK noncombat role in, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 32], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 202]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 202]

ROK role in settlement talks, 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190]-414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

U.S.-ROK talks on, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 96], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122]-260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 122], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 139]-305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 141]

Visits: Honolulu, April 1968, 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]-416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 194]-423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 680n [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 304]

Southeast Asia, February 1966, 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 63], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 63], 145n [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 72]-152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 73], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 77], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 78], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80]

Vietnam, February 1967, 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 108]

Washington, 1961, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47]

Washington, November 1963, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47]

Washington, May 1965, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 33], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 37]-70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 37], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 43], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 46]-109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 51], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 57], 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]-780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 354], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 361]-792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Washington, proposed, 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 186], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 194]

Pak Chung Kuk, Gen., 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 216] Pueblo negotiations: Apology demands, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 276], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 283], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 290], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 293], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 296], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 306]

Expressions of regret, 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 295], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 299]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Location of seizure, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 254]-582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 262]

MAC Senior Members meetings, 726n [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324] 1st, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 254]-582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

2nd, 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 262]-602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 264]

3rd, 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 265], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 267]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

4th, 616n [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 272]

5th, 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 274]

6th, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 276]

7th, 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

8th, 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]-634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

9th, 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 284], 642n [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

10th, 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 291]

11th, 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 291]

12th, 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 297], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 299]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 302]

13th, 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 300]-677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 302]

14th, 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 303]-679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 303]

15th, 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 304]-683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

16th, 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

17th, 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 309]-691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

18th, 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

20th, 700n [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313]

21st, 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 313], 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

22nd, 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]-708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 316]

23rd, 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]-718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 319]

24th, 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320]-723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 321]

25th, 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 322]-725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

26th, 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 325]-733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 325], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 326]-736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 327]

27th, 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]-739 [Pg. 739 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

28th, 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

29th, 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

NNSC involvement, 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 232]-537 [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 635n [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 282]

Open MAC sessions, 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 235], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 285]

Prisoner swap, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

Receipt, signing of, 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 312]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 313], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]-708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 316], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 317]-716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 318], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 319]-725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]-738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 329]

Release of crew, 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 316], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 319], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 326]-740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

Trial of crew, 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 263], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 293]-657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]

Pak Kun, 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 95], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 333]

Pak Song-chol, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 285]

Pakistan, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223]-499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 223], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 228]

Paraguay, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223]

Peace Corps, 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Peace Line, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 333]-749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 356]

Pearson, Drew, 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248]

Petree, Richard W., 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356]

Philippines, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17]-37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 36]-68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 39], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 109], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185] U.S. commitment for defense of, 367n [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 174], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 180], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190]

Pike, Otis G., 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 331]

Poage, W. R. “Bob,” 442

Poats, Rutherford M., 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 57], 156n [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 758n [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 361]

Poland, 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 226], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 229], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 273]

Popper, David H., 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 367]

Porter, William J., 252n [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 285n [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 132], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 180], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 182], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 185], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]-426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200] DPRK infiltration into ROK, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 125], 278 [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 132] ROK obsession with, 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 176]

ROK retaliation for, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 145]-313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 161]-344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 161]

Internal security in ROK, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 135]-295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 397n [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]

Pak message to Johnson, 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171]-361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 173]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 173]

Pueblo crisis, 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 212], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 225], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]-640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

Pueblo negotiations, 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]-654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 291], 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295] 672n [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 300], 698n [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 312], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 316] MAC Senior Members meetings: 1st, 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

2nd, 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 263]

3rd, 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 267]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

5th, 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 274]

7th, 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]-627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

8th, 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]-634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

9th, 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 283]

10th, 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 283], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

11th, 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 293]-657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]

12th, 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 299]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

13th, 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]-677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 302]

14th, 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 303]-679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 303]

15th, 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]-683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

16th, 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

17th, 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 309]-691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

18th, 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

21st, 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 313]

22nd, 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 316]-709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]

23rd, 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 319]-718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 319]

24th, 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 321]-723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 321]

25th, 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]-726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]

Military action as pressure tactic, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 279]-631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

U.S.-ROK relations, effect on, 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 235]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 685n [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 306]

ROK military force levels, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 193]-418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

ROK role in Vietnam War, 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 126], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 132], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 134]-293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 134], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 137]-299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 140]-303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 140], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 142]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 338n [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 158] Light division, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 137], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 187], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 192]-416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

ROK position, 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]

U.S. funding for, 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 128]-278 [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 202]-439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204]

U.S. position, 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

U.S. military aid to ROK, 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 141], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 152]-326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 159]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 159], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]

U.S.-DPRK MAC talks, 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155]-331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 161]

U.S.-ROK relations, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 151]-324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 152], 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 157], 336n [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 157], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]-423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 235]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

Vance mission, 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 164]-349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 174]-367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 174], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 181]

Public Law 480, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 3], 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 4], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 209], 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 341] Grain, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 205]-442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Pucinski, Roman, 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 275]

Pueblo crisis (see also Negotiations over the Pueblo crisis), 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 176], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246] Aircraft deployment to ROK, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 151], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 161]-344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 161], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 225]-517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 226], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 239], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248] Numbers of, 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 220], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 221], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 226]-519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 226], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 228], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 243]

Secrecy regarding, 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 243]

Blue House attack comparisons, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 217], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 219], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221] ROK position, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 148]-318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155]-330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 173]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 173], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]-377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 180]

U.S. position, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 156]-334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 156], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 158], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 159], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 161]

Capture of the Pueblo, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 144], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 212]-461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 213], 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 215]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 216], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 230] Air response, lack of, 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 218], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 228], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 243]-561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 243], 574n [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248]

Call for help, 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 218]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 218]

Destruction of classified equipment during, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 218]-480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218]

Intelligence losses due to, 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 331]-743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 331]

Investigation of, 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 259]-591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Media relations, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221]

ROK position, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 213]-464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

Classified equipment, recovery of, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 225], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 226], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 242], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244]

Communications failure in, 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181]-391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 182]

Congressional authority for military action, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 223]-503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 228]-528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 244]

Congressional-Executive relations over, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 241], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248]-575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250]

Counterinfiltration equipment airlift, 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 154], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 165]

Crew, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 279], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 311], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 331] Confessions by, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 218]-480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220], 537 [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 261], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 262]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]-627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]-655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 292]

Health of, 537 [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 310]

Movie of, 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 303], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 307]

Release of, 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 290], 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 307] Agreement for, 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 326]-739 [Pg. 739 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

DPRK position, 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 306]-686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 319]-718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 319]

Specific arrangements for, 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 315], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]-739 [Pg. 739 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

Timing of, 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 312]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 313], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 315]-708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 316], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 317], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 320]

Twentieth anniversary celebration as occasion for, 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 312], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 312]-700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313]

U.S. position, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 237]-548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 237], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 242], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 300]-673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 300]

Return of body, 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 226], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 229], 537 [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Trial as criminals, 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 298] DPRK position, 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 293], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 310]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

U.S. position, 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 234], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 285], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 291], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 293]-657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 298]

Diplomatic responses to, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 225]-510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 225], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 228]

Diplomatic situation, 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 228]-524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 229]-532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229]

DPRK actions, possible, 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 225]-510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 225], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 226]

DPRK motives, possible, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 218], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 244] Democratic Republic of Vietnam support, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 218]-480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226]

U.S. view, 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]-465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 215], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 217]-471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 283]

DPRK planning for, 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 218]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 218]

Intelligence gathering, 480n [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 220], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 229], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 275], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 331] Black Shield missions, 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 217]-475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]-522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 228], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 258], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 278]

Drone flights, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 221], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244]

Oxcart flights, 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 221], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 226], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244]-566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244]

Photos of captured Pueblo, 522n [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 228], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229]

Japanese role in, 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220]-489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 222], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 225], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 228]

Joint unconventional warfare group proposal, 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 159]-352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 165]

Legal issues, 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 220]-487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 220], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 226] International waters, definition of, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 213], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 223], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]-660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 295]

Mining of international waters, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236]

Proposals for settlement of, 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 252]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Location of seizure: Difficulty in determination of, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 217]-475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 218], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 220], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228]

DPRK position, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 254], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 262]

Soviet position, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 230], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 231], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]-553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 240], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 244], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 248]-574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248], 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]-675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

U.S. position, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 213], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 234], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 237]-548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 237], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244]-565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 262]-596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 262]

Media relations, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 223]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 223], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228]-529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 228]

Military responses to, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 220], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 223], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 223], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271] Attack to recover Pueblo, 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 217]-474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 217]

Blockade, 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 226], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 239], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 242], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 258]-589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 258]

Bombers, deployment of, 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 222], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 226]-518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 226]

Bombing of DPRK targets, 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 239], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 242], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244]

Callup of U.S. reserves, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 243], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244] Presidential authority for, 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 221]-494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 221], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 223]-503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225]

Cross-DMZ raids on DPRK, 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 242], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244]

Mining of Wonsan harbor, proposed, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226]-515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 226], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 242], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244]

PRC position, 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 223], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 223], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 229]-532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229]

Seizure of DPRK ships, 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 225], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 226], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244]-567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 244], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 258], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

Seizure of Soviet ship, 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 217], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 220]

Seizure of Wonsan, proposed, 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 180]-380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 180]

Soviet position, 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 223], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 223], 532n [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 229], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 273]

Timing for, 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 228], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228]

Tour of duty extensions, 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225]-508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 225], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 228]-526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 228], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 242]

Troop reinforcement, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220]-489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 242]

Types of, 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 239], 584n [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 256]

U.S. bombing practices in ROK, 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 242], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 244]

U.S. naval buildup, 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 223], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 262] 606, 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 275]

Movement of Enterprise task group, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 158], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 161]

Operational plan for Pueblo-type ships, 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 241]-556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 259], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 270]-615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 271], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 275]

Organizational planning for crisis management in, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 217], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217]

Possibilities for, 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244]-566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244]

PRC position, 478n [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

Public opinion on, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 225]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 225]

Replacement by USS Banner, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 217], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 221], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226]-515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 226], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 258]-589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 258], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 298]

Soviet collusion with DPRK in, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217]-472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 226]

Soviet position, 311n [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 145], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 227]-521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 248], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 261]-594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 262]

Soviet-U.S. contacts regarding, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 181], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

Tactical Air Control Center deployment, 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]-327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

U.S. courses of action, possible, 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]-559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 242], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 244], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 258]-589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 258]

U.S. electoral implications of, 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 167]-356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179]

U.S. media response to, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 228]

U.S. policy, 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 169], 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 172], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]-402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

U.S. reduction of tensions, 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 248], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 263], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 264]-601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 264], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]-610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 268]

U.S. restraint in, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 168], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 172], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 182]-394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 182], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 200]

U.S. troop reinforcement, Japanese bases for, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217]

U.S.-ROK coordination on, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]-318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 156]

Purcell, Graham, 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

Pursely, Col. Robert E., 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 331]

Radio Pyongyang, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 102]

Read, Benjamin H., 305n [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 141], 322n [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 335n [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 157], 358n [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 371n [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 419n [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 194], 440n [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 466n [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 216], 495n [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 504n [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 549n [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 575n [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 585n [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 257], 609n [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 628n [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 278], 634n [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

Reischauer, Edwin O., 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 772n [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 350] Japan-ROK settlement, 766n [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 347], 767n [Pg. 767 is part of Doc. 347], 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 353], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 364] Japanese position, 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 336], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]-775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 351], 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 356], 793n [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 364]

ROK position, 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]-775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 351], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 355]

Signing of treaty, 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368]

Timing for, 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 332]-746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

U.S. role in negotiations for, 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 346], 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 348]-771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 349], 777n [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

U.S.-Japan talks, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 335], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356]

Rhee, Syngman, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 157], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 161], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 180]-383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 333]

Ridgway, Gen. Matthew B., 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]

Rivers, Mendel L., 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248]-575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Robertson, Walter, 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 174]

Romania, 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Roosevelt, Franklin D., 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 167], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Ropa, Donald W., 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 230n [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 107]

Rosa, Joseph, 4n [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 13n [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Rostow, Walter W., 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 187n [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 99], 257n [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 120], 278n [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 295n [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 297n [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 137], 302n [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 140], 315n [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 316n [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 322n [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 327n [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160], 343n [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 161], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 355n [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 167], 356n [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 358n [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 363n [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 173], 366n [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 174], 368n [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 175], 369n [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 375n [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 180], 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 181], 395n [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 399n [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 402n [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 419n [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 194], 422n [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 427n [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 200], 433n [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 201], 440n [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 447n [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 464n [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 466n [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 216], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217], 538n [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 237], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 241], 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242], 576n [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 609n [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 626n [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 640n [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 642n [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 648n [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 288], 665n [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 297], 709n [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 719n [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320], 722n [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 321] DPRK infiltration into ROK, 311n [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 145], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155]

Economic situation in ROK, 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48], 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 96]

Election in ROK, 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 244n [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 116]

Korean Reconstruction Bank loan, 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]-425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

Loans to ROK, 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]-243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 115]

Military aid to ROK, 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 141]-306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 141]

Pueblo crisis, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 223], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 226], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 235], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 275] Capture of the Pueblo, 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 218], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 228]

DPRK motives, possible, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 217]-470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217]

Intelligence gathering, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 217], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220]

Location of seizure, 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 244]

Military responses to, 469n [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 217], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 217], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 217], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 220]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 225], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 226], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248]

UN consideration of, 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 220]-486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 220], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 223], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]-506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 225], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 228]

U.S. courses of action, possible, 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244], 587n [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 258]

Pueblo negotiations, 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 236], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244], 580n [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254] Apology demand by DPRK, 632n [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 634n [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

Failure of, 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

MAC Senior Members meetings, 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 642n [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

Receipt, signing of, 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 308], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 312], 707n [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 316]

Thant's “good offices” initiative, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

ROK role in Vietnam War, 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 252n [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 291n [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 134], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 139], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 142]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190]-414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 202]

ROK troop buildup, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

U.S. economic aid to ROK, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 205]-442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]-454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

U.S. military aid to ROK, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 190]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190]

Rowen, Henry S., 41n [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Roybal, Edward R., 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 209]

Rusk, Dean, 187n [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 99], 234n [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 109], 235n [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 110], 295n [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 322n [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160], 355n [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 167], 356n [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 358n [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 181], 395n [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 407n [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 447n [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 464n [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 466n [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 216], 495n [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 504n [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 237], 585n [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 257], 606n [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 266], 693n [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315] China, Republic of, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 36]-68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 38]

Chung Il-kwon visit, March 1967, 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

DMZ incidents, 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 133]

Dominican Republic, 101n [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 51]

DPRK infiltration into ROK, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 145], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 180]

Elections in ROK, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106]

Humphrey visit to Seoul, July, 1967, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 122]-261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

Japan-ROK settlement, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 336], 778n [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 353] Johnson message to Pak, 763n [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 345], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 346]

U.S.-Japan talks on, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 335], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 338]-756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 779n [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368]-801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

U.S.-ROK talks on, 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358]-787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 367]-799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

MAP transfer program, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 50]

Military force reductions, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 9], 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 33], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 54]

Pak visit to U.S., May, 1965, 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 46]-94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50]-105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 50], 780n [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 354]

Pueblo crisis, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220]-492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 225], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228], 530n [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 229], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 244], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 270], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 331] Capture of the Pueblo, 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 212]-460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 218]

Confessions of crew members, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 218], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220]

Congressional response to, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 223], 527n [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248]

Legal issues, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 213], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 220]

Letters to Gromyko, 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]-553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 240], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 278], 636n [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 282], 642n [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

Location of seizure, 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 244]-565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 244], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248]

Military responses to, 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220]-490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 220], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 225]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 225]

UN consideration of, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220]-488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 221], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]-507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 236]

U.S. courses of action, possible, 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 258]-589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 258]

U.S. reduction of tensions, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 264], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]-610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 268]

Pueblo negotiations, 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 275], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 292], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 327] Apology demand by DPRK, 634n [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 727n [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 324], 729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 324]

International Court of Justice role in, 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 244]-568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 244]

MAC Senior Members meetings, 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 272], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 276], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Receipt, signing of, 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 308], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 312], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 314], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]

Soviet role as intermediary in, 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 223], 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 307]

U.S. strategies for, 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 235], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 297]-668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

ROK role in Vietnam War, 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 5], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 37], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 63], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 134], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 139], 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]

Status of Forces Agreement with ROK, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 36]-68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 38]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 38], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 50]-103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 50], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

United Nations, 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 95], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 206]

U.S. economic aid to ROK, 9n [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 50]-105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 50], 165n [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 78]

U.S. military aid to ROK, 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 133], 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 182]

U.S.-ROK relations, 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 157]-336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 157], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 235]

Vance mission, 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 175]-369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

Visits: Australia, Asia, May–June 1966, 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 90]

Japan, July 1966, 799n [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Japan-Korea, January 1964, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 333], 749n [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Seoul, October–November 1966, 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 96]-208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 97]

Seoul, proposed, 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 63]

Tokyo, December 1966, 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

Yi Tong-won visits to Washington, 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

Russell, Richard, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 92], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228]

Salans, Carl F., 719n [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320], 724n [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 322]

Sang Ho Cho, 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 48]

Sato, Eisaku, 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 46], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 122], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 134], 403 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 332]-746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333] Japan-ROK settlement, 781n [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 355], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356]-783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 356], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358]-786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 358], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 364]-795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365], 798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 367]-799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Pueblo crisis, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223], 523n [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 228] Military buildup using Japanese bases, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220]-489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 222], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 225]

Saunders, Harold H., 476n [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 218], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Scandinavia, 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 90]

Schultze, Charles L., 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 115]

Senate, U.S., 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 331] Armed Services Committee, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 241]

Foreign Relations Committee, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 213], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 244]

Senegal, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223]

Seven Nation Meetings on Vietnam, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 112], 401n [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]

Sharp, Adm. Ulysses S. Grant, 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]-198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 92], 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 99], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 123], 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 125], 294n [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 135], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 141], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 193], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 202], 618n [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273] Counterinfiltration planning, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 137], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 138]

Joint unconventional warfare group, 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]-352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 165]

Pueblo crisis, 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 172], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 241], 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242]

U.S.-ROK relations, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160], 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]

Shiina, Etsusaburo, 767 [Pg. 767 is part of Doc. 347], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 350]-775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 351], 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 357]-787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 788n [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 360], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 364], 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]-800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368]

Shima, Shigenobu, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 335]

Shimanouchi, Toshio, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 335], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356]

Shostal, Pierre, 215n [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 100]

Sidney, Hugh, 529n [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 228]

Sin Xang-ch'ol, 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 30], 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 41]

Singapore, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 119]

Sisco, Joseph J., 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220]-486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 220], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220], 544n [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 576n [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 594n [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 262], 604n [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 265]

Six-day War, 482n [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 219]

Sixteen-Nation Declaration, 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190]-413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190]

Slutz, Robert F., 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86]

Smith, Bromley K., 140n [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 107], 338n [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 158], 339n [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 159], 468n [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217], 476n [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 218], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 483n [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228], 680n [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 304] Pueblo crisis, 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

Smith, Jack, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 119], 262n [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 123], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 127]

Smith, Rear Adm. John V.: Pueblo negotiations, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 181], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 237]-548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 237], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 636n [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 282], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 685n [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 306] Expression of regret, 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 297]-666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 297], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 299]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Location of seizure, 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

MAC Senior Members meetings: 1st, 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

2nd, 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 261], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 264], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 264]-603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 264]

3rd, 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 265]-605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 265], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 267]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

5th, 617n [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 272], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 274]

6th, 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 276]

7th, 625n [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 276], 630n [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 279]

8th, 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 281]-634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

9th, 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]-642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

10th, 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 288]

11th, 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 293]-657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]

12th, 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 299]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

13th, 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 300]-677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 302]

14th, 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 303]-679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 303]

15th, 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]-684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 306]

16th, 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

Initiation of, 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 216], 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

Names of casualties, U.S. request for, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 254], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

Trial of crew members, 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 293]-657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]

Smith, Margaret Chase, 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248]

Sneider, Richard L, 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368]

So Min-ho, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 116]

Solbert, Peter, 49n [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50]

South America, 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 132]

Southeast Asia, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 90], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO), 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88], 229n [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 106], 401n [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 349]

Southwestern Research Society, 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17]

Soviet Union (see also Soviet subheadings under other subjects), 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248], 613n [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 270], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 307], 693n [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 333] Intelligence-gathering ships, 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]

Korea, Democratic Republic of, relations with, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 158]

United States, relations with, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 109], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 165], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 335] Capture of Soviet ships in U.S. waters, 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 240], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 262]

Hot line, use of, 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 221]-495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244]

U.S. buzzing of Soviet vessels, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 230]-534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 230]

U.S.-Soviet ship collision, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 269]-612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 269]

Walker spy ring, 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 331]

War in Korea, possibility of, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 181], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 200]-429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 200], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 200], 452n [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 209], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 226]

Special National Intelligence Estimates, 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]-262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 123], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 123], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 209] SNIE 10–4–65, 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]-65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 35]

SNIE 14.2–67, 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]-283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 130], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 464n [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

SNIE 14.2–68, 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 200]-432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

SNIE 4.2–69, 452n [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 209]

Springsteen, George S., 693n [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Steadman, Richard, 215n [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 100], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 124], 371n [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 404n [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 466n [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 216], 604n [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 265], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 713n [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 719n [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320], 724n [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 322], 731n [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325] Pueblo crisis, 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217]

Steakley, Brig. Gen. Ralph D., 459n [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 212]

Stennis, John, 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 243], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248]

Stoneman, Walter G., 776n [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 352]

Strano, Angelo, 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 313]

Strategic Air Command (SAC), 431n [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 200]

Stuart, Richard K., 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 119], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 127], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 366]

Sukarno, 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 48]

Sweden, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 229]

Switzerland, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 92], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 229], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 284]

Symington, Stuart, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 64]

Syria, 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 206]

Takeshima. See Tok-to Island (Takeshima).

Takeuchi, Harumi, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 335]

Takeuchi, Ryuji, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 335], 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]-756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 353], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356], 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Taylor, Gen. Maxwell B., 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220] Ball Committee report, 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 270]-614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Bay of Pigs investigation, 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 270]

Pueblo crisis, 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 244]

Visit to Seoul, August 1967, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 123]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 134], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 136]

Tcherniakov, Yuri N., 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Thailand, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 39], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 90], 199n [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 93], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Thanat Khoman, 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

Thanom Kittikachorn, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 194]

Thant, U, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225] “Good offices” initiative, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 223], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 248]

Thompson, Llewellyn E., Jr.: Communist reaction to force, 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 226]

Pueblo crisis, 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 266], 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302] Military responses to, possible, 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 223]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 223], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244]

U.S. naval buildup, 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 260]

Pueblo negotiations, 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 635n [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 282], 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301] Johnson-Kosygin message exchange, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 230]-534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 230], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 260], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 269]

Soviet intermediary role, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 213], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 227]-521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 231], 686n [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307] Clandestine channel, use of, 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 242]

Oral démarche, 644n [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 285], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 286]-646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Thomson, James C., Jr., 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]-91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 47], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 357]

303 Committee, 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 241]

Thurmond, Strom, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218], 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Time, 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 228], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244]

Tok-to Island (Takeshima), 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363] Japanese position, 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 356], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 364]-794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 364]

ROK position, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 364]-794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 364]

Toon, Malcolm, 549n [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 256], 642n [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 731n [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

Tower, John, 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222]

Trade, U.S.-ROK (see also Offshore procurement), 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3]-12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 59], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71], 189 287

Treasury, U.S. Department of the, 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

Trowbridge, Alexander B., 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223]

Trueheart, William C., 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86], 271n [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 125]

Turkey, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 92]

Unger, Leonard, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

Unification Church, 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 182]

United Arab Republic (UAR), 482n [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 219]

United Kingdom (UK) (see also British subheadings under other subjects), 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 94], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 223], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 236], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 242], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 350]

United Nations (UN) (see also UN subheadings under other subjects), 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32] DPRK role in, 204n [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 95], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 206]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

General Assembly, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 91]-194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 91], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 95], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 102]-224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 129], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

Korea debate, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 47], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48], 228n [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106] DPRK conference proposal, 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Soviet bloc position, 202n [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 95], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 102]-224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

U.S. position, 108n [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 91], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 181]

ROK agenda in, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 90], 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 95], 205n [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 96], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 97], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 369]

PRC membership in, 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

Security Council, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 102], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220] Establishment of UN Unified Command by, 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 129], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 264]

Pueblo seizure, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253] Consensus for Thant's “good offices” initiative, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

DPRK position, 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 248]

Pakistani position, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 228]

Risks of UN consideration of, 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]-506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 225]

ROK position, 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 223], 541n [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 235]

Soviet position, 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 220], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 229], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 236], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

U.S. position, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 144], 315n [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220]-488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 223], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226]

U.S. request for meeting on, 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 223]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 223], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 225], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 228]

War threat as motive for action in, 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 225], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 226]

Vietnam conference proposal, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 91]

United Nations Charter, 443n [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 206], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

United Nations Command (UNC): Abuse of UN authority by, 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 102]-224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

Compensation for land requisitioned by, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77]

DPRK infiltration into ROK, 311n [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 145], 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 145]

Martial law declaration in ROK, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13]-28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

ROK position, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 92], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 129]-281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 129]

United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea (UNCURK), 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 91], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 91], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 95], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 102]

U.S. Army Logistics Center Japan (USALCJ), 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52]

U.S. Army Procurement Agency, 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 76]

U.S.-Japan Committee on Trade and Economic Affairs, 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88]

U.S.-ROK Joint Study on Death Gratuities and Wounded-in-Action Benefits, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 76]

Ushiba, Nobuhiko, 523n [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 228], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356], 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Valenti, Jack, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 68], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 80]

Vance, Cyrus R., 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 38], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 218] DPRK infiltration into ROK, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 278], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 285]

Pueblo crisis, 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 241], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 244]-567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 244]

ROK role in Vietnam War, 419n [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 194], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 275]

Special Envoy to ROK: Debriefing after mission of, 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]-383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

Effect of mission, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 182]-394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 182]

Instructions for, 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 167]-356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]-360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 175]-369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]-373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Joint communiqué with Pak, 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 174], 371n [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179]-376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 181], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Meetings with ROK officials, 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]-371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Pak letter to Johnson, 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 365n [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 173]

Post-mission recommendations, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 181]-391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]-402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 433n [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 201], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 211]

Report on mission, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 181]-391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

ROK plans for visit, 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 174]-367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 174]

Selection of, 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 164]-349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]

Status of Forces Agreements

U.S. defense commitment to ROK, 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 180], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 190]

U.S. military aid to ROK, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 181]-391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 194], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Vettel, Thelma, 758n [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 341]

Viet Cong, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 28], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 80]-170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 35], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 87], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 119], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 140], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226]

Vietnam, Republic of, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 43 170, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 87], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 109], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 110], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 112], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 182], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291] Elections in, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 122], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Hiring of Korean veterans in, 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 132]-288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

ROK, relations with, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 39], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Trade, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 37], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 42], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52]-113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 57], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 133]

Pacification program, 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 110], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 133]

U.S. economic aid to, 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 96], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

U.S. military aid to, 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 187], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204]

Vietnam War, 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 132], 374n [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 211], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248]-575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 269], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 275] Aircraft redeployment for Pueblo crisis, 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 225]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 225]

Australian military role in, 75n [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 39], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 48], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96], 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 134], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 140]

Bombing of Vietnam Democratic Republic, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 124], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

Broadening of international support for, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 28]

Callup of U.S. reserves for, 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 243], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244]

Clifford-Taylor mission, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 123]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 134], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 136]

DPRK assessment of, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 99]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 99], 275n [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 127], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 146], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]-372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 177], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 187], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]-448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 219]

DPRK military role in, 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 35], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 218], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 229]

Japanese military role in, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 39], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 66]

Khe Sanh battle, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 217], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 221], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 241]

Manila Conference, October 1966, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 90]-189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 90], 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]-202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 96]-206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96]

Mining of Haiphong harbor, 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 273], 665n [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 297]

Negotiated settlement in, 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190]-414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217]

New Zealand military role in, 75n [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 39], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 48], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96], 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 134]

Philippine military role in, 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 39], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96], 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

PRC military role in, 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]-65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 35]

Prisoners of war, 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 298], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 317]

ROK military role in, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 32], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 35], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 71], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 128], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 140], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 141], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 194] Combat troops: Anti-infiltration division, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 100]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 101], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 107]-232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Country Team position, 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 73]-153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 73]

Expansion in response to DPRK attacks, 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 177]-373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Increases in, 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 67], 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 74], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 77]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 134]

Light divisions, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 137], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 141], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 187]-406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 187], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 188]-409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 192]-416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 194], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 202], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204]

ROK position, 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 72]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 72], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 126], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 194]-420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 194], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Tactics for U.S. request for, 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]-254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 124]-269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 124], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 136], 368n [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 175]

Troop numbers, 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 61]

U.S. arming of, 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 56]-121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

U.S. position, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 37], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 39]-77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 76]-160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 76], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 132], 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]-409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 194]

Vietnam Republic request for, 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

Withdrawal of, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 158], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 169], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 180], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 180], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 181], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 201]

DPRK position, 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]-65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 35], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 72], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 128], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 217]

Field-hospital units, 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 5]-17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 32], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47]

Hiring of Korean veterans, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 97], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 132]-288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

Japan-ROK settlement effected by, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 5], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 37]-70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 37], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 43]-87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 43], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 46], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53]

Limits to, 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 79], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 82]-174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 82], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 93]-200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

Noncombat forces: Approval of, 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 30], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

ROK position, 220n [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 101], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 231n [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 107], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 194]-420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 194]

Training for ARVN personnel, 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

U.S. position, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 190], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 194], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 202]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 202]

PRC reaction to, 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]-65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 35]

Proposals for, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 30]

Reserve troops, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]-182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 87]

ROK opposition to increase in, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 137]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 137]

ROK politics as factor in, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 37], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 131n [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 73], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 101]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 101], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 134]-292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 134], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 142]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

ROK public opinion on, 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 67], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 84]-178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 84]

Secrecy concerns, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]-78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 40], 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 55]-121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

Tai-kwon-do instructors, 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 5]-17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 32], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 47]

U.S. funding for, 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 71], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 76], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 110], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 134], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 235] Compensation for casualties, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 52], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 72], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 76]

Helicopter pilot training, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 110], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 112]

Kimchi for troops, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 110]-239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 112], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 140], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 140]

Negotiations over, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 137]-299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Noncombatant/civilian projects, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 112], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 202]-439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204]

Overseas allowances, 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 56]-121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 73], 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 75], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 76], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77]-163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77]

Rifles, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 112]-240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 112]

ROK position, 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 73], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 74], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 137], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 140]

U.S. position, 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 76]-160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 76], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 117], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 128]-278 [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

U.S. position, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 37], 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 43]-90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 134]

U.S.-ROK talks on, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 43], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 43]-90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 46], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 48]-98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 78]-167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 139]-305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 141], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Victory as motive in, 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 188]

Vietnam Democratic Republic reaction to, 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]-65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 35]

Vietnam Republic position, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 40], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 43], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 46], 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 55]

Volunteer forces, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 39], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 101]

Thai military role in, 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 39], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96], 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 134], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 140]

Tonkin Gulf incident/resolution, 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 220], 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 223], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 225], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228]-528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 228], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 243]

U.S. policy, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 112], 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 194], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228]

U.S. military strength in, 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 107], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 182], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

U.S.-ROK talks on, 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 80], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 96], 229n [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 106], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122]-260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 122], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 140]-304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 140], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358]

Voice of the UN Command (VUNC), 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 102]

Walker, John, 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 331]

Walker, Michael, 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 331]

Walsh, John P., 337n [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 158], 339n [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 159], 400n [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 185], 537n [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 538n [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 237], 576n [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 594n [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 262], 604n [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 265], 640n [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 642n [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 652n [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 290], 657n [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 680n [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 304], 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 719n [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320], 724n [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 322], 731n [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 737n [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328] Vance Mission to ROK, 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 164], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Walske, Carl, 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204]

Warnke, Paul C., 327n [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 337n [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 158], 407n [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 412n [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 190], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 209], 646n [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287] Pueblo crisis, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 220], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 292], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 295]

Pueblo negotiations, 689n [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 308], 703n [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 314]

Watanabe, Makoto, 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368]

Watson, Marvin, 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 96], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 270]

West Berlin, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 87]

Westmoreland, Gen. William, 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 55], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 64], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 80], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 87], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 96], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 101], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 221], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 244] Korean forces in Vietnam, 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 107], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 110], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 132], 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 140]

Korean veterans, hiring of, 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 132]-288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

Military requirements for Vietnam War, 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 124], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 140]

Pueblo crisis, 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 225]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 225]

Redeployment of ROK forces, 368n [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 175], 378n [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 180]

Talks with Johnson, Guam, March 1967, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 110]-237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 110]

Wheeler, Gen. Earle G., 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 262n [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 123], 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 356n [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 181], 395n [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 217], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 275] DPRK military posture, 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

Pueblo crisis, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 220], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]-506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 225], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 248] Aircraft deployment to ROK, 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 225]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 225], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 226], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 226], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 228]

Attack to recover Pueblo, 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 217]-474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 217]

Capture of the Pueblo, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 213]-462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 213], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 217], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 218]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 218], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 228], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 243]-561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 243]

Congressional response to, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 218], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 228], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 241]

Intelligence gathering, 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 220]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220]

Location of seizure, 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 228], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 248]

Military responses to, possible, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 217]-473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 217], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 225], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 228], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 229], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 244], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 248] Naval movements, 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 223], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 275]

Replacement by USS Banner, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 217], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220]

ROK raids into DPRK, 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 180], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220]

U.S.-ROK relations, 196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

Vietnam War, 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 192], 419n [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 194], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 221]

White, William S., 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Wickel, James, 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356]

Wilson, Harold, 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 220], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 286]

Wirtz, Willard, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]

Woodward, Brig. Gen. Gilbert H.: Pueblo negotiations: Crew, release of, 697n [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 312], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 315], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 316]-709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 319], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 326]-736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 327], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 329]-740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

MAC Senior Members meetings, 726n [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324] 16th, 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 306]-686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

17th, 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 309]-691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

18th, 691n [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 310]

19th, 693n [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

20th, 700n [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313], 701n [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 313]

21st, 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 313], 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

22nd, 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 316]-709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]

23rd, 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]-718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 319]

24th, 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320]-723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 321]

25th, 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 322]-725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

26th, 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 325]-736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 327]

27th, 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]-739 [Pg. 739 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

28th, 739 [Pg. 739 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]-740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

29th, 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

Publicizing of, 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 310], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 319]-718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 319]

Receipt, signing of, 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 312]-700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]-706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 315], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 317], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]-716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 318], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 320]-728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 324]

World War III, 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 165]

Wyatt, Wilson, 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 342]

Yager, Joseph A., 640n [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 642n [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 646n [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 680n [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 304]

Yang Yun-sae, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 110]

Yasukawa, Takeshi, 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368]

Yi Hu-rak, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 29], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 129], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 181] Clifford/Taylor Mission, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 124]-268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 124]

Development Loan Fund, 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 43], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 50]-105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 50], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 51]

MAC meetings on Pueblo, 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Pak visit to Washington, May 1965, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51], 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]-780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 354]

ROK combat troops in Vietnam War, 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 61], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 65]-138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 69]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 72]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 72], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 74]

U.S. economic aid to ROK, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77]

U.S. military aid to ROK, 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

U.S.-ROK relations, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80], 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

Yi Tong-won, 160n [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 76], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106] Foreign Ministers Conference, Seoul, June 1966, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]-44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

Japan-ROK settlement, 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 347]-767 [Pg. 767 is part of Doc. 347], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 350]-774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 355]-782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 356], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 358]-787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 788n [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 360], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 361]-791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 362], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 364]-795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 367]-799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

ROK role in Vietnam War, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 37], 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 80]-170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 80] ROK position, 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 65], 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 69], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 74], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 77]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

Secrecy concerns, 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 56], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 73]-154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 74], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]-160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 76]

UN Korea debate, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 97], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

U.S. economic aid to ROK, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 71]

U.S.-ROK relations, 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 81], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 88], 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106]-229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 106], 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]-780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 354] Status of Forces agreement, 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]-146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 176n [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 83]

Vance mission, 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 167], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 179]

Visits: Washington, March 1965, 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]-64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

Washington, November–December 1965, 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Yoshida, Shigeru, 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 340], 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 347]-767 [Pg. 767 is part of Doc. 347], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 349]

Yu Chin-o, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 116], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 118]

Yum Suk Heun, 25n [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Yun, Brig. Gen. S. K., 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52]

Yun Po-sun, 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 32], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 106], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 116]-246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 116], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 116], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 116]-251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 116]

Yun Suk-heun, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 50]

Zabalakas, K., 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52]

Zurhellen, J. Owen, 799n [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368] [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 368], 801n [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]
