Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–5, Part 2, Documents on North Africa, 1969–1972 (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 2007)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1969-76ve05p2).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Part 2, Documents on North Africa, 1969–1972 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–5)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976

Volume E–5

Part 2, Documents on North Africa, 1969–1972

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on June 5, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
June 2018

Part 2, Documents on North Africa, 1969–1972 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–5)Contents

Preface

Sources

Abbreviations and Terms

Persons

Documents on North Africa, 1969-1972Ch. 1. U.S.-North African Policy (Documents 1-12)

Ch. 2. Algeria (Documents 13-35)

Ch. 3. Libya (Documents 36-96)

Ch. 4. Morocco (Documents 97-137)

Ch. 5. Tunisia (Documents 138-163)

Preface Preface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, under the direction of the General Editor, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg first promulgated official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series on March 26, 1925. Those regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.

Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by President George H. W. Bush on October 28, 1991, established a new statutory charter for the preparation of the series. Section 198 of P.L. 102–138 added a new Title IV to the Department of State's Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 U.S.C. 4351, et seq.).

The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the series must include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government. The statute also confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purpose of concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded.

Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series

This electronic-only volume is part of the subseries of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important decisions and actions of the foreign policy of the administration of Richard M. Nixon. This is the third Foreign Relations volume to be published in a new format, that of electronic-only publication. Approximately 25 percent of the volumes scheduled for publication for the 1969–1976 subseries, covering the Nixon and Nixon-Ford administrations, will be in this format. The decision to institute this change was taken in full consultation with the Department's Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, which was established under the Foreign Relations statute. The advantages of this new method of presenting documentation are evident in this volume: the format enables convenient access to more key documentation on a broader range of issues, all or any portion of which can be easily downloaded. Annotation—the value added element of documentary editing—is still present in limited form, but not to the scale of a Foreign Relations volume. This electronic-only publication results in substantial savings in cost and time of production, thus allowing the series to present a fuller range of documentation, on a wider range of topics, sooner than would have been possible under a print-only format. These advantages compensate for the fact that this Foreign Relations volume is not an actual book bound in traditional ruby buckram. The Department of State, the Historian, the General Editor, and the Historical Advisory Committee are all dedicated to publishing the great majority of the volumes in the Foreign Relations series in print form; these are also posted in electronic format on the Department of State's website. While the future of research in documentary publications is increasingly tied to the ease of use and availability of the Internet, the Department of State will continue to use both print and electronic-only versions to make the Foreign Relations series available to the widest audience possible. In that sense, this innovation is in keeping with the general principles of the series begun by President Lincoln and Secretary of State Seward and continued by subsequent presidents and secretaries of state for more than 140 years.

Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, E–5

This volume documents the foreign policy of the Nixon administration toward North and sub-Saharan Africa and with the exceptions of the Republic of South Africa, Angola, Mozambique, Rhodesia, and Namibia, which are covered in print volume Foreign Relations 1969-1976, Vol. XXVIII, Southern Africa, 1969-1976. This volume does not attempt to cover all countries in sub-Saharan or North Africa, but instead concentrates on those areas where U.S. interests and concerns were greatest. The chapters on general U.S. policy toward Africa and North Africa provide the widest scope of coverage.

The largest chapter, comprising more than half the sub-Saharan section of the volume, documents the Nigeria civil war and its aftermath. While the United States did not recognize the rebellion in Biafra and followed a policy of non-intervention, it was heavily involved in providing humanitarian relief mainly through the International Committee of the Red Cross and Joint Church Aid. President Nixon appointed a Special Coordinator on Relief to Civilian Victims of the Nigerian Civil War to provide guidance and direction to relief operations and to deflect some of the domestic criticism of the U.S. policy of non-intervention. Nixon himself was sympathetic to Biafran aspirations and the suffering caused by the civil war, and complained about, but did not to change, the Department of State policy of refusing to recognize Biafra as a belligerent.

The second great humanitarian crisis covered by the volume relates to the 1972 massacres of Hutus by Tutsis in Burundi. Again the Department of State followed a low-key, non-intervention policy and the Nixon administration did not make any effort to prevent the brutality and massacres beyond again expressing private dismay.

Chapters on Congo and the Horn of Africa highlight the growing U.S relationship with President Joseph Mobutu of Zaire and Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia as the Nixon administration attempted to create strong, pro-American governments in those two key African countries, especially through military assistance and sales of military equipment. On the other hand, in the Horn of Africa chapter, the volume documents the deterioration of U.S. relations with the Somali Republic and the virtual breakdown of U.S. relations with Uganda under the erratic leadership of President Idi Amin is documented in the Uganda chapter.

There are four chapters on U.S. bilateral relations with North Africa—Algeria, Libya, Morocco, and Tunisia. In Algeria and Libya, the United States faced radical governments with strong pro-Palestinian leanings. Algeria did not have diplomatic relations with the United States, but commercial and economic ties remained strong. The overthrow of the Libyan monarchy in September 1969 by young military officers forced the Nixon Administration to reconsider its relationship with Libya. The documentary records indicates that in the end the Nixon administration decided to maintained diplomatic relations with Libya and use its economic connections in the hopes of influencing the new military government towards a more pro-Western stance. The documentation on relations with staunch U.S. allies Morocco and Tunisia are highlighted by high-level visits of leaders, mutual assurances of support, and military aid. In all four chapters, there is documentation indicates that each of these governments, in its own way, attempted to influence the United States to pressure Israel towards a Middle East settlement conducive to Palestinian interests.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time. Memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations electronic-only volumes follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the Chief of the Declassification and Publishing Division. The original text is reproduced exactly, including marginalia or other notations, which are both visible on the facsimile copy of the document and described in the source note. There is also a text version of the document. The editors have supplied a heading, a summary, and a source note with additional relevant information, as required, for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the original text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected in the text file. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the text, and a list of abbreviations, persons, and sources accompanies the volume.

Bracketed insertions in roman type are used on the facsimile copy and in the text file to indicate text omitted by the editors because it deals with an unrelated subject. Text that remains classified after declassification review is blacked-out on the facsimile copy and a bracketed insertion (in italic type) appears in the text file. Entire documents selected for publication but withheld because they must remain classified are accounted for by a heading, a source note, and a bracketed note indicating the number of pages not declassified. These denied documents are listed in their chronological place in the volume.

Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation

The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Historical Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the preparation and declassification of the series. The Historical Advisory Committee does not necessarily review the contents of individual volumes in the series, but it makes recommendations on issues that come to its attention and reviews volumes, as it deems necessary, to fulfill its advisory and statutory obligations.

Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act Review

Under the terms of the Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act (PRMPA) of 1974 (44 U.S.C. 2111 note), the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) has custody of the Nixon Presidential historical materials. The requirements of the PRMPA and implementing regulations govern access to the Nixon Presidential historical materials. The PRMPA and implementing public access regulations require NARA to review for additional restrictions in order to ensure the protection of the privacy rights of former Nixon White House officials, since these officials were not given the opportunity to separate their personal materials from public papers. Thus, the PRMPA and related implementing public access regulations require NARA to notify formally the Nixon estate and former Nixon White House staff members that the agency is scheduling for public release Nixon White House historical materials. The Nixon Estate and former White House staff members have 30 days to contest the release of Nixon historical materials in which they were a participant or are mentioned. Further, the PRMPA and implementing regulations require NARA to segregate and return to the creator of files private and personal materials. All Foreign Relations volumes that include materials from NARA's Nixon Presidential Materials Staff are processed and released in accordance with the PRMPA.

Declassification Review

The Office of Information Programs and Services, Bureau of Administration, Department of State, conducted the declassification review of all the documents published in this volume. The review was undertaken in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12958, as amended, on Classified National Security Information, and applicable laws.

The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security as embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State and other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government. The final declassification review of this volume, which began in 2000 and was completed in 2005, resulted in the decision to withhold 4 (this might change if any N. Afr. denials) documents in full, to excise a paragraph or more in 9 (plus N. Afr. excisions) X documents, and to make minor excisions in 22 (plus N. Afr excisions) documents. The editors are confident, on the basis of the research conducted in preparing this volume and as a result of the declassification review process described above, that this volume is an accurate record of the foreign policy of the first Nixon administration toward sub-Saharan and North Africa between 1969 and 1972.

Acknowledgments

The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the Nixon Presidential Materials Project of the National Archives and Records Administration (Archives II), at College Park, Maryland, Sandra Meagher of the Department of Defense, who facilitated access to Defense records, and historians at the Center for the Study of Intelligence, who assisted in access to relevant records of the Central Intelligence Agency. The editors also wish to acknowledge the Richard Nixon Estate for allowing access to the Nixon Presidential recordings, and the Richard Nixon Library & Birthplace for facilitating that access.

Joseph Hilts did the research, initial selection, and initial annotation of the sub-Saharan sections of the volume. Upon his retirement, David C. Humphrey revised the volume and reorganized it to make it conform to the new electronic-only format. Monica Belmonte did the research, selection, and annotation of the chapters on North Africa. Edward C. Keefer, General Editor of the Foreign Relations series, reviewed the volume.

For Part 1, Documents on sub-Saharan Africa, Susan C. Weetman, Chief of the Declassification and Publishing Division, and Chris Tudda coordinated the declassification review. Chris Tudda compiled the list of sources. Carl Ashley, Renée A. Goings, Keri Lewis, and Jennifer Walele performed the copy and technical editing. For Part 2, Documents on North Africa, Susan Weetman and Dean Weatherhead coordinated the declassification review. Keri Lewis performed the copy and technical editing. Carl Ashley, Stephanie Hurter, Chris Tudda, and Joe Wicentowski assisted with the scanning, proofreading, and electronic publication of the volume.

Marc J. Susser"
The Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
October 2005 and September 2007

Sources Sources

Unpublished Sources

Department of State

National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, Maryland.

Record Group 59, Department of State Records

Subject-Numeric Central Files. The subject-numeric system is divided into broad categories: Administration, Consular, Culture and Information, Economic, Political and Defense, Science, and Social. Within each of these divisions are subject subcategories. For example, Political and Defense contains four subtopics: POL (Politics), DEF (Defense), CSM (Communism), and INT (Intelligence). Numerical subdivisions further define the subtopics. The following are the principal files consulted for this volume:

AID (US) MOR: U.S. economic and technical aid, Morocco

AID (US) 9 MOR: U.S. loans, Morocco

AID (US) TUN: U.S. economic and technical aid, Tunisia

AID (US) 8-7 TUN: U.S. public safety and public administration aid, Tunisia

AID (US) 9 TUN: U.S. loans, Tunisia

DEF 1-1 AFR-US: U.S. contingency planning, Africa

DEF 1 LIBYA: defense policy and plans, Libya

DEF 6 LIBYA: armed forces, Libya

DEF 12-5 LIBYA: procurement and sale, Libya

DEF 1 LIBYA-US: U.S. defense policy and plans, Libya

DEF 15 LIBYA-US: U.S. bases and installations, Libya

DEF 19-8 US-LIBYA: U.S. equipment and supplies (mil. assistance), Libya

DEF 19-9 US-LIBYA: U.S. advisory and training assistance, Libya

DEF 1 MOR: defense policy and plans, Morocco

DEF 12-5 MOR: procurement and sale, Morocco

DEF 15 MOR-US: U.S. bases and installations, Morocco

DEF 15-8 MOR-US: U.S. labor and employment, Morocco

DEF 15 US-MOR: U.S. bases and installations, Morocco

DEF 19-8 US-MOR: U.S. equipment and supplies (mil. assistance), Morocco

ORG 7 AF: organization and administration, visits, Africa

ORG 7 S: organization and administration, Secretary's visits

PET 1 LIBYA: general petroleum policy and plans, Libya

PET 6 LIBYA: petroleum companies, Libya

PET 12-2 LIBYA: petroleum stocks, Libya

PET 14 LIBYA: petroleum prices, Libya

PET 15-2 LIBYA: petroleum nationalization and expropriation, Libya

POL AFR: political affairs and relations, Africa

POL 1 AFR: general political policy and background, Africa

POL AFR-FR: political affairs and relations, Africa-France

POL 1 AFR-US: general U.S. political policy and background, Africa

POL ALG: political affairs and relations, Algeria

POL 1 ALG: general political policy and background, Algeria

POL 2 ALG: general reports and statistics, Algeria

POL 2-3 ALG: politico-economic reports, Algeria

POL 7 ALG: visits and meetings, Algeria

POL 15-1 ALG: head of state, Algeria

POL 23-9 ALG: rebellions and coups, Algeria

POL 29 ALG: political prisoners, Algeria

POL ALG-US: political affairs and relations, Algeria-United States

POL 1 ALG-US: general U.S. political policy and background, Algeria

POL 17 ALG-US: diplomatic and consular representation, Algeria-United States

POL 1 LIBYA: general political policy and background, Libya

POL 2 LIBYA: general reports and statistics, Libya

POL 7 LIBYA: visits and meetings, Libya

POL 15 LIBYA: government, Libya

POL 15-1 LIBYA: head of state, Libya

POL 16 LIBYA: independence and recognition, Libya

POL 23-8 LIBYA: demonstrations, riots and protests, Libya

POL 23-9 LIBYA: rebellions and coups, Libya

POL 29 LIBYA: political prisoners, Libya

POL LIBYA-UAR: political affairs and relations, Libya-United Arab Republic

POL LIBYA-US: political affairs and relations, Libya-United States

POL 17 LIBYA-US: diplomatic and consular representation, Libya-United States

POL 31 LIBYA-US: air space and boundaries, Libya-United States

POL MOR: political affairs and relations, Morocco

POL 1 MOR: general political policy and background, Morocco

POL 2 MOR: general reports and statistics, Morocco

POL 7 MOR: visits and meetings, Morocco

POL 15-1 MOR: head of state, Morocco

POL 23-9 MOR: rebellions and coups, Morocco

POL MOR-US: political affairs and relations, Morocco-United States

POL 1 MOR-US: general U.S. political policy, Morocco

POL 17 MOR-US: diplomatic and consular representation, Morocco-United States

POL TUN: political affairs and relations, Tunisia

POL 7 TUN: visits and meetings, Tunisia

POL 15-1 TUN: head of state, Tunisia

POL 23 TUN: internal security and counter-insurgency, Tunisia

POL 29 TUN: political prisoners, Tunisia

POL TUN-US: political affairs and relations, Tunisia-United States

POL 1 TUN-US: general U.S. policy and background, Tunisia

POL 17 TUN-US: diplomatic and consular representation, Tunisia-United States

Nixon Presidential Materials

National Security File

Agency Files

Central Intelligence Agency
Department of State

Country File

Africa
Algeria
General
Libya
Morocco
Tunisia

Harold Saunders Chronological File

Algeria
Libya
Morocco
Tunisia

Presidential Correspondence

Algeria, Colonel Houari Boumediene
Morocco, King Hassan

Subject Files

Items to Discuss with the President
Morocco, Attempted Coup D'Etat
National Intelligence Estimates
National Security Study Memoranda
VIP Visits

National Security Council Institutional Files (H-Files)

National Security Decision Memorandums

NSDM 200

National Security Study Memorandums

NSSM 87
NSSM 160

Washington Special Actions Group Meeting

Libya and Lebanon

White House Tape Recordings

National Security Council Files, Washington, DC

Nixon Intelligence Files

Subject Files

303 Committee and 40 Committee Records

Central Intelligence Agency

Deputy Director of Intelligence Files, Job 79-01229A

Director of Intelligence/Office of Current Intelligence Files,

Job 79T00829A
Job 79T00830A
Job 79T00831A

Files of the Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Richard M. Helms, (1966-1973)

Executive Registry Files, Job 80B01086A
National Intelligence Council Files
Job 79R01012A
Job 79R00967A

Office of National Estimates Files, Job 79-R00967A

Washington National Records Center, Suitland, Maryland

Record Group 330, Records of the Office of the Secretary of Defense

Records of the Secretary of Defense

OSD: FRC 330-76-0067

Subject Decimal Files of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, 1970
Records of the Assistant Secretary of Defense

OASD: (C) (A), FRC 330-77-0094

Subject Decimal Files of the Secretary of Defense, 1972
Records of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

OASD/ISA: FRC 330-73A-1975

Secret Files of the Office of International Security Affairs, 1970

OASD/ISA: FRC 330-74-0083

Secret Subject Decimal Files of the Office of International Security Affairs, 1971

OASD/ISA: FRC 330-75-0125

Secret Subject Decimal Files of the Office of International Security Affairs, 1972

Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Washington, DC

Kissinger Papers

Chronological File
Memoranda to the President
Memoranda of Conversations

National Security Council (Classified)

Published Sources

U.S. Government Documentary Collections

U.S. Department of State. Department of State Bulletin, 1969-1972. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1969-1972.

U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Richard M. Nixon, 1969, 1970, 1971, 1972. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1970, 1971, 1972, 1973)

U.S. Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, 1969, 1970, 1971, 1972 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1970, 1971, 1972, 1973)

Abbreviations and Terms Abbreviations and Terms

ADB, African Development Bank

AF, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AF/AFI, Office of Inter-African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AF/N, Office of Northern African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AF/RA, Office of Regional Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AFCM, Country Director for Central Africa, Malagasy and Mauritius, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AFCW, Country Director for West Central Africa, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AFE, Office of Eastern and Southern African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AFL-CIO, American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations

AFP, Agence France Presse

AFSE, Country Director for Southeastern Africa, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AID, Agency for International Development (also USAID)

Amb, Ambassador

Amcits, American citizens

Amemb, American Embassy

ANC, African National Congress or the Congolese National Army

AP, Associated Press

APC, armored personnel carrier

ASAP, as soon as possible

BAC, British Aircraft Corporation

BNA, Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

BP, British Petroleum

CA, circular airgram

CAE, Congolese Air Force

CAR, Central African Republic

CAS, Controlled American Source

ChiCom, Chinese Communist(s)

ChiRep, Chinese representational question

CHMAAG, Chief, Military Assistance Advisory Group

CHMUSLO, Chairman, U.S. Liaison Office

CI, Counterinsurgency

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

CIA/DDP, Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

CIB, Combined Intelligence Board

CINCEUR, Commander in Chief, European Command

CINCLANT, Commander in Chief, Armed Forces, Atlantic

CINCMEAFSA, Commander in Chief, Middle East/South Asia and Africa South of the Sahara

CINCSTRIKE/CINCMEAFSA, Commander in Chief, Strike Command; Commander In Chief, Middle East, South Asia and Africa South of the Sahara

CINCUSAFE, Commander in Chief, United States Air Force, Europe

CINSTRIKE, Commander in Chief, Strike Command

CJCS, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

CO, Commanding Officer; Commonwealth Office (Nigeria)

COCOM, Coordinating Committee on Export Controls

COMNAVTRACOM, Commander, Naval Training Command

COMUSJTE, Commander, U. S. Joint Task Force

CONUS, continental United States

COREMO, Comite Revolucionario de Mocambique (Revolutionary Committee of Mozambique)

CPP, Convention's People's Party (Ghana)

CPR, Chinese People's Republic

CRO, Commonwealth Relations Office

CS, Chief of Staff

CU, Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs, Department of State

CYDEF, Libyan gendarmerie

DAO, Defense Attaché's Office

DATT, Defense Attaché

DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission

DDP/AE, Deputy Director of Plans for Africa, Central Intelligence Agency

DefMin, Defense Minister

Del, Delegation

Depcirtel, Department of State circular telegram

Deptel, Department of State telegram

Deptoff, Department Officer

DFA, Department of Foreign Affairs

DHC, District High Commissioner (Nigeria)

DIA, Defense Intelligence Agency

DOD, Department of Defense

DOD, Department of Defense

DOD/ISA, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

DOS, Department of State

DRC, Democratic Republic of the Congo

E, Office of the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs

E/ORF/FSE, Office of Fuels and Energy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

ECA, Economic Commission for Africa (ECOSOC)

EEC, European Economic Community (Common Market)

ELF, Eritrean Liberation Front

Emb, Embassy

Emboff, Embassy officer

Embtel, Embassy telegram

EST, Eastern Standard Time

ETA, estimated time of arrival

EUCOM, European Command

EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EUR/BMI, Office of British, Irish, and Maltan Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EUR/FBX, Office of French and Benelux Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EXDIS, executive distribution only

EXIMBANK, Export-Import Bank

FBIS, Foreign Broadcast Information Service

FM, Foreign Minister

FMG, Federal Military Government (Nigeria)

FMS, Foreign Military Sales

FNLA, Frente Nacional de Libertacao de Angola (National Front for the Liberation of Angola)

FonMin, Foreign Minister

FonOff, Foreign Office

FonSec, Foreign Secretary

FPC, Federal Power Commission

FRC, Federal Records Center

FRELIMO, Frente de Libertacao de Mocambique (Mozambique Liberation Front)

FRG, Federal Republic of Germany

FY, fiscal year

FYI, for your information

GA, United Nations General Assembly

GDRC, Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo

GNP, Gross National Product

GOA, Government of Algeria

GOB, Government of Burundi

GOC, Government of the Congo

GOF, Government of France

GOG, Government of Ghana

GOI, Government of Italy

GOIC, Government of Ivory Coast (Cote d'Ivoire)

GOK, Government of Kenya

GOL, Government of Libya

GOM, Government of Morocco

GON, Government of Nigeria

GOP, Government of Portugal

GOR, Government of Rhodesia, Government of Rwanda

GOS, Government of Senegal

GOT, Government of Tunisia

GOU, Government of Uganda

GOUV, Government of Upper Volta (Haute Volta)

GRAE, Angolan Revolutionary Government in Exile

GRC, Government of the Republic of China

GRZ, Government of the Republic of Zambia

GSR, Government of the Somali Republic

GURTZ, Government of the United Republic of Tanzania

HICOM, High Commissioner

HIM, His Imperial Majesty

HM, His Majesty

HMG, Her Majesty's Government

HQ, Headquarters

IBRD, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank)

ICFTU, International Confederation of Free Trade Unions

ICJ, International Court of Justice

ICRC, International Committee of the Red Cross

IDA, International Development Association

IEG, Imperial Ethiopian Government

IEGF, Imperial Ethiopian Government Forces

IG/AF, National Security Council Interdepartmental Group on Africa

IMF, International Monetary Fund

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

INR/DDC, Deputy Director for Coordination, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

INR/RAF, Office of Research and Analysis for Africa, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

IRG, Interdepartmental Regional Group

IRG/AF, Interdepartmental Regional Group, Africa

ISA, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

JANAF, Joint Army, Navy, Air Force

JCA, Joint Church AID, USA

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

JCSM, Joint Chiefs of Staff Memorandum

JTF, Joint Task Force

KANU, Kenya African National Union

L, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

L/AF, Office of the Assistant Legal Adviser for African Affairs, Department of State

L/C, Office of the Assistant Legal Adviser for International Claims, Department of State

L/E, Office of the Assistant Legal Adviser for Economic Affairs, Department of State

L/UNA, Assistant Legal Adviser for United Nations Affairs, Department of State

LARA, Libyan Arab Republic Army

LARAF, Libyan Arab Republic Air Force

LARG, Libyan Arab Republic Government

LDC, Less Developed Country

LGTA, General League of Angolan Workers

LIMDIS, limited distribution

LNG, liquefied natural gas

LNOC, Libyan National Oil Corporation

M, Office of the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

MAAG, Military Assistance Advisory Group

MAP, Military Assistance Program

MATS, Military Air Transport Service

MDRA, Mouvement Democratique pour le Renouveau Algerien, Algerian opposition party

Memcon, memorandum of conversation

MIG, A. I. Mikoyan I M. I. Gurevich (Soviet fighter aircraft named for designers Mikoyan and Gurevich)

MilGovs, Military Governments

MinDef, Minister of Defense

MinExtAff, Minister of External Affairs

MinInfo, Minister of Information (Ethiopia)

MLS, Military Liaison Section/Staff, U.S. mission in Libya

MOD, Minister of Defense

MPLA, Movimento Popular de Libertacao de Angola (Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola)

MUFA, Libyan Ministry of Unity and Foreign Affairs

MUSLO, Moroccan-U.S. Liaison Office

NAACP, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People

NASA, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

NEA/UAR, Office of United Arab Republic Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State

NEP, North Eastern Province (Somalia)

NER, North East Region (Kenya)

NFD, Northern Frontier District (Kenya)

NIE, National Intelligence Estimate

NLC, National Liberation Council (Ghana)

NMG, National Military Government (Nigeria)

NODIS, no distribution

Noforn, No Foreign Dissemination

NOTAL, not received by all addressees

NPP, National Policy Paper

NSA, National Security Agency

NSAM, National Security Action Memorandum

NSC, National Security Council

OASD/ISA, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

OAU, Organization of African Unity

OCAM, Organization Commune Africaine et Malagache (African-Malagasy Common Organization)

OCI, Office of Current Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency

ODMA, Office of the Director of Military Assistance, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

OEP, Office of Emergency Planning

OMB, Office of Management and Budget, Executive Office of the President

ONE, Office of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency

OSD, Office of the Secretary of Defense

OSD/ISA, Office of the Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

P, Office of the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs

PL, Public Law

PAC, Pan African Congress

PADM, Policy Analysis Decision Memorandum

PAO, Public Affairs Officer, Department of State

PARA, Policy Analysis and Recommended Action Review

PASM, Policy Analysis Study Memorandum

PC, Peace Corps

PCC/ZAPU, Peoples' Caretaker Council/Zimbabwe African Peoples' Union

PM, Prime Minister or Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State

PM/ISO, Office of International Security Operations, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State

PM/ISP, Office of International Security Policy and Planning, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State

PM/MAS, Office of Military Assistance and Sales, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State

PNG, persona non grata

POL, petroleum, oil, lubricants

PriMin, Prime Minister

PSD, Destourian Socialist Party, ruling political party of Tunisian President Habib Bourguiba

RAF, Royal Air Force

RCC, Revolutionary Command Council, Libyan revolutionary government

Reftel, reference telegram

Reps, representatives

RF, Rhodesian Front

RG, Record Group

RPT, repeat

RSA, Republic of South Africa

RTV, Radio and Television International, Inc.

S, Office of the Secretary of State

S/P, Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council, Department of State

S/PC, Planning and Coordination Staff, Department of State

S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department of State

SA, South Africa

SAG, South African Government

SC RES, Security Council Resolution

SC, United Nations Security Council

Secto, series indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State (or his delegation) to the Department of State

Septel, separate telegram

SIG, Senior Interdepartmental Group

SITREP, situation report

SMC, Supreme Military Council (Nigeria)

SNIE, Special National Intelligence Estimate

SRG, Southern Rhodesia Government

STRATCOM, Strategic Command

STRIKECOM, Strike Command

STRIKEOPS, Strike Operations

SWA, South West Africa

SWAPO, South West Africa People's Organization

SYG, Secretary-General

SYL, Somali Youth League

Tosec, series indicator for telegrams from the Department of State to the Secretary of State (or his delegation)

U, Office of the Under Secretary of State

UAMCE, Union for African and Malagasy Economic Cooperation

UDENAMO, Uniao Democratica Nacional de Mocambique (Democratic National Union of Mozambique)

UK, United Kingdom

UKG, United Kingdom Government

ULC, United Labour Congress (Nigeria)

UN, United Nations

UNCTAD, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

UNDP, United Nations Development Program

UNECA, United Nations Economic Commission for Africa

UNGA, United Nations General Assembly

UNITA, Uniao Nacional para e Independencia Total de Angola (National Union for the Total Independence of Angola)

UNP, Office of United Nations Political Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

UNRep, United Nations Representative

UNSC, United Nations Security Council

UNSYG, United Nations Secretary-General

UPA, Uniao das Populacoes de Angola (Union of Angolan Peoples)

UPC, Ugandan Peoples' Congress

UPGA, United Progressive Grand Alliance (Nigeria)

URTZ, United Republic of Tanzania

USAF, United States Air Force

USDA, United States Department of Agriculture

USG, United States Government

USIA, United States Information Agency

USIS, United States Information Service

USLOT, Military Assistance Program for Tunisia

USN, United States Navy

USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

UST, United States Treaties and Other International Agreements

USUN, United States Mission to the United Nations

VOA, Voice of America

VOLAGs, volunteer agencies

VP, Vice President

WH, White House

WHO, World Health Organization

WTD, weapons training detachment

Z, Zulu, Greenwich Mean Time (for Department of State telegrams)

ZANU, Zimbabwe African Nationalist Union

ZAPU, Zimbabwe African People's Union

Persons Persons

Abaydi, Haamid al-, Libyan Defense Minister until September 1969

Abdirascid, Ali Shermarke, President of Somalia from June 1967 until his assassination on October 15, 1969

Abidia, Fathi, Libyan Ambassador to the United States until mid-1970

Achebe, Chinua, novelist, worked for Biafran Information Services and Political Orientation Committee

Adair, Edwin Ross, Ambassador to Ethiopia from July 8, 1971 to February 12, 1974

Adoula, Cyrille, former Prime Minister of the Congo; Ambassador to the United States from January 1967

Agnew, Spiro T., Vice President of the United States, January 1969 to October 1973

Aklilu, Abte-Wold Tsahafi, Prime Minister of Ethiopia

Akpan, N. U., Chief Secretary of the Biafran Government

Amachree, Godfrey, personal representative of Major General Gowon

Amin, Major General Idi, President of Uganda from January 25, 1971

Annenberg, Walter H., Ambassador to the United Kingdom from April 1969 to October 1974

Arikpo, Okoi, Nigerian Federal Commissioner for External Affairs under Gowon

Atherton, Alfred L., Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs from March 1970

Azikiwe, Chukwuma, son of the former President of Nigeria

Azikiwe, Nnamdi, former President of Nigeria

Balafrej, Hadj Ahmed, Personal Representative of King Hassan II of Morocco

Ben Abbes, Moroccan Foreign Minister from 1970

Ben Ammar, Hassib, Tunisian Defense Minister from 1970 to 1971

Ben Saleh, Ahmed, Tunisian Minister of National Planning, Finances, Economy and Education to 1970

Benhima, Ahmed Taibi, Moroccan Foreign Minister from July 1972

Benhima, Mohammed, Moroccan Prime Minister to October 1969; Minister of the Interior from 1972

Berard, Armand, French Representative to the United Nations until February 1970

Bergsten, C. Fred, member of the National Security Council Staff, 1969-1971

Blake, James J., Country Director for Algeria, Libya, Morocco, Spanish Sahara, Tunisia, Sudan, and Mauritania, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State, 1970 to 1971

Blatchford, Joseph H., Director of the Peace Corps, May 1969 to June 1971; Director of ACTION, July 1971 to February 1973

Boumediene, Houari, President of Algeria

Bourguiba, Habib, Jr., Foreign Minister of Tunisia until June 1970

Bourguiba, Habib, President of Tunisia

Bousselham, Abdelkader, Minister Counselor, Head of Algerian Interests Section in Washington from December 1970

Boutaleb, Abdelhadi, Moroccan Minister of Foreign Affairs, from October 1969 to 1970

Bouteflika, Abdel Aziz, Algerian Minister of Foreign Affairs

Bray, Charles W. III, Deputy Director, Office of Algeria, Libya, Morocco, Spanish Sahara, Tunisia, Sudan, and Mauritania, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

Burns, Arthur F., Counselor to the President, January 1969 to January 1970; thereafter, Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board

Bush, George H. W., Republican Congressman from Texas until January 1971; Representative to the United Nations, February 1971 to January 1973

Butterfield, Alexander P., Deputy Assistant to the President from January 1969 to January 1973

Butz, Earl l., Secretary of Agriculture from December 1971

Buwaysir (also Bwaysiir), Saalih Mas'uud, Libyan Foreign Minister from September 1969 to early 1970; Interior Minister from August 1971

Cadieux, Marcel, Canadian Ambassador to the United States from April 1970

Calhoun, John A., Ambassador to Tunisia from July 1969 to May 1972

Caradon, Lord (Hugh Mackintosh Foot), British Representative to the United Nations until June 1970

Carter, W. Beverly, Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary for African Affairs, Department of State, until mid-1972

Carter, W. Beverly, Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, November 1969 to June 1972; thereafter, Ambassador to Tanzania

Castiella y Maiz, Fernando Maria, Foreign Minister of Spain

Chaban-Delmas, Jacques, Prime Minister of France from June 1969 to July 1972

Chafee, John H., Secretary of the Navy from January 1969 to May 1972

Chiang Kai-shek, President of the Republic of China (Taiwan)

Chou En-lai (Zhou Enlai), Premier of the People's Republic of China

Clark, Warren Jr., Office of Fuels and Energy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State until late 1971; Office of Northern African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State from late 1971

Cline, Ray S., Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, from October 1969

Coerr, Wymberly DeR, Deputy Director of Coordination, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, until early 1972

Cohen, Edwin S., Under Secretary of the Treasury, 1972-1973

Connally, John B., Jr., Secretary of the Treasury from February 1971 to May 1972

Cousins, Norman, Editor, Saturday Review

Cromer, Earl of (George Rowland Stanley Baring), British Ambassador to the United States from February 1971

Crowe, Sir Colin, British Representative to the United Nations from June 1970

Curran, Robert T., Deputy Executive Secretary in the Office of the Secretary of the Department of State from August 1970

Cushman, Lieutenant General Robert R., Jr., Deputy Director of Central Intelligence from May 1969 to December 1971

Davies, Rodger P., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

Davis, Jeanne W., Director, National Security Council Staff Secretariat, 1970-1971

De Guiringaud, Louis, French Representative to the United Nationals from 1972

Debre, Michel, French Foreign Minister until June 1969

DeGaulle, Charles, President of France until April 1969

Denney, George C. Jr., Deputy Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State from April 1970

Denney, George C., Jr., Deputy Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

Dent, Frederick B., Secretary of Commerce from December 1972

DePalma, Samuel, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs from February 1969 to June 1973

Dike, Kenneth, roving Biafran emissary

Djazeri, Idriss, Algerian Undersecretary for Economic and Cultural Affairs

Dohney, Father Kevin, Holy Ghost priest, Ireland, active in Biafran relief effort

Douglas-Home, Sir Alec, British Foreign Secretary from June 1970

Driss, Rachid, Tunisian Ambassador to the United States until September 1969

Eagleburger, Lawrence S., member of the National Security Council Staff, 1969-1970

Eagleton, William L., Jr., Deputy Chief of Mission, U.S. Interests Section, Algiers, from December 1969

Effiong, Major-General Philip, Biafran Chief of Staff who conducted Biafra's surrender after Ojukwu left

Egal, Mohammed Ibrahim, Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Somalia from June 1967

Ehrlichman, John D., Counsel to the President, January to November 1969; Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs, November 1969-May 1973

Ekwensi, Cyprian, Director of Biafran Information Services

El Goulli, Slaheddine, Tunisian Ambassador to the United States from late 1969

Eliot, Theodore L., Jr., Special Assistant to the Secretary and Executive Secretary of the Department of State from August 1969 to September 1973

Enahoro, Chief Anthony, Federal Minister of Information in Gowon's Government

Essebsi, Beji Caid, Tunisian Minister of Defense from November 1969 until 1970; thereafter Minister of the Interior

Farjaani, Lt. Col. Salih, Libyan Air Force Commander

Ferguson, Clarence Clyde, Jr., Special Coordinator on Relief to Victims of the Nigerian Civil War from February 1969 to June 1970; Ambassador to Uganda from June 1970 until July 1972; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs from August 1972 to October 1973

Filali, Abdellatif, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Morocco, August 1971 until August 1972

Foccart, Jacques, French Secretary General for African and Malagasy Affairs

Ford, Gerald R., Republican Congressman from Michigan; House Minority Leader

Freeman, John, British Ambassador to the United States from March 1969 to January 1971

Freeman, Rear Admiral Mason, USN, Vice Director, Joint Chiefs of State

Freymond, Jacques, Vice President of the International Committee of the Red Cross from April 1969

Froehlke, Robert F., Assistant Secretary of Defense for Administration from January 1969 to June 1971; Secretary of the Army from July 1971 to May 1973

Fulbright, J. William, Democratic Senator from Arkansas; Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee

Galanto, Fred J., U.S. Interests Section, Algiers, Algeria from 1969 to early 1971

Ghozali, Ahmed, President of Algerian state oil company Sonatrach

Gowon, Major General Yakubu, Chairman of the Supreme Military Council of Nigeria

Haasi, Muusa Ahmad al-, Libyan Interior Minister from September to December 1969

Hadsel, Fred Latimer, Ambassador to Somalia from June 28, 1969 to July 18, 1971; Ambassador to Ghana from September 25, 1971

Haig, General Alexander M., Jr., Senior Military Assistant to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs from January 1969 to June 1970; Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs from June 1970 to January 1973; thereafter, Army Vice Chief of Staff

Haile, Selassie I, Emperor of Ethiopia

Haldeman, H. R., Assistant to the President from January 1969 to April 1973

Hall, William O., Ambassador to Ethiopia until May 15, 1971

Hamdani, Smail, Adviser to Algerian President Boumediene; Deputy Secretary-General of the Presidency from October 1970

Hannah, John A., Administrator, Agency for International Development

Hardin, Clifford M., Secretary of Agriculture from January 1969 to December 1971

Harlow, Bryce N., Assistant to the President from January 1969 to January 1970; Counselor to the President from January 1970 to 1974

Harrop, William C., Director, Office of Research and Analysis for Africa, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, from June 1969 to 1971

Hasanayn, Ali, Libyan Foreign Minister until September 1969

Hassan II, King of Morocco

Hawaaz (also Hawwaaz), Aadam Said al-, Libyan Defense Minister from September to December 1969

Heath, Edward, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from June 1970

Helms, Richard M., Director of Central Intelligence until February 1973

Hillenbrand, Martin J., Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs

Hoffacker, Lewis, Principle Officer, U.S. Interests Section, Algiers, until November 1969

Holmes, Edward W., Office of Inter-African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State, until mid-1971

Hughes, Thomas L., Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, until August 1969

Humaydi, Libyan Interior Minister

Huni (Houni), Abd al-Munim al-, Libyan Deputy Prime Minister and RCC Member from September 1969; Interior Minister from September 1970; Director of Intelligence, 1970; Prime Minister from September 1971

Hurd, John G., Ambassador to South Africa from September 10, 1970

Hyland, William, member of the National Security Council Staff from 1970 to 1972

Idris I al-Senussi, King of Libya until September 1969

Irwin, John N. II, Under Secretary of State from September 1970 to July 1972; Deputy Secretary of State from July 1972

Iyalla, Joseph T. F., Nigerian Ambassador to the United States until April, 1972; Permanent Secretary, Nigerian Ministry of External Affairs from May 1972

Jalluud (also Juluud and Jalloud), Abd al-Sallam, Libyan Deputy Prime Minister and Interior Minister from January 1970; Minister of the Economy and Industry from September 1970; Prime Minister from July 1972

Johnson, U. Alexis, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs from February 1969 to February 1973

Johnson, U. Alexis, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Josif, Harold G., Chargé D'Affaires ad Interim to Libya from November 1972

Karamessines, Thomas H., Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

Katz, Julius L., Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Resources and Food Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

Katzenbach, Nicholas de Belleville, Under Secretary of State until January 20, 1969

Kaunda, Kenneth D., President of Zambia

Kayibanda, Gregoire, President and Prime Minister of Rwanda

Kearns, Henry, President and Chairman of the Export-Import Bank

Keita, Modibo, President of Mali

Kennedy, Colonel Richard T., Member of the National Security Council Staff from January 1970

Kennedy, David M., Secretary of the Treasury from January 1969 to January 1971; Ambassador at Large for Foreign Economic Development from February 1971 to March 1973; jointly, Representative to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization from March 1972 to February 1973

Kenyatta, Jomo, President of Kenya

Kikhya (Kikhia), Mansuur, Libyan Under Secretary of Foreign Ministry from September 1969 to early 1972; Foreign Minister from mid-1972

Kinney, Edward M., Secretary/Treasurer, Joint Church Aid-USA until April 1970

Kissinger, Henry A., President's Assistant for National Security Affairs from January 1969

Kosciusko-Morizet, Jacques, French Representative of France to the United Nations from February 1970 to May 1972; thereafter, French Ambassador to the United States

Kosygin, Alexei N., Prime Minister of the USSR

Ladgham, Bahi, Secretary of State to the Presidency of Tunisia, 1969; Prime Minister until November 1970

Laird, Melvin R., Secretary of Defense from January 1969 to January 1973

Lake, W. Anthony, member of the National Security Council Staff from 1970 to 1971

Lamrani, Mohamed Karim-, Prime Minister of Morocco, August 1971 to November 1972

Lane, George M., Office of the Executive Director, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State; Country Officer for Algeria, Department of State, from June 1972

Lang, William E., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Africa and the Western Hemisphere until 1970

Laraki, Ahmed, Foreign Minister of Morocco to October 1969; Prime Minister of Morocco from October 1969 to August 1971

Latimer, Tom, Member of the White House staff, 1971

Lichtblau, George E., Acting Staff Director, National Security Council Interdepartmental Group for Africa, 1970

Lindt, August, Swiss Ambassador, served as the Commissioner General of the International Committee of the Red Cross for West Africa concentrating on relief operations in Nigeria from July 1968 to June 1969; resigned June 19, 1969 after being declared persona non grata by the Federal Military Government of Nigeria on June 14, 1969

Loomis, Henry, Deputy Director, United States Information Agency until January 1973

Lord, Winston, member of the National Security Council Staff from 1969 to 1971

Lowrie, Arthur L., Country Officer for Algeria, Department of State, until June 1972

Lucet, Charles, French Ambassador to the United States until April 1972

Lythcott, Dr. George, Associate Dean for International Medical Affairs, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University; former Regional Director in Lagos for the 19 country project of the Public Health Service/Communicable Disease Center until June 1969

Maghribi, Mahmud Sulayman al-, Libyan Prime Minister from September 1969 to January 1970

Masmoudi, Mohamed, Tunisian Foreign Minister from June 1970

Mathews, Elbert G., Ambassador to Nigeria until July 26, 1969

Mattson, James A., Office of Research and Analysis for Africa, Department of State

Medbouh, Brigadier General Mohamed, Moroccan Director of Royal Military Household until July 1971

Medeghiri, Algerian Minister of the Interior, 1970

Melady, Thomas Patrick, Ambassador to Burundi from January 31, 1970 to May 25, 1972; Ambassador to Uganda from July 30, 1972 to February 9, 1973

Melbourne, Roy M., Country Director for West Africa, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

Mendenhall, Joseph A., Acting Assistant Administrator, Bureau for Vietnam, Agency for International Development until January 1970; Ambassador to the Malagasy Republic from September 1972

Messmer, Pierre, Prime Minister of France from July 1972

Mestiri, Ahmed, Tunisian Minister of the Interior until September, 1971

Meyer, Cord, Jr., Acting Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency, 1971

Meyers, Marilyn A., Acting Country Officer for Tunisia, Department of State, 1971

Mitchell, John, Attorney General from January 1969 to February 1972

Mobutu, Lieutenant General Joseph D., President of the Republic of the Congo (Zaire) and Minister of Defense

Mohammed, Lieutenant-Colonel Murtala, Nigerian Commander of 2nd Division, adviser and rival to Yakubu Gowon, Nigerian Head of State

Mojekwu, C. C., Biafran Commissioner for Home Affairs

Moore, C. Robert, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs until June 1972; thereafter, Ambassador to Cameroon

Moorer, Admiral Thomas H., United States Navy, Chief of Naval Operations until July 1970; thereafter, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Moorer, Admiral Thomas H., USN, Chief of Naval Operations until July 1970; thereafter, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Moose, Richard, member of the National Security Council Staff from 1969 to 1970

Morris, Roger, member of the National Security Council Staff until 1971

Mufa Major Muhammad Najm, Libyan Minister of Unity and Foreign Affairs from October 1970 to February 1972

Muhayshi, ‘Umar al-, Libyan RCC Member; Acting Foreign Minister from 1970; Minister of the Economy and Industry from January 1970

Nasser, Gamal Abdel, President of Egypt to September 28, 1970

Naville, Marcel A., President of the International Committee of the Red Cross from April 1969

Newsom, David D., Ambassador to Libya to June 1969; Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs from July 1969

Nixon, Richard M., President of the United States from January 20, 1969 to August 9, 1974

Njoku, Eni, Biafran delegate at peace talks and a senior emissary

Nouira, Hedi Amira, Tunisian Minister of State in Charge of Economy from June 1970; Prime Minister from November 1970; Secretary General of the ruling Destourian Socialist Party

Noyes, James H., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Near Eastern, African, and South Asian Affairs

Nutter, G. Warren, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs from March 1969 to January 1973

Nwakoby, Ralph, Biafran Deputy Representative in the United States

Nwokedi, Francis, special adviser to Biafra's Head of State Ojukwu

Nyerere, Julius, President of Tanganyika until country renamed in October 1964; thereafter President of Tanzania

Obote, A. Milton, President of Uganda until overthrown on January 25, 1971

Odell, Harry I., Office of Northern African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State Omar, General Driss Ben, Moroccan Deputy Chief of Staff; Minister of Defense from August 1972

Ojukwu, Lieutenant Colonel Chukwuemeka Odumegwu, Military Governor of the Eastern Region of Nigeria until January 10, 1970

Okigbo, Pius, economic adviser to the Biafran Government

Okpara, Michael I., political adviser to Biafra's Head of State Ojukwu

Osman, Ahmed, Moroccan Director of the Royal Cabinet until November 1972; thereafter Prime Minister

Oufkir, General Mohammed, Moroccan Minister of the Interior to 1971, and again in 1972; Minister of Defense from 1971 to 1972

Packard, David, Deputy Secretary of Defense from January 1969 to December 1971

Palmer, Joseph A. II, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs to July 1969; Ambassador to Libya from October 1969 to November 1972

Palmer, Joseph, II, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs until July 1969

Podgorny, Nikolai, President of the Soviet Union

Poher, Alain, Interim President of France from April to June 1969

Pompidou, Georges, President of France from June 1969

Qadhafi, Mu'ammar al-, Chairman of the Libyan Revolutionary Command Council and Commander-in-Chief of the Libyan Armed Forces from September 1969; Prime Minister and Minister of Defense from January 1970 to 1972

Qadhafi, Wanis al-, Prime Minister of Libya until September 1969

Resor, Stanley R., Secretary of the Army until June 1971

Richardson, Elliot L., Under Secretary of State from January 1969 to June 1970; Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare from June 1970 to January 1973; Secretary of Defense from January to May 1973; Attorney General from May to October 1973

Ritchie, A. Edgar, Canadian Ambassador to the United States until January 1970

Rives, Lloyd M., Director, Office of Research and Analysis for Africa, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, from 1971

Roberto, Holden, Angolan nationalist leader, President of GRAE, and leader of FNLA and UPA

Rockwell, Stuart W., Ambassador to Morocco from March 1970

Rodman, Peter W., member of the National Security Council Staff from 1970 to 1972

Rogers, William P., Secretary of State from January 1969 to September 1973

Roosevelt, Archibald B. Jr., Chief, Africa Division, Central Intelligence Agency

Root, John F., Country Director for Northern African Affairs, Department of State, to November 1969

Ross, Claude G., Deputy Assistant Secretary for African Affairs, Department of State, from August 1972

Ross, Claude G., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs from August 1972

Rountree, William Manning, Ambassador to South Africa from January 1966 to June 1970

Rush, Kenneth, Ambassador to the Federal Republic of Germany from July 1969 to February 1972; Deputy Secretary of Defense from February 1972 to January 1973

Ryan, General John D., USAF, Air Force Chief of Staff from August 1969 to July 1973

Salans, Carl F., Deputy Legal Adviser, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

Saunders, Harold H., member, National Security Council Staff

Savimbi, Jonas, leader of the Angolan national liberation movement UNITA

Schaufele, William E., Jr., Ambassador to Upper Volta (Burkina Faso) from October 16, 1969 to July 10, 1971

Schlesinger, James R., Assistant Director, Bureau of the Budget from January 1969 to August 1971; Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission from August 1971 to February 1973; Director of Central Intelligence from February to July 1973; thereafter, Secretary of Defense

Schumann, Maurice, French Foreign Minister from June 1969 to April 1973

Seamans, Robert C., Jr., Secretary of the Air Force from February 1969 to May 1973

Seelye, Talcott W., Country Director for Lebanon, Jordan, Syrian Arab Republic, and Iraq, to September 1972; Ambassador to Tunisia, from September 1972

Senghor, Leopold Sedar, President of Senegal

Shakespeare, Frank, Director, United States Information Agency from February 1969 to February 1973

Sharp, Mitchell, Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs

Shillito, Barry J., Assistant Secretary of Defense, Installations and Logistics

Shriver, R. Sargent, Jr., Ambassador to France until March 1970

Shuwayrib (also Shawaarib), Colonel Abu Sa'adin, first leader of the Libyan Revolutionary Command Council

Sisco, Joseph J., Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs from February 1969

Slaoui, Driss, Moroccan Director General of the Royal Cabinet until August 1971

Smith, Ian Douglas, Prime Minister of Rhodesia

Smith, Robert Powell, Officer in Charge of Nigerian Affairs

Smith, Robert S., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, December 1969 to February 1973

Sonnenfeldt, Helmut, member of the National Security Council Staff from January 1969

Spiers, Ronald I., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs from August to September 1969; Director, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs from September 1969 to August 1973

Springsteen, George S., Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs until June 1972; Acting Assistant Secretary from June 1972 to August 1973; thereafter, Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs

Stans, Maurice, Secretary of Commerce from January 1969 to January 1972

Stewart, Michael, British Foreign Secretary until June 1970

Strausz-Hupé, Robert, appointed Ambassador to Morocco in 1969, but never commissioned

Suddarth, Roscoe, Country Director for Libya, Department of State

Suwesi, Abdalla, Libya Chargé D'Affaires ad Interim to the United States from mid-1970

Swanstrom, Bishop Edward E., President, Joint Church Aid-USA until April 1970

Tahiri, Mamoun, Moroccan Minister of Finance and Special Emissary of King Hassan; Minister of Higher Education from 1971

Tasca, Henry J., Ambassador to Morocco until October 1969

Thant, U, Secretary-General of the United Nations until December 1971

Trezise, Philip H., Representative to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris, to July 1969; Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, July 1969 to November 1971

Trudeau, Pierre Elliott, Prime Minister of Canada

Truehart, William Clyde, Ambassador to Nigeria from November 6, 1969 to September 1, 1971

Tubby, Roger Wellington, Ambassador, Representative of the United States to the European office of the United Nations until September 24, 1969

Vaky, Viron P., Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs from January to May 1969; member of the National Security Council Staff from May 1969 to September 1972; thereafter, Ambassador to Costa Rica

Valadas, Andre, Counselor, French Embassy to the United States, 1971

Vaughn, Jack, Director of the Peace Corps

Veliotes, Nicholas A., Member of the National Security Council Interdepartmental Group for Africa, 1970

Waldheim, Kurt, Secretary-General of the United Nations from January 1972

Walters, Lieutenant General Vernon A., Deputy Director of Central Intelligence from May 1972

Warner, John W., Under Secretary of the Navy until April 1972; Secretary of the Navy from May 1972 to April 1974

Wheeler, General Earle G., USA, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff until July 1970

Williams, James A., Staff Assistant in the Office of the Under Secretary of State, Department of State, September 1970 to August 1972

Wilson, Harold, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom until June 1970

Wisner, Frank G., International Relations Officer, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State, to July 1971

Witman, William II, Director, Office of Inter-African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State, from May 1969; Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, from November 1969; Special Assistant to Assistant Secretary for African Affairs from April 1971

Wright, W. Marshall, member of the National Security Council Staff from June 1970 to April 1972; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations from April to December 1972; thereafter, Acting Assistant Secretary

Yaker, Layachi, Algerian Foreign Ministry Official; later Minister of Commerce

Yost, Charles W., Representative to the United Nations from January 1969 to February 1971

Yost, Robert Lloyd, Ambassador to Burundi from August 19, 1972 to May 26, 1974

Zeghar, Rachid, Confidant of Algerian President Boumediene

Documents on North Africa, 1969-1972Documents on North Africa, 1969-1972

Contents

Ch. 1. U.S.-North African PolicyCh. 1. U.S.-North African Policy

1. Intelligence Note 195 From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, March 19, 1969

Washington, March 19, 1969.

Hughes informed the Secretary of the mood shift in the Maghreb caused by the rapprochement between Morocco and Algeria and the new neutralism in both countries. While these changes had produced positive economic results for both nations, the new relationship appeared to have potential drawbacks for U.S. interests in the region.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 735, Country Files, Africa, Algeria, Vol. I. Secret; Noforn; Controlled Dissemination.

2. Intelligence Note 693 From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to the Acting Secretary of State (Richardson), Washington, September 29, 1969

Washington, September 29, 1969

Denney reported that the recent Islamic summit in Rabat, which had resulted in a moderate consensus, was a considerable achievement for Hassan and co-organizer King Faisal of Saudi Arabia.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 13-6. Confidential; Noforn; Controlled Dissemination.

3. Intelligence Note 876 From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, December 24, 1969

Washington, December 24, 1969

Hughes reported that, although the Fifth Arab Summit Conference at Rabat ended in disunity and disarray, recent U.S. peace initiatives in the Middle East, including Secretary of State Rogers' December 9 speech and the surfacing of U.S. proposals for an Israel-Jordan peace, had been well received.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 7 ARAB SUMMIT. Secret; Noforn. On December 16, Rogers had recommended that President Nixon send a message to King Hassan supporting his moderate position at Summit. (Ibid., POL 15-1 MOR). Yet on December 19, when President's Advisor for National Security Affairs Kissinger provided Nixon with a requested list of steps taken to bolster moderate Arab leaders at the Rabat summit, he omitted Rogers' recommendation and draft letter to Hassan. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1243, Saunders Files, Morocco, 1/20/69-12/31/69)

4. Memorandum From the President's Advisor for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, January 19, 1970

Washington, January 19, 1970

In light of recent regional developments, Kissinger recommended that the President authorize a review of U.S. programs in North Africa.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-169, NSSM Files, NSSM 87. Secret. Sent for action. The President approved the recommendation on January 21.

5. National Security Study Memorandum 87, Washington, January 22, 1970

Washington, January 22, 1970

Kissinger conveyed the President's request to review the trend of events in North Africa, as well as the U.S. regional programs, policies, and options there, and draft a National Intelligence Estimate and an options paper for submission to the NSC Review Group.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-169, NSSM Files, NSSM 87. Secret. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of Bureau of the Budget. A summary of the response is printed as Document 9. This response was later subsumed into NSSM 90, a wider study of “U.S. Interests in and Policy toward the Mediterranean Area,” on February 26. It is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1969-72, volume XIV, Middle East Region, 1969-1972

6. Memorandum From the President's Advisor for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, February 4, 1970

Washington, February 4, 1970

Kissinger summarized Admiral George Anderson's impression, based on his recent visit, that the Free World position in North Africa was deteriorating.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 274, President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, Vol. III. Secret; Nodis. Sent for information. President Nixon underlined a portion of the second paragraph and wrote in the margin, “I completely agree—Except for Tasca—virtually all career State people I have talked to do not adequately recognize this. They keep saying that the June '67 war was a great ‘blow' to Soviet in Mideast. Bunk.”

7. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, February 23, 1970

Washington, February 23, 1970

Eliot transmitted a memorandum prepared for the Acting Secretary by the Acting Assistant Secretary for African Affairs outlining the possible consequences in North Africa of a positive U.S. response to the Israeli arms request.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 747, Country Files, Africa General, Vol. I. Secret. According to the February 18 Intelligence Note RAFN-4, on his February 7-11 trip to Morocco and Tunisia, Secretary Rogers, although warmly received, was also met with private diplomatic warnings and unprecedented press attacks over U.S. support for Israel. (Ibid.) For additional information on the Secretary's talks with Moroccan officials, see Document 102, Document 20, and Document 145.

8. National Intelligence Estimate 60-70, Washington, March 12, 1970

Washington, March 12, 1970

The estimate reviewed trends and prospects in the four North African states. It concluded that, in general, the recent improvement in political relations was not likely to extend beyond economic cooperation and that the region was turning toward Western Europe and away from close association with either of the Cold War superpowers. This trend was likely to continue as long as the United States continued to be closely identified in Arab eyes with Israel. The report then outlined the prospected trends for individual states, highlighting the potential political and social ramifications of projected economic stability.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79-R01012A, Box 390. Secret; Controlled Dissemination. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, Defense, and NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. The Director of CIA submitted this estimate with the concurrence of all members of USIB with the exception of the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on grounds that it was outside their jurisdiction.

9. Analytical Summary, Washington, April 17, 1970

Washington, April 17, 1970

The memorandum summarized the options paper, entitled “Trends and U.S. Options in North Africa,” produced by the Interdepartmental Group for Africa in response to National Security Study Memorandum 87. This paper examined the present and projected political stability of the four North African nations and the possible influence on U.S. interests in the region, then put forth a strategy for protecting those interests.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Box CL 303, NSC Committees and Panels, Review Group, May 1970. Secret. The entire options paper can be found in National Archives,NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-169, NSSM 87. The trends outlined in this document are discussed in greater detail in NIE 60-70, printed as Document 8.

10. Memorandum From the Acting Staff Director (Lichtblau) to the National Security Council Interdepartmental Group for Africa, Washington, May 11, 1970

Washington, May 11, 1970

Lichtblau reported the consensus of the AF/NSC-IG that, although no further action was needed on NSSM 87, the United States should continue an active relationship with North Africa where it maintained appreciable interests.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 1-1 AFR-US. Secret. The minutes of the May 21 Senior Review Group meeting on NSSM 90, into which NSSM 87 was folded, are printed in Foreign Relations, 1969-72, volume XIV, Middle East Region, 1969-1972.

11. Response to National Security Study Memorandum 90, Washington, June 12, 1970

Washington, June 12, 1970

An excerpt from the paper “U.S. Interest in and Policy Toward the Mediterranean,” prepared in response to NSSM 90, discussed the role of France in North Africa, which U.S. policymakers viewed with ambivalence.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-28, NSC Meeting Files, The Mediterranean, June 17, 1970. Secret; Exdis. The Analytical Summary of the June 12 paper, concluded that “The North Africans in Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia have a character and history which distinguish them from the Eastern Arabs and give them somewhat different foreign policy options, particularly those growing out of their closer relationship with Western Europe. The North African governments are turning toward Western Europe—especially France—and away from the close association with either the United States or the USSR that characterized their policies in the 1950s and 1960s. US influence in North Africa will remain severely limited while the US remains closely identified in Arab eyes with Israel and Israel remains in occupation of Arab territory. The USSR is unlikely substantially to improve its modest political and diplomatic position in North Africa, as least as long as current regimes remain in power.” (Ibid.) The full analytical summary is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969-72, volume XXIV, Middle East Region, 1969-1972.

12. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Irwin) to the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom), Washington, December 9, 1971

Washington, December 9, 1971

Based on the November 5 Policy Analysis and Recommended Action review, Irwin presented the conclusions with respect to U.S. policy toward and interests in North Africa. The memorandum emphasized the need to work with North African nations bilaterally, as regional tensions prevented U.S. policymakers from developing a comprehensive strategy for approaching the region as a whole. Oil and natural gas interests in the region, while significant, should not be overemphasized. Finally, the current U.S. programs in North Africa were achieving the appropriate results and should be continued.

Source: National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 1 AFR-US. Secret; Exdis. The Summary Sheet is attachment but not printed. No record of the review itself was found.

1. Intelligence Note 195 From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, March 19, 1969 1. Intelligence Note 195 From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, March 19, 19691

Washington, March 19, 1969.

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE
DIRECTOR OF INTELLIGENCE AND RESEARCH
Intelligence Note 195
March 19, 1969

To:

The Secretary

Through:

S/S

From: Thomas L. Hughes

Subject:

New Directions in the Maghreb

Diplomatic activity in the Maghreb has quickened since the successful visit in January of Algerian President Houari Boumediene to Morocco. “Non-alignment” is again the watchword in Morocco and Algeria—although not yet in Tunisia or Libya. While this new climate may place some limits on Soviet influence, it can also have significant drawbacks for the US. But the enhanced stability it provides an area important to US interests may be worth the risks.

New Mood in the Maghreb. The Moroccan-Algerian rapprochement has been the major agent of change.1 Apparently determined to live up to the friendship treaty they signed in January, Morocco and Algeria have now signed a financial accord. Both have been seeking to promote a Maghreb summit to bring Tunisia and Libya into line. The advent of a new administration in Washington, the Nixon-de Gaulle talks, and the suggestion of Spanish Foreign Minister Castiella that the Mediterranean be cleared of both the US and Soviet fleets have contributed to an atmosphere of international ferment that has affected the mood in the Maghreb.

Morocco Searching for New Partners. Since France suspended a good part of its aid following the Ben Barka affair in late 1965, Morocco has been seeking more diplomatic latitude. The June 1967 war in the Middle East—and protracted US delays in honoring a commitment in 1967 to supply $14 million in arms—induced Morocco to seek a more neutralist coloration in its diplomacy. One result has been a gradual warming in Morocco's relations with the USSR, reflected in increased trade and economic assistance. The Moroccans are now looking forward to a visit by Soviet President Nikolai Podgorny in April in the hope of obtaining more economic assistance for their new five-year plan. Moroccan Foreign Minister Ahmed Laraki has also expressed interest in a “Mediterranean pact” that he apparently sees as growing out of the Castiella proposal. At the same time, the Moroccans have been probing for an invitation for King Hassan to visit Washington.

Algeria Seeking Alternatives. Algeria is also trying to avoid too great a dependence on either of its major aid donors—France or the USSR. Stung by Western criticism of increasing Algerian dependence on the USSR, Boumediene has moved to demonstrate his independence by bettering relations with his conservative neighbors. To draw a rein on the Soviets, the Algerians have sought more French military assistance and have agreed to a visit by French Foreign Minister Debre in May. They, as well as the Moroccans, are now preparing to receive Podgorny and probably hope this will help keep the French on their toes. To keep both countries in line they have hinted at an improvement in relations with the US and have recently received a private delegation of Americans interested in increased trade.

Tunisia and Libya More Cautious. Tunisia and Libya have been less quick to respond to these new currents. Tunisia fears, moreover, that Algeria and Morocco may be trying to impose a new pattern on the Maghreb. In January the Tunisians obtained some promising results in talks with the Algerians on economic cooperation. Later, however, the Algerians attempted to force through a quick border settlement, with the predictable result that the Tunisians dug in their heels. Both Tunisia and Libya have been seeking nonetheless to broaden their diplomatic options. Tunisia has been moving ahead on its rapprochement with France.1 Libya, having recently signed a friendship treaty with Algeria, is scheduling visits for the spring by Crown Prince Hassan al-Rida, to its Maghreb neighbors and to France.

Implications for the US. The move towards “non-alignment” resulting from the Moroccan—Algerian rapprochement may have more immediate drawbacks for the US than for the USSR. Although Morocco apparently interprets the new relationship as calling for more Soviet and neutralist influence in its foreign policy, Algeria has not shown a corresponding interest in moving closer to the US or other Western countries. Boumediene has recently branded the US Sixth Fleet—but not the Soviet fleet—as “dangerous” to its independence. Even so, Algeria's decision to improve relations with its neighbors probably constitutes a significant contribution to stabilizing an area long torn by rivalries and suspicions and in which the US retains important interests.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 735, Country Files, Africa, Algeria, Vol. I. Secret; Noforn; Controlled Dissemination.

1 See Intelligence Note 42, “Boumediene's Visit to Morocco: A New Era in Moroccan-Algerian Relations,” January 24, 1969

1 See Intelligence Note 91, “Franco-Tunisian Rapprochement: Interests Converging,” February 14, 1969.

2. Intelligence Note 693 From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to the Acting Secretary of State (Richardson), Washington, September 29, 1969 2. Intelligence Note 693 From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to the Acting Secretary of State (Richardson), Washington, September 29, 19691

Washington, September 29, 1969

U.S DEPARTMENT OF STATE
DIRECTOR OF INTELLIGENCE AND RESEARCH
Intelligence Note 693
September 29, 1969

To:

The Acting Secretary

Through:

S/S

From: INR - George C. Denney, Jr. [DEM initialed]

Subject:

Islamic Summit Produces Moderate Consensus and the Makings of a Moslem Bloc

The Rabat meeting of 25 Moslem nations survived postponement attempts and internal conflicts to become the first Islamic Summit Conference. Its concluding declaration and resolutions represented a moderate consensus and may have laid the groundwork for a Moslem bloc.

A Major Achievement: Holding the Conference. King Hassan of Morocco, host of the September 22-25 meeting and one of the original promoters of the Summit, called holding of the conference a “miracle of God” and a success in itself. We agree that bringing together government leaders (including 9 heads of state) representing about 300 million Moslems was a major achievement. It took considerable skill on the part of Hassan and co-initiator King Faisal of Saudi Arabia to gain rapid agreement for early scheduling of a summit and to persuade suspicious non-Arab Moslems to participate in an Arab-dominated assembly. Less than a week before opening day, President Nasser launched a counteroffensive seeking to postpone the summit indefinitely. In the end, his bluff was called and a UAR delegation was dispatched to Rabat. Only Iraq and Syria of the “progressive” Arab group failed to appear. A final crisis occurred in mid-summit, when a belated invitation to India provoked a stormy Pakistani response and India's ouster. Even this turbulent event, which might have broken up any other conference, only prolonged the meeting an extra day.

A Moderate Consensus. Out of the conference came a moderate consensus, despite radical Arab and Palestinian lobbying (the Palestinian Liberation Organization—PLO—was given observer status at the meeting). The official conference declaration, taking the al-Aqsa mosque incident as point of departure, called for restoration of Jerusalem's pre-June 1967 status and speedy withdrawal of Israeli military forces from all territories occupied as a result of the 1967 war; it appealed to the US,UK, USSR, and France to secure compliance with the 1967 Security Council resolution. On Palestine, a solitary sentence affirmed “full support to the Palestinian people for the restitution of their rights” and in their “struggle for national liberation.”

The moderate Arab organizers can claim full credit for the language-a compromise that reiterated basic Arab positions without offending non-Arab participants, five of whom have diplomatic relations with Israel. The radical Arabs may regret what might have been added, but can raise no serious objections to the statements in the final declaration.

The Makings of a Moslem Bloc? The Moderates undoubtedly hope that they have strengthened the Arab cause in a potentially permanent fashion. The conference declaration spoke of regular consultation and “close cooperation and mutual assistance” among Mos1em states. In addition, the principal resolution set a meeting of Islamic foreign ministers for March 1970 at Jidda to review common action undertaken after the summit and to establish an Islamic permanent secretariat. In sum, the moderates can claim to have created a Moslem bloc to be formally organized next March.

Arab moderates will use the success of the Islamic Summit to strengthen their inter-Arab position and to argue against holding an Arab Summit, to which Faisal is adamantly opposed. He fears it would be controlled by radical states, who would call for increased financial contributions from the oil-producers and would push through extreme resolutions. If Faisal also hopes that the projected Moslem bloc will provide an effective counter balance to radical domination of the Arab League, he will probably be disappointed.

A consequence of the moderates' success was the absence of attack on the US or “imperialism” in the final statements, However, it is virtually certain that the radical Arab states will continue to agitate for a more extreme political posture in the Islamic forum; unless Hassan and Faisal can sustain their achievement the resulting dispute could cause a short life—or even stillbirth—for the Moslem bloc.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 13-6. Confidential; Noforn; Controlled Dissemination.

3. Intelligence Note 876 From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, December 24, 1969 3. Intelligence Note 876 From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, December 24, 19691

Washington, December 24, 1969

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE
DIRECTOR OF INTELLIGENCE AND RESEARCH
Intelligence Note 876
December 24, 1969

To:

The Secretary

Through:

S/S

From: INR - George C. Denney, Jr. [GCD initaled]

Subject:

MIDDLE EAST: Arab Summit Ends in Disarray

The Fifth Arab Summit Conference at Rabat (December 21-23), which the Arabs convened in high hopes and in an atmosphere relatively free of inter-Arab bilateral disputes, came to an ignominious end in apparently irreconcilable disagreement over the central issue of mobilization for an eventual full-scale war with Israel.

Fawzi's Proposals Unacceptable to Some. The summit foundered on the first agenda item—a three-year plan for mi1itary mobilization presented by UAR War Minister Fawzi. In addition to heavy requirements for men and material, the plan reportedly called for huge financial allocations for arms by present financial contributors (Libya, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia) and by other states (e.g., Algeria, Morocco) as well. The plan ran aground because of the Iraqi and Syrian demands for an all-out war against Israel now, attempts by the Algerians, Moroccans, and Tunisians to focus Arab efforts on support for the Palestinians, and Saudi and Kuwaiti unwillingness to increase their financial contributions. When Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia were clearly unwilling to commit themselves to the financial contributions envisioned by Fawzi's plan, Nasser staged his walk-out on December 23. The subsequent closed session failed to reach agreement; militant Syria, Iraq, and Southern Yemen boycotted the brief closing session.

Arab Disunity: A Mixed Blessing. The disunity at Rabat may push the possibility of another Mideast war further into the future, but it raises questions about the possibilities for peace, since it removes some of the pressure for compromise from Israel and may make it even more difficult for individual Arab leaders to agree to a settlement. Furthermore, the conference results may pose problems for the Arab states which opposed the Fawzi plan, in the form of domestic discontent or of campaigns mounted by Arab radicals. Cairo media have already blamed the conference failure on states that “contended they could not offer more to the battle.” It will not take long to discover whether we are on the verge of a renewed “cold war” among the Arabs, or whether the UAR's need for a continuation of the Khartoum subsidy payments will mute any major propaganda-subversion campaigns. The overall impact of the negative psychological reaction in the Arab world has not been felt yet. Nasser may try to regain the initiative at the UAR-Libya-Sudan summit scheduled for December 25 in Tripoli. Though less likely, he has the option of using the Rabat meeting's failure to endorse war preparations as justification for renewed UAR attention to a political settlement.

The Fedayeen. Because of the conference's disorderly end, the remaining agenda items—support for the fedayeen and financial aid to Palestinians in the occupied areas—were not resolved. As a result, the Palestinian Liberation Organization apparently did not receive the collective Arab political backing it had sought nor its anticipated subsidy of about $20 million per year, but it will probably get increased financial aid from some Arab states, and the overall effect of the summit's collapse on the guerrilla movement will probably be minor. Arafat apparently kept out of the disputes, and Fatah's avowed goal of avoiding subordination to any Arab state may be strengthened by the split at Rabat. The failure of the more grandiose military schemes may also enhance popular support for guerrilla activities.

The US Comes off Well. Recent US peace initiatives—Secretary Rogers' December 9 speech and the surfacing of US proposals for an Israel-Jordan peace as the Rabat conference opened—probably contributed to the Arab disarray at Rabat by casting doubt on the need for all-out sacrifices in preparation for “inevitable” war. The result was a double benefit for the US: because of our balanced position, the summit was not in the mood to be as critical of the US as expected; and the protracted talk and final breakdown over mobilization of Arab resources meant that the conference ended without an opportunity to turn to consideration of anti-US measures. In the wake of the conference, however, it is possible that extremists may turn to anti-American propaganda themes in their search for a scapegoat.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 7 ARAB SUMMIT. Secret; Noforn. On December 16, Rogers had recommended that President Nixon send a message to King Hassan supporting his moderate position at Summit. (Ibid., POL 15-1 MOR). Yet on December 19, when President's Advisor for National Security Affairs Kissinger provided Nixon with a requested list of steps taken to bolster moderate Arab leaders at the Rabat summit, he omitted Rogers' recommendation and draft letter to Hassan. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1243, Saunders Files, Morocco, 1/20/69-12/31/69)

4. Memorandum From the President's Advisor for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, January 19, 1970 4. Memorandum From the President's Advisor for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, January 19, 19701

Washington, January 19, 1970

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
ACTION
January 19, 1970

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM Henry A. Kissinger [HK initialed]

SUBJECT:

Study of Trends in North Africa

As you know, there has been a series of disturbing developments in North Africa over the past year. Most conspicuous has been the coup in Libya. But we also have President Bourguiba's declining health in Tunisia. Morocco seems calm on the surface, but there has long been dissatisfaction with the government of young King Hassan. Algeria seems to be steering a course of its own with a combination of private American and official French and Soviet aid and it seems to have improved its relations with Morocco and Tunisia recently. But it is the potential power in North Africa, and we have as a government not paid as much attention to it perhaps as we could have.

I propose a modest review of our programs in North Africa as they stack up against the trend of events there. This would involve a CIA estimate of the prospects and a paper in the NSC process reviewing our options in relation to the trends. I would bring this paper at least as far as the NSC Review Group and leave open the judgment on whether it would need to come to the NSC. You have expressed a desire to discuss Libya there at some point, but it may be that the purpose of focusing bureaucratic attention on the problem more actively could be accomplished by this exercise, leaving the results for your study outside of the NSC along with any action decisions that might need to be made.

Recommendation: That you approve the attached National Security Study Memorandum.

Approve [RN initialed 1-21-70]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-169, NSSM Files, NSSM 87. Secret. Sent for action. The President approved the recommendation on January 21.

5. National Security Study Memorandum 87, Washington, January 22, 1970 5. National Security Study Memorandum 87, Washington, January 22, 19701

Washington, January 22, 1970

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C.20506
January 22, 1970

National Security Study Memorandum 87

TO:

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Director of Central Intelligence

The Administrator of Agency for International Development

The Director, U.S. Information Agency

SUBJECT:

Trends and U.S. Options in North Africa

The President has directed a review of the trend of events in North Africa and of U.S. programs, policies and options there.

This review should give attention to, though not be limited by, the following: —the prospect for the further spread of radical government;

—the prospect and likely character of political and economic cooperation among the North African countries;

—the likely Soviet and radical Arab role in those countries;

—the role of European countries;

—the relationship of the Arab-Israeli impasse to trends in North Africa;

—present U.S. programs and policies and resources available for furtherance of U.S. interests;

—U.S. options in response to trends.

The President has directed that a National Intelligence Estimate be prepared by the intelligence community and that an options paper be prepared by the Interdepartmental Group for Africa. This paper should be submitted to the NSC Review Group by March 18.

Henry A. Kissinger

cc:

Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Director, Bureau of the Budget

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-169, NSSM Files, NSSM 87. Secret. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of Bureau of the Budget. A summary of the response is printed as Document 9. This response was later subsumed into NSSM 90, a wider study of “U.S. Interests in and Policy toward the Mediterranean Area,” on February 26. It is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1969-72, volume XIV, Middle East Region, 1969-1972

6. Memorandum From the President's Advisor for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, February 4, 1970 6. Memorandum From the President's Advisor for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, February 4, 19701

Washington, February 4, 1970

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
INFORMATION
February 4, 1970

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM: Henry A. Kissinger [HK initialed]

SUBJECT:

Admiral George Anderson's Report on Mediterranean Trip

Admiral Anderson is just back from a trip to Italy, Greece, Turkey, Cyprus, Malta and Spain. He will compare notes with Messrs. Frank Lincoln and Robert Murphy before submitting a broader report in response to your request for a broad look at the area from Morocco to Iran. But in the meantime he has some reflections he wants to bring to your attention.

His main points are:

[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to North Africa.]

2. Deterioration in North Africa. Those Admiral Anderson talked with emphasized the threat to Tunisia and urged that the U.S. rely more on the Europeans to uphold the Free World position. More specifically in this connection he learned in confidence that the Moroccan government had approached the Spanish and Portuguese proposing a three-member defensive “arrangement.” He believes that Soviet involvement in North Africa is “more real than even our most suspicious political and intelligence authorities credit” and he feels our intelligence “leaves much to be desired” there.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 274, President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, Vol. III. Secret; Nodis. Sent for information. President Nixon underlined a portion of the second paragraph and wrote in the margin, “I completely agree—Except for Tasca—virtually all career State people I have talked to do not adequately recognize this. They keep saying that the June '67 war was a great ‘blow' to Soviet in Mideast. Bunk.”

7. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, February 23, 1970 7. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, February 23, 19701

Washington, February 23, 1970

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WASHINGTON, DC 20520
FEB 23 1970

MEMORANDUM FORMR. HENRY A. KISSINGER
THE WHITE HOUSE

Subject:

Possible Consequences in North Africa of U.S. Response to Israeli Arms Request

Enclosed for your information is a copy of a memorandum prepared for the Acting Secretary by the Acting Assistant Secretary for African Affairs.

[signed] Theodore. L. Eliot, Jr.
Executive Secretary

Enclosure:

Copy of February 14 Memorandum to Acting Secretary NSC

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WASHINGTON, DC 20520
FEB 14 1970
INFORMATION MEMORANDUM

SUBJECT: Possible Consequences in North Africa of U.S. Response to Israeli Arms Request -

The Problem

The President's announcement on January 30 that the decision on the Israeli arms request will be made within the next thirty days, and the secretary's presence in Morocco and Tunisia have focused North African attention on the U.S. response in an ominous way. It is clear that the North Africans expect the decision to be favorable to the Israelis and that all of the governments in the area, including the moderates, would be subjected to substantial pressure by local public opinion, as well as by the radical Arabs, to retaliate against the United States. We believe Morocco and Tunisia would endeavor to resist these pressures. However, they would have to yield to them at least to some degree in view of the recent evidence of the growth of public support in both countries for the Palestine cause.

Discussion

It goes without saying that a decision to postpone action on the Israeli request would have a positive effect on our relations with all four North African states, although not in any dramatic manner.

To the extent that we agree to provide further advanced aircraft, however, we risk severe damage to U.S. interests in the area.

Downgraded at 12-year intervals, not automatically declassified.

Libya

Our most exposed position is in Libya because of our important oil interests, the size of our American colony and the fact that we are still liquidating Wheelus. Libya's recent contract with France for the purchase by the end of 1974 of “some 100” advanced aircraft has of course given added momentum to the Israeli arms request. In a sense, the Libyans “created” the present problem of dealing with the Israelis because of their purchase of Mirages. This fact is, however, unlikely to influence the Libyan reaction in view of the current superiority of the Israeli Air Force and the minimum 3 to 5 year interval before the French aircraft are likely to be operational.

The Libyan reaction could, at worst, mean the rupture of diplomatic relations, which we doubt, or, perhaps, a request that we close our Embassy office in Benghazi or our cultural centers. Pressures against the American-controlled oil industry would certainly be increased, and efforts to improve our bilateral relations and to expand our dialogue with the regime would be severely set back. A physical attack on our installations—permitted by the LARG—is also conceivable.

Tunisia and Morocco

In Tunisia and Morocco, the governments would not wish to take any direct actions against U.S. interests. Popular, and particularly student, discontent with the U.S. decision could, however, result in demonstrations against U.S. installations: the Embassies, the USIS centers, and possibly against Kenitra (U.S. Navy communications facility in Morocco). In the longer run, these same pressures might force Morocco and Tunisia to diverge increasingly from their close relationship with the U.S. The Tunisian government's desire to avoid a confrontation with the students during the Secretary's visit and Prime Minister Ladgham's statement to the Secretary that the U.S. must assume a prime share of the responsibility for Israel's aggressive attitude are two signs of the erosion of the U.S. position. In both countries opposition elements are seizing this issue and the regimes' ties to the U.S. to undermine internal stability.

Algeria

In Algeria the recent improvement in relations would suffer a setback. We believe any possibility of an early resumption of relations would be nullified by a decision favoring the Israelis. In view of Algeria's longer term importance in North Africa, we believe it would be most unfortunate if our relative isolation from the regime should be prolonged.

In our view we should exhaust all non-military alternatives as answers to any Israeli security problem, before moving against North African sentiments; the most provocative signal to the North Africans, of course, would be to furnish additional Phantom jets.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 747, Country Files, Africa General, Vol. I. Secret. According to the February 18 Intelligence Note RAFN-4, on his February 7-11 trip to Morocco and Tunisia, Secretary Rogers, although warmly received, was also met with private diplomatic warnings and unprecedented press attacks over U.S. support for Israel. (Ibid.) For additional information on the Secretary's talks with Moroccan officials, see Document 102, Document 20, and Document 145.

8. National Intelligence Estimate 60-70, Washington, March 12, 1970 8. National Intelligence Estimate 60-70, Washington, March 12, 19701

Washington, March 12, 1970

NIE 60-70 12 March 1970
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 60-70
The Outlook for North Africa

Submitted byDEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

Concurred in

by the UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD As indicated overleaf

12 March 1970

THE OUTLOOK FOR NORTH AFRICA

NOTE

This estimate examines trends and prospects for the next three or four years in the four North African states—Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, and Libya—as well as in the area as a whole.

CONCLUSIONS

A. There are distinct limits on the likely extent of cooperation among the four North African countries. They do have some common interests—a regional perspective, involvement with the Islamic community, and much popular sympathy for the Arab cause against Israel—and some common problems—notably massive unemployment and rapidly increasing population. However, each government places first priority on its own internal political and economic problems. Long-standing territorial disputes among Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia have recently been shelved, and their political relations have improved, but they are not likely to go beyond a moderate degree of economic cooperation and occasional foreign policy coordination. In the Arab-Israeli dispute, Algeria, Tunisia, and Morocco, at least, are likely to support the Palestinians rather than commit sizable resources to the regular Arab armies.

B. The North African governments are turning toward Western Europe—especially France—and away from the close association with either the US or the USSR that characterized their policies in the 1950s and 1960s. Attitudes toward the US are likely to depend to a very large degree on how North African governments interpret US policies concerning arms supply and international trade, but US influence in North Africa will remain severely limited while the US continues closely identified in Arab eyes with Israel and Israel remains in occupation of Arab territory. The USSR is unlikely substantially to improve its modest political and diplomatic position in North Africa, at least as long as current regimes stay in power.

C. Algeria has good prospects for political stability and economic growth over the next few years. It has adequate resources—principally oil and natural gas—to earn the foreign exchange required to finance its 1970-1973 development program, and the Boumediene regime is concentrating on internal problems in a fairly competent way. Evidence on the degree of political support for the government is scanty, but indications of opposition have been few, and most Algerians will probably remain desirous of political tranquility at least for the term of this estimate.

D. In Morocco, King Hassan has focused his efforts on concentrating political power in his own hands. This fact and the country's paucity of resources have resulted in extremely limited social and economic progress. In time, Moroccans are likely to become restive at the continuing deterioration of their situation in comparison to that of their neighbors. The loyalty of the armed forces to the monarchy also is likely slowly to decline. But Hassan's hold on power looks to be good for some years.

E. Under Bourguiba's rule, Tunisia has made notable economic and social advances, but these have been expensive, and the country faces major economic and financial problems in the years ahead. Burguiba's departure from power, which appears likely before long, probably will lead to a period of political instability and eventually to a government more authoritarian in its methods, more actively involved in the Arab cause against Israel, and markedly less close to the US, than the present one.

F. It seems more likely than not that Libya will experience serious political turmoil in the next few years. The military junta continues to display insecurity about its control over the country and uncertainty about its policies. A successor government, however, probably would pursue domestic and Arab policies much like those of the present regime, except that it might be less susceptible to Egyptian influence.

DISCUSSION

I. BACKGROUND

1. The indigenous society and culture of the area now comprising Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, and Libya have long been strongly influenced both from Europe and from the Eastern Mediterranean. Trade, warfare, and power politics have brought North Africa and Europe into constant contact and occasional conflict throughout recorded history. The Arab conquest of the eighth century made North Africa solidly Muslim and imposed Arabic as the area's written language. Ottoman power also prevailed for a time, although limited for the most part to ports and coastal areas. In the 19th and early 20th centuries, European states took over control of the entire area, even settling colonists in much of it.1

2. The colonial period had widespread and lasting effects. The Europeans introduced a modern economy, operated by them for their benefit, in and around the major coastal cities and in some inland areas of particular fertility. They built excellent roads, communications, power facilities, and other infrastructure items, largely in those areas. Marked dualism developed between modern and traditional economies, the latter supporting the vast majority of the indigenous population. In the French-controlled states, French language, culture, and education became widespread; the language in particular was the passport required for those local inhabitants who aspired to move into the European-dominated sectors of the economy and society. To a considerable extent this has continued to the present time, and European influence remains substantial. In Libya, however, where the Italians enforced a form of segregation, the cultural impact was superficial. In the aftermath of independence, Libya came under the cultural, social, and even political influence of the Arab states to the east—particularly Egypt—to a degree not seen in the other North African countries.

3. Neither Arab nor European conquest obliterated the special character of North Africa. The indigenous Berber tribes were not absorbed by foreigners over the centuries; rather they accommodated to their conquerors and often assimilated them, and Berber stock remains identifiable throughout much of the area. The Muslim religion practiced in North Africa is characterized both by pre-Islamic practices and by a tendency toward extremist sects and heresies. Most important, the people in all four countries share a sense of common identity which owes much to the interaction of European, Arab, and Berber influences.

4. As independent nations, however, the four North African states have moved along paths that emphasize their individuality rather than their similarity. In large measure, this is because they had somewhat different colonial experiences, reached independence by different paths, chose disparate political systems and philosophies, and followed dissimilar methods of economic organization and management. They have common interests—a certain regional perspective, involvement with the Islamic community, and support for the Arab cause against Israel—and common problems—notably massive unemployment and about a three percent annual increase in population.2 At present, however, each North African government places first priority on internal problems of political and economic control. Accordingly, it seems appropriate to consider first the domestic situation in the four countries and then relations among them and with foreign states.

II. ALGERIA

5. The Algerian struggle for independence was long, bloody, and extremely destructive; when it ended, half a million people were dead and some 20 to 25 percent of the indigenous population was displaced. The managerial and organizational structure of Algeria was almost totally disrupted by the departure of a million Europeans. Under the best of circumstances, the early years of independence would have been difficult; as events transpired, they were extremely painful. The loss of French managers and consumers and the disruption of daily life led to a sharp and continuing economic decline. Ben Bella's ambitious attempts to acquire international status diverted attention from domestic needs, and ideological squabbling among his intimates interfered with governmental decisions on a wide range of domestic and foreign matters.

6. Since taking power in 1965, Boumediene has concentrated Algerian efforts more on internal matters. He has not abandoned Algeria's strong interest in various national liberation movements, but he has not allowed support for such movements to interfere with important Algerian concerns. He has continued to object to the US role in Vietnam, but he has not let this deter him from seeking advice and expertise from US business firms. And he has taken diplomatic initiatives that have led his neighbors to shelve their claims on Algerian territory, so that potential border incidents are no longer likely to flare up and demand an Algerian reaction.

7. Executive and legislative power rests with Boumediene and a few close associates. The armed forces remain the basic constituency of the regime and ultimate arbiter of power, and senior military leaders are consulted on major policy questions, but overt military involvement in governmental affairs appears to have diminished. The 75,000 man military establishment that was built up after independence has not been significantly expanded in the past several years. Boumediene retains the post of Defense Minister and controls the military through a chosen lieutenant; although himself a product of the army, he now operates an essentially civilian government. The current regime has emphasized results rather than ideology; organization and discipline of the bureaucracy have improved; and young, pragmatic technocrats are increasingly influential. These improvements notwithstanding, government efficiency still suffers from the after-effects of the independence struggle and the relative inexperience of the present administrators. Jockeying for power within the establishment persists, and overstaffing of government agencies is chronic. All things considered, however, the Bomediene regime has substantially improved administrative competence.

8. Since 1967, the Algerian economy has achieved a real annual growth rate of about six percent, owing partly to the government's actions. The new regime put Algeria's formerly chaotic finances in order. Rising foreign exchange receipts—oil revenues and remittances of 500,000 Algerian workers in France—combined with tight restrictions on consumer imports and a cautious approach to new investment, led to a steady accumulation of reserves, which exceeded $600 million at the end of 1969. The Algerians are showing a new willingness to compete for export markets, and semiautonomous state-owned firms now manage nationalized businesses and are replacing the costly worker-management system that had sprung up after independence. During the past year or so, work on investment projects has greatly accelerated and it now seems likely that the bulk of future increases in foreign exchange earnings will be spent to promote economic development.

9. Algeria seems in a position to maintain its economic momentum, at least for the next several years. Projects already under way or completed will permit the production and export of sufficient petroleum and natural gas to finance the 1970-1973 development plan without resort to heavy foreign borrowing. Petroleum production, now at the rate of about 900,000 barrels per day, is likely to increase at an average rate of 5 to 10 percent annually. Output of exportable natural gas is scheduled to rise from 1.5 billion cubic meters (bcm) annually to 5 billion during the same period.3 France has contracted to increase its annual gas purchases from 0.5 bcm to 4 bcm and a French market for at least half of total oil production seems assured. By 1973, Algeria's annual foreign exchange earnings will include about $800-$900 million from oil and about $100 million from natural gas. Locally available fuel also provides a cheap energy source for Algerian industry. Thus a continued growth rate of about 6 percent (3 percent per capita) over the next several years appears attainable within Algerian financial resources.

10. The 1970-1973 development plan emphasizes capital intensive industry that will provide new employment opportunities and better living standards for relatively few people. During this period, the regime is depending on minor investments in the traditional agriculture sector, labor exportation, and outright dole as temporary expedients to retard migration to the cities and to cushion the effects of unemployment. Agriculture is slated to receive relatively little investment in the next few years; in the absence of strong governmental efforts, farming will continue to provide only a scant livelihood for the bulk of the population at least through this decade.

11. The outlook for the Algerian economy beyond the mid-1970s is uncertain. Beginning in 1973, the government intends to channel public investment into light industry and other sectors, with the object of achieving full employment within a decade. In these circumstances, substantial alleviation of the unemployment problem is years away. Realization of these governmental intentions, moreover, depends on continuing growth of foreign exchange earnings and hence on locating adequate new deposits of oil and the requisite markets for oil and natural gas.

12. Our evidence on the degree of political support for the government is scanty; certainly outward manifestations of opposition have been few in recent years. Boumediene apparently does not seek a charismatic image and certainly does not project one, but neither does his diffident manner inspire antagonism. He is gradually erecting a set of largely powerless representative institutions and is moving to bring the trade union, student organizations, and other special interest groups under closer government control. The adult population has passively accepted these initiatives; it will probably remain war weary and in no mood to support revolution or civil uprising that could lead to widespread bloodshed. Students and unemployed youth, although attracted by the regime's revolutionary slogans, dislike its authoritarian style. Their opposition will probably flare up periodically, although it does not pose the same threat as would factional strife within the army and regime. We cannot rule out either assassination or a coup—with unpredictable results—but we think the present regime has a good chance of continuing to govern Algeria for some years to come.

III. MOROCCO

13. In nine years of rule, King Hassan has successfully gathered all political power into his own hands and is intent on maintaining this position. He clearly seeks to protect himself from such modern movements as republicanism, socialism, and pan-Arab nationalism. Whereas for a time after Independence in 1956 the political system was responsive to a wider range of interest groups, it has been greatly narrowed. Some political parties are permitted to exist, to hold meetings, and to publish newspapers (subject to frequent suspension). Otherwise, political activity has been suspended since June 1965, and the King has given no sign that he intends to end this “state of exception,” at least until he is confident that he has arranged to control a future parliament. He relies on traditional palace advisers and increasingly on a group of key officials, many of rural Berber origins. Hasan has placed these individuals in positions of authority in the armed forces, security apparatus, local administration, and major economic sectors.

14. The King is anxious to preserve the foundations of his political control. Hence he has chosen to refurbish traditionally loyalist institutions and to resist social and economic innovations. The overriding attention which the palace gives to political matters has been one factor leading to limited educational opportunities and health facilities in Morocco. Expenditures in these fields are the lowest in the area on a per capita basis; in literacy rate (about 15 percent) and in the proportion of children attending school, Morocco does roughly half as well as the other North African countries. Similarly the primacy of political goals, combined with limited resources and undependable weather, have resulted in a decade of economic stagnation in Morocco. Since Independence, Morocco has received about $1.5 billion in foreign aid, including some $80 million from the US. Rapid population growth, however, has absorbed most economic gains, and per capita income has remained roughly what it was in 1960.

15. Future economic prospects are no brighter. The development plan for 1968-1972 envisages the highest investment level in Moroccan history but aims for a growth rate of only 4 percent; since population is growing at about 3.3 percent annually, fulfillment of the plan would raise per capita incomes by only about one-half of 1 percent per year. Even the modest objectives for the 4 year period will not necessarily be achieved. Goals are predicated on adequate rainfall throughout the plan period, whereas periodic droughts are to be expected in Morocco. Economic growth in the first year of the plan period was 12 to 13 percent, thanks to an excellent harvest after 2 years of drought, but total output declined in 1969. Moreover, Hassan has been extremely reluctant either to force domestic savings and investment or to born abroad on anything except concessional terms. Annual investment targets involving roughly $150 million from foreign sources and $250 million from domestic sources, therefore, may not be met.

16. There is little reason to expect that Hassan's grip on the levers of power will be broken in the near future. His roots and those of the dynasty are deep; his position as religious leader of the Moroccans supplements his temporal role and binds his people to him, especially in the countryside. The King's favored appointees are well rewarded and are not likely to mount a threat to the throne. Because Hassan's father became a leading symbol of the independence movement, anticolonialism did not become antimonarchical; this is an important element in the royal family's strength. Hassan is fully aware that the principal danger lies in the discontented elements in the cities and universities. Occasional outbursts of trouble are likely, but he has shown himself willing firmly to suppress demonstrations and disturbances before they can attract widespread support. Politicians who speak out against him or against existing conditions or policies are harassed, placed under house arrest, or jailed. With a deft combination of force and favor, he probably can suppress or buy off potential dissidents for at least several years to come.

17. Over the longer run, Hassan's ability to retain his throne is open to serious question. Moroccans will come to see that the comparison between Morocco and its neighbors, in social and economic areas at least, increasingly favors the latter. People have been streaming into overcrowded city slums since World War II, and there are no serious attempts at present to devise ways to hold them to the land or to provide housing or jobs in the cities. As the cities grow in size, discontent will probably increase and repression will become more necessary.

18. Moreover, the loyalty of the armed forces to the monarchy is likely to decline over time. Even today, a carefully hatched plot along Libyan lines cannot be ruled out. The urban elite have recognized the military as a promising career for their sons, and young men from educated, relatively progressive and sophisticated city families have entered the officer corps. If the King denies these young officers access to the top ranks and continues to favor the rural Berber element in the armed forces, he eventually will increase, rather than diminish, the threat to himself. If he died, or even if he were overthrown, the elements which now support his regime might be able to work together to maintain control. But whether this occurred, or whether presently suppressed radical elements succeeded in coming to power, would depend on the circumstances of Hassan's departure and the political situation at the time, including the attitudes and power of the military.

IV. TUNISIA

19. Since independence, Tunisia has been led by Habib Bourguiba, a product of the urban middle class who thinks and acts much like a French politician of the 1930s. Bourguiba's style has always been dramatic and abrupt; he has leapt forward with new ideas, then inched backward to a level of innovation that his countrymen would tolerate. Rather than use religious tradition to bolster his own position, he has openly advocated discarding the trappings of medieval Islam. He has been equally innovative in economic affairs—vineyards have been uprooted to make way for other crops, communal farming has been introduced, new industries have sprung up throughout the small country. Tunisia has embarked on a widespread birth control program and has poured money into education and health.

20. To date the results of this activist approach have been mixed. On the positive side, the economy has grown at an annual rate of almost 4.5 percent for the past decade, while the rate of population growth—though it has risen slowly—is about 2.8 percent. Industry now provides about 15 percent of the national product, compared to about 10 percent at independence. Over half of the eligible children are in school, and literacy is increasing rapidly. The Destourian Socialist Party began as a pre-independence popular movement and has functioned reasonably well. Elections have been held on schedule and, within the limits of a one party system, have provided a modicum of choice and a minimum of violence. Tunisia has stayed largely aloof from the Arab-Israeli conflict and has maintained peaceful, if not always amicable, relations with its neighbors; resources that might have been absorbed by a large military establishment have been put to civilian use.

21. Yet, Tunisia's progress is no more a guarantee of a promising future than Morocco's relative stagnation is of imminent revolution. Success has been costly in both monetary and social terms. Maintaining and expanding the economy has absorbed over $1 billion in foreign aid (including about $600 million from the US) since independence and the gap between foreign earnings and foreign expenditures has seldom fallen below $100 million per annum. Tourism has begun to bring in foreign revenues, but it cannot hope to earn enough to replace aid for years. Economic problems are likely to present a major challenge to any Tunisian government in the next few years. An immediate concern is to repair extensive damage to roads, railways, and farms caused by disastrous floods in 1969. Most of the relatively easy opportunities for stimulating growth have already been seized; the country has been exhaustively explored for new mineral resources without much success. Foreign debt service charges have more than doubled in the past five years and will remain high at least for several years to come. Private foreign investment has been discouraged by a government which has nationalized or collectivized virtually the entire economy; only tourism has remained in private hands and attractive to foreign investors.

22. The Bourguiba regime has already begun to reverse the extreme policy of forced agricultural collectivization, started by former economic czar Ahmed Ben Salah, which had aroused strong opposition. The balance between collectively owned and individually owned agricultural land probably will shift back somewhat in favor of the independent farmer, and there are pressures which may over the long term bring some return to private ownership in such fields as retail trade. Even such minor corrections, however, will antagonize that element in Tunisian society (principally confined to the universities at present) which believes that Ben Salah's program would have been successful if pursued to its conclusion. In any event, socialism in some form is likely to remain the dominant economic philosophy. Moreover, inability to attract sufficient foreign aid and other capital to finance foreign exchange requirements is likely to force Tunisian to retrench economically; the need for enforcing austerity is likely, in turn, to lend to more authoritarian political methods.

23. If Habib Bourguiba were still in full vigor, Tunisia probably could get through several more years without severe political trouble. However, he has been seriously ill several times in the past two years; his age (67), general health, and apparent loss of political acumen make it extremely doubtful that he will be able effectively to direct Tunisian affairs much longer. None of his close associates appears to have the personality and political savvy necessary to make the system work when he is gone. Prime Minister Bahi Ladgham, whom Bourguiba has appointed as successor, has been running the day-to-day business of the government for some months but he has shown himself to be somewhat indecisive, compromising among various functions in a manner that satisfies no one.

24. While Ladgham probably will become the titular head of government when Bourguiba leaves the scene, we doubt that he will be able to maintain control for long. He will be challenged by younger elements within his party who are impatient at the party's growing immobilism and eager for power. There will be challenges from without the party—e.g., by men expelled from it for failure to follow Bourguiba's command and by presently embryonic ideological movements among students. The military, which has exerted virtually no influence on government policy, might seek a political voice in a post-Bourguiba government. The likely course of such challenges is unclear; much will depend on the time and circumstances of Bourguiba's departure. We believe, however, that a post-Bourguiba government is likely to be more authoritarian in its methods and more in tune with Arab world trends than the present one.

LIBYA

25. After six months in power, Libya's Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) continues to display a sense of insecurity about its position and uncertainty about its domestic and foreign policies. There are indications of disagreement within the RCC and of discontent within the country, focusing most notably on relations between Libya and Egypt.RCC President Qaddafi's advocacy of extremely close relations with Nasser and his transfer of Libyan troops to Egypt have already caused one split within the leadership. In the face of persistent opposition from other members of the RCC, he has temporized. The Egyptian presence in Libya has remained for some time at the level of about 1,500 troops and about 500 advisers, mostly civilians. If Qaddafi is willing to play down his affinity for Egypt, he probably can remove the most serious immediate cause of domestic opposition.

26. The RCC's actions so far have underscored both the Libyan and the Arab character of the revolution but have shown no other consistent pattern. It is clearly determined to identify with the militant Arab line toward Israel and has increased its financial contributions to Egypt. It insisted on the early termination of the US and UK military presence. It completed the Libyanization of foreign-owned banks which had begun under the monarchy. It introduced partial prohibition, presumably out of deference to Islamic fundamentalism. It removed foreign-language signs and deleted English language courses from the school curriculum. It carried out widespread arrests of politicians, businessmen, and senior military personnel associated with the old regime. It also began negotiations—originally scheduled by the Idris government—for an upward revision of the price structure on which Libyan oil revenues are calculated. It turned almost immediately to France for military aircraft but continued to seek tanks from the UK; if the British refuse the Libyan bid, France is likely to be asked for tanks and other equipment as well.

27. We have little to go on in assessing likely political developments in Libya over the longer term. RCC has now installed its own members in the key cabinet posts and has improved its ability to monitor the daily activities of the bureaucracy. It is apparently making an effort to avoid exacerbating tribal or regional tensions and rivalries. It has purged the military of followers of the old regime, who would almost certainly have been a threat to the new order, but it probably has failed to identify the potential dissidents among officers who remain on active duty. Moreover, there are divisions even among the junta. It seems more likely than not that Libya will experience serious political turmoil in the next few years, but there is little basis for predicting the various circumstances and contingencies that might arise. Economic problems per se are not likely to bring on domestic strife, thanks to Libya's very large oil revenues, which amounted to some $1 billion in 1969. If a part of the present RCC were to seize control or if another group of officers should move in, the odds are that a successor government would pursue domestic and Arab policies—except perhaps in regard to Egypt—much like those of the present regime.

28. A Libyan attempt to nationalize oil production does not appear likely. Nevertheless, it cannot be entirely ruled out, especially in the event of major Arab-Israeli military hostilities. The RCC is deeply committed to the Arab cause, and oil is the major weapon at Libyan disposal. An embargo of oil shipments to certain countries is much more likely in such circumstances than is nationalization. Selective oil embargos, however, are relatively easy to circumvent, especially in view of the many alternative sources of oil. Should Libya choose to attempt nationalization, it is in a unique position to carry through without severe damage to itself. Twenty-five percent of the crude oil imported in 1968 by the European Common Market countries—and 43 percent of West German imports—came from Libya. Independent oil companies in importing countries would probably not refuse to buy oil from nationalized companies, as long as the price remained competitive. Furthermore, Libya has accumulated foreign exchange reserves adequate to ride out a lengthy period during which it could seek new customers; imports other than oil field equipment could be maintained at current levels for roughly two years with the funds Libya now has on hand. The strong Libyan position in regard to nationalization will diminish in a year or two with rising oil production from the Gulf of Guinea—principally Nigeria—and with substantial increases in world tanker tonnage. In any event, with Libyan financial support for Egypt now running at a high level,4 Arab solidarity may act more to protect than to threaten Western oil interests.

VI. FOREIGN INFLUENCES AND POLICIES

A. Arab and African Affairs

29. The recent shelving of long-standing territorial claims among the French-speaking states of North Africa have markedly improved their political relations. These disputes, which kept tensions high and even provoked border clashes, have now been formally resolved or set aside at Algeria's initiative. Since January 1969, Algeria has concluded treaties with Morocco and with Tunisia that call for permanent peace between the parties, renunciation of force in the case of disputes, and non-adherence by either party to any pact or coalition directed against the other. Boumediene also has helped promote contacts that have led to Morocco's formal recognition of Mauritania, thus, in effect, renouncing long-standing Moroccan claims to that country. And Tunisia, Algeria, and Mauritania appear willing to cooperate with Morocco in pressing Spain to relinquish political control of the Spanish Sahara.

30. With territorial issues shelved, the North African countries may move forward on economic collaboration. For example, iron ore deposits in Algeria would become profitable to exploit if transportation across Morocco to the Atlantic could be arranged. Negotiations for a preferential trade zone in North Africa (perhaps including Mauritania) were slated to resume in March 1970 but were postponed; if such an agreement eventually is reached, it would afford some small advantages to each of the participants. However, all of the North African countries are concerned principally with their internal problems and have a distinct sense of their own individuality; moreover, their international economic interests are divergent. For these reasons, a moderate degree of economic and occasional foreign policy coordination represents the likely limit of their cooperation.

31. The revolution in Libya, however, has helped to stimulate cooperation among the other North African states, and future events in Libya will have a substantial impact throughout the area. For Morocco and Tunisia, the Libyan revolution was a blow, raising the specter of the overthrow of conservative governments by radicals and removing one more country from the dwindling ranks of Arab states maintaining an avowedly pro-Western foreign policy. The Algerian Government probably cheered the revolution, but the subsequent increase of Egyptian influence in Libya was no more welcome in Algiers than in Rabat or Tunis. Algeria would like to have Libya as a collaborator on oil policy and an independent member of the Arab family, rather than a stooge or tool of Cairo. Morocco and Tunisia are worried about Libya as a possible base for Egyptian—and perhaps eventually Soviet—subversion. There are clear signs, however, that the present Libyan leaders are strongly opposed to both communist ideology and Soviet tutelage and that some are equally fearful of Egyptian intentions. If Libyan nationalists prevail in Tripoli, the other countries will be somewhat reassured. On the other hand, if Libya pursues a pro-Egyptian course, this will probably lead to greater political collaboration among Tunisia, Morocco, and Algeria.

32. Since 1967, the Arab-Israeli dispute has increasingly engaged the attentions of the North African states. Algeria, Tunisia, and Morocco do not wish to become deeply involved but, for reasons of both domestic and inter-Arab politics, cannot afford to remain entirely aloof. They wish to minimize the commitment of their resources to the buildup of regular Arab armies arrayed against Israel, which they probably see as a futile effort; hence, their support has been given principally to the Palestinians. Algeria's long-standing support for the fedayeen is likely to continue and increase. Both Morocco and Tunisia will probably step up somewhat their financial and verbal support for the Palestinian cause.

33. The new Libyan regime has chosen to join the ranks of the militant Arabs and to increase its financial contribution to the cause. Libya's military forces are very small. The regime has arranged to purchase over 100 jet aircraft from France, but the bulk of these planes are not scheduled for delivery for some years. Moreover, their effective operational use will require extended training for pilots and maintenance personnel and establishment of an adequate ground support system. Even if Libyan planes were made available to Egypt, Egypt lacks the personnel to operate them. Hence, Libyan planes will not materially affect Arab military capabilities against Israel at least for the next three or four years.

34. In the event of another major round of Arab-Israeli hostilities, the extent of North African participation would depend in part on the duration of the fighting. If it dragged on long enough to make reinforcement possible (or the failure to send reinforcements too obvious), Algerian and Libyan units certainly would be provided, and probably Moroccan and Tunisian ones as well. The depth of popular emotion in all the North African countries probably would compel such actions, although Tunis and Rabat, at any rate, would move reluctantly.

35. By and large, the North African countries play only a limited role in Arab and African affairs. Algeria's national oil company has cooperation agreements with national oil companies in Yemen, South Yemen, and Iraq and has proposed similar arrangements with Libya and Syria. Both Arab and Islamic summits have recently been held in Morocco. The Algerians and Tunisians have occasionally exchanged visits with some ruling political parties in Arab states. No major expansion of such activity is likely. Under Qaddafi, Libya is actively cultivating closer relations with the Eastern Arabs, especially Egypt and the Sudan. Libya's money, however, is likely to be more consequential than its political role.

36. All four North African states belong to the Organization of African Unity, and all but Libya have on occasion been quite active in African affairs. These interests, however, have never been great; the vast desert that separates black from North Africa and the wide disparities of culture and race give the two areas little in common. Algeria sympathizes with and provides office space and subsidies for the representatives of a score of liberation movements, e.g., those of Angola and Mozambique. It also cooperates to some extent with the Cubans in such ventures. In general, however, Algerian enthusiasm for these groups has declined in recent years and is unlikely to increase.

B. The USSR 5

37. The Soviet Union is unlikely to make substantial political and diplomatic gains in North Africa while current regimes remain in power. The new Libyan regime has already brushed aside several Soviet arms offers and has recently inspired Libyan newspapers to launch an anticommunist press campaign. The USSR cannot expect greatly enhanced influence in either Morocco or Tunisia under existing regimes; even in the event of a revolution in either country, any growth of Soviet influence would be limited by North African suspicions, traditional cultural and economic ties to Western Europe, and fear of Soviet-Egyptian collaboration. The Egyptians, for their part, do not appear to favor a greater Soviet role in Libya.

38. Over the past year or so, relations between Algeria and the USSR have cooled. The Algerians apparently have rebuffed Soviet requests for some sort of naval facility and have repeatedly called for the withdrawal of the fleets of non-Mediterranean powers from the Mediterranean Sea. Boumediene appears to be making a deliberate effort to limit Soviet influence in Algeria; he has recently concluded a small military procurement and training agreement with France that is evidently the beginning of an attempt to diversify sources of arms procurement.

C. EUROPE

39. France is likely to expand its already substantial influence in North Africa in the years ahead. Recent French policy initiatives appeal to the North Africans. Among them are an emphasis on the role of the Palestinians in the Arab-Israeli dispute, the embargo on arms sales to Israel, and willingness to sell arms to some Arab customers. France favors eventual withdrawal of non-riparian naval forces from the Mediterranean and may indeed be orchestrating a campaign to that end. The small sale of French arms to Algeria and the subsequent multimillion dollar aircraft deal with Libya will probably be followed by further arms sales in North Africa. Over 600,000 North Africans presently work in France and this number may rise somewhat. The French Government undoubtedly will attempt to promote the commercial interests of French oil companies and other French businesses in North Africa. France is also likely to court North Africa by providing increased technical assistance, by continuing to buy North African products, and by promoting North African efforts to expand preferential access to the European Economic Community (EEC).

40. This is not to say that relations between France and the North African countries will be uniformly smooth. Even during De Gaulle's day, there were serious and unresolved disagreements between Algeria and France—notably over French reneging on a contract to purchase Algerian wine. Other bilateral problems are likely to arise in the next few years. In addition, impending renegotiation of Franco-Algerian oil agreements is bound to cause some frictions between the two. France has recently normalized relations with Morocco and made some conciliatory gestures toward Tunisia as well. It is likely to increase economic and military aid to both—though probably not as much as they would like. The North African countries will continue to compete with one another for the French market—a major recipient of their oil and agricultural goods—and will seek special favors at one another's expense. Thus periodic strains in relations among the North African states and in dealings between France and individual states are likely.

41. A further diversification of North Africa's international ties is likely in the 1970s. While West Germany, Italy, and the UK are not likely to equal France or the US in diplomatic, political, or economic influence in the area, all three are likely to improve their position. Spain will also try to cultivate its Arab neighbors, but it is not likely to accede to Moroccan desires for control of the Spanish Sahara; relations between Spai n and North Africa, therefore, are likely to remain cool.

D. The US

42. US relations with Morocco and Tunisia are cordial; the US has important commercial interests in Libya and Algeria but official relations only with the former. Friendly government to government relations are almost certain to persist between the US and Morocco and Tunisia, at least as long as the present regimes remain in power there. Both regimes look to US friendship as in some measure a bulwark against domestic as well as foreign enemies. Beyond this, attitudes of all four countries toward the US are likely to depend to a very large degree on how they interpret and react to US policies and actions on matters going beyond North Africa itself. Among these are, for example, the question of arms sales to Israel and diplomatic positions in the Arab-Israeli issue, support or opposition to North African countries association with the EEC (since the US is formulating a single policy toward all such applications), US policies on imports of oil and natural gas (the latter affecting a tentative arrangement for the sale of $1.4 billion worth of Algerian gas in the US over the next 25 years), and the general availability of foreign aid and investments.

43. So long as the US remains closely identified in Arab eyes with Israel and Israel remains in occupation of Arab territory, any substantial growth of US influence in North Africa is highly unlikely. Indeed, frictions and irritations are almost certain to recur at frequent intervals. However, if the Arab-Israeli issue does not flare up into widespread new hostilities, we anticipate a continued gradual warming of Algerian-US commercial relations. The existing governments of Tunisia and Morocco will continue to cooperate with the US, but perhaps less readily than in the past; warming North African relations with France, reductions in the level of US aid, and growing doubt in both Tunisia and Morocco about American willingness to actively defend the regimes will all work to loosen ties to the US. In sum, now that the shock of independence and decolonization have been weathered, the North African states are once again turning toward Western Europe and deemphasizing the close association with either the US or the USSR that characterized the 1950s and 1960s

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79-R01012A, Box 390. Secret; Controlled Dissemination. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, Defense, and NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. The Director of CIA submitted this estimate with the concurrence of all members of USIB with the exception of the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on grounds that it was outside their jurisdiction.

1 France moved into Algeria in 1830, took over Tunisia in 1881, and joined with Spain to divide Morocco in 1912. Italy occupied Libya in 1911.

2 Current populations of the North African countries are estimated as follows: Algeria—13.6 million, Morocco-15.3 million, Tunisia—4.8 million, Libya-1.9 million.

3 Under a tentative agreement between Algeria and the El Paso Natural Gas Co., export to the US of 10 bcm/year of Algerian natural gas for 25 years is scheduled to begin in November 1973. Financing of the facilties for this additional production has not yet been arranged.

4 Under agreements reached at Khartoum in 1967, Libya gives Eyypt an annual subsidy of $59 million. In late 1969, Qadaffi offered Nasser an additional $96 million and may provide such extra sums occasionally in the future.

5 See NIE 11-6-70, “Soviet Policies In the Middle East and Mediterranean Area,” dated 5 March 1970, SECRET, for a fuller discussion of the USSR's political, economic, and military goals and activities in the North African area.

9. Analytical Summary, Washington, April 17, 1970 9. Analytical Summary, Washington, April 17, 19701

Washington, April 17, 1970

April 17, 1970

SUMMARY

Trends and U.S. Options in North Africa

I. SITUATION IN NORTH AFRICA

A. The North African Countries — Morocco seems likely, barring assassination, to remain in the hands of King Hassan, but his ability—or that of a conservative successor government—to survive over the longer run remains open to serious question as long as he refuses to permit significant socio-political innovation. Hassan still regards the U.S. as a major patron.

— Algeria's “revolutionary” government is more pragmatic in practice than its rhetoric would suggest. Although far from effective in management and still occasionally vocal on international issues and active in supporting some liberation movements, it has become increasingly introspective and concerned with domestic development. One measure of this pragmatism is a strong continuing relationship with U.S. business despite the absence of official diplomatic relations. Boumedienne seems wary of too heavy a dependence on the USSR or France and interested in adding other strings to his diplomatic bow. In the long run, Algeria seems likely to aspire to regional hegemony.

— Tunisia has been the most innovative and in many ways the most effective of the North African countries in terms of its own political and economic management. It has also been the most outspoken in supporting U.S. foreign policy positions. With President Bourguiba's illness, however, Tunisia has entered a delicate transitional stage politically. The government is likely to emerge—at the very least—less in tune with the U.S. and more Arab in outlook and rhetoric.

— Libya is still something of a question mark because its revolutionary government is still inexperienced and threatened by challenges from within. There seems no question that it will remain close to Arab causes in posture and in providing financial support. One tempering element will be Libya's dependence on oil revenues and desire to save a substantial proportion of them for Libya's own use. Nationalization of the oil companies seems a less likely prospect that severe truncation of past concessional arrangements, for the government seems interested in creating an image of putting the companies in their place without upsetting working arrangements if they can.

— In general, U.S. intelligence feels that it does not seem likely that the USSR will achieve the degree of dominance that would be required for achievement of its strategic objectives in North Africa in the absence of some seriously destabilizing series of events such as prolonged military conflict between Arabs and Israelis, or western disengagement from North Africa.

B. U.S. interests. — The basic U.S. interest is negative: That neither the region as a whole nor any of the countries there be dominated by a hostile power capable of effective military action against NATOinterests.

— The U.S. strategic interest is, therefore, derivative. Libya and Algeria are major petroleum suppliers to France and West Germany. The Mediterranean sea lanes are essential to the protection of southern Europe. A significant Soviet military position in North Africa could complicate NATO defense by multiplying its military problems and exposing Spain and other southern European countries to a more direct threat. The psychological impact on the Alliance could also be significant.

— Without strategic access through the Mediterranean the U.S. would be cut off from the Middle East. The alternative land and air access would depend in large measure on military rights we might enjoy in Spain; routes to the north would be less certain.

— Present U.S. economic interests are concentrated in Libya (2.5% of total U.S. overseas direct investment by book value) where oil investments return about $750 million net to our balance of payments. There is a much smaller but growing interest in Algeria. Both countries offer modest prospects for U.S. trade over the longer run.

C. Summary of key trends. — There will be opportunities for the U.S. private sector to build a network of relationships in North Africa, but all American interests will be subject to intermittent pressures to the extent the U.S. is identified in the Arab mind as anti-Arab and pro-Israeli.

— The trend toward militancy on both domestic and Mid-Eastern issues seems clear; the political consequences will depend in part on the ability of incumbent governments to satisfy rising domestic and social expectations as well as on events in the area.

— France has decided to give primary strategic attention to North Africa. North Africa may become again more accessible to Western European influence than it was in the immediate post-independence period of the early 1960's.

— The USSR has met only limited successes in North Africa despite its pro-Arab positions. The future will depend on the extent of satisfactory European-North African relationships and the course of events in the Near East.

— Détente in the Maghreb is welcome but fragile, at least in the short term. While limited cooperation may be possible in economic fields, the most serious long-term impediment may be the latent Algerian tendency to seek regional hegemony.

— In short, a relative decline in the US position can be expected over the next 3-5 years because of warming North African relations with Europe, the downward trend in U.S. assistance, the U.S. identification with Israel.

II. OPERATIONAL ISSUES

Apart from the question of general U.S. posture toward North Africa, a number of operational issues are before the U.S.

A. USN Communications Station in Kenitra, Morocco. This is an important part of the system used to communicate with US naval forces in the Mediterranean and with CINCSTRIKE forces that might be deployed into the area. [text not declassified] Moving the facility to Spain would cost at least $9 million and operations might be degraded. There is no immediate question about the tenure of this facility, but a lessening of U.S. aid or a change in Morocco's political posture would raise one. The question is whether we should begin relocating or wait till pressures develop.

B. Libyan F-5's. In June 1969 the former Libyan Government received a U.S. letter of offer to sell eight F-5 aircraft for delivery in early 1971 to supplement 10 purchased in 1967. The change in government and the U.S. withdrawal from Wheelus changes the original assumption of the program—that working with the Libyan air force would be a useful way of prolonging U.S. tenure at Wheelus. Now the new Libyan government is pressing us to say whether delivery will be made.

C. European preferences. Arrangements for partial association with the European Common Market have been negotiated by Morocco and Tunisia. Algerian special arrangements derived from the Treaty of Rome but have been cut back. All of these special arrangements entail preferences that discriminate against U.S. as well as other third-country exports. The U.S. has protested against these arrangements as inconsistent with the GATT. At the same time the U.S. is interested in seeing closer North African ties with Europe evolve. The question arises whether the U.S. would wish to qualify its blanket opposition to preferential agreements not conforming to GATT.

D. Military assistance—Morocco and Tunisia. Current programs are running at a level of $7 million in credit sales to Morocco and $3 million in grants to Tunisia. The problem arises to what extent the U.S. should go on providing such assistance to what may turn out to be transitory regimes in the face of Congressional opposition to providing such aid to developing countries-especially Arab countries.

E. Economic assistance—Morocco and Tunisia. U.S. aid is declining (1) because appropriations are declining and (2) because AID has deliberately encouraged a multilateral framework for aid (IBRD consultative group). Are there political reasons for trying to maintain present levels?

F. The third country surrogate. The French are seeking a predominant political role—for primarily French and not broad Western or U.S. interests in mind. The question exists to what extent the Western European presence in North Africa may compete with and not necessarily complement U.S. interests.

G. U.S. intervention. In view of U.S. interests in Morocco and Tunisia, the question has been posed, especially by Tunisia, whether the U.S. would move if Tunisia were attacked either by Algeria or Libya. While avoiding a security guarantee which would be politically difficult in the U.S., the U.S. in its contingency planning could decide for itself how far it would be willing to go.

H. Relations with Algeria. The Hickenlooper Amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act makes impossible the extension of economic assistance to Algeria from public funds so long as Algeria does not take appropriate steps to provide prompt and adequate compensation for American property it has sequestered. This precludes conclusion of an investment guaranty agreement. The question arises whether the Executive Branch should seek repeal of the Amendment or other legislative measures that would make a guaranty possible.

III. POLICY ALTERNATIVES

The strategies outlined below are applied to the issues described above in the table at the last page of this summary. The broad alternatives are:

Alternative 1—“low political profile.” To withdraw from an active official role in North Africa and to leave primary responsibility in the hands of the Western Europeans.

The arguments for this approach are consistency with the Guam doctrine (in leaving to states of the area primary responsibility for their own security) and facing the Europeans with assuming greater responsibility for an area where their interests are in greater jeopardy than direct U.S. interests.

The arguments against are that this could sacrifice a U.S. position—especially in Tunisia and Morocco—with no assurance that the Europeans are inclined to uphold Western security interests in the area. It would also have psychological repercussions on other friends throughout the area if they thought the U.S. had “written off” the area.

Alternative 2—“selectivity” in favor of Algeria and Libya. To recognize explicitly that long-term American interests in North Africa lie with the militant “haves,” to adjust our policies and programs to this fact, but to disengage from Morocco and Tunisia gradually.

The argument for this approach is mainly putting ourselves on what may well be the wave of the future since the potential power center lies in Algeria and the resource base in Algeria and Libya (including the greatest U.S. investment).

The argument against is mainly that this would put us in the position of walking out on two good friends, however transitional their current state may be. It would seem to write them off and polarize North Africa unnecessarily.

Alternative 3—“selectivity” in favor of Tunisia and Morocco. To continue our present policy emphases in favor of Tunisia and Morocco but to promote longer-term economic and perhaps political relationships with Algeria and Libya. [This is essentially present policy.]

The argument for this approach is that it builds on present positions while still leaving the door open for more effective commercial and political relationships with Algeria and Libya.

The argument against is that this approach would leave us less than aggressive in protecting the substantial U.S. investment in Libya and backing regimes that may be destined for short life.

Alternative 4—forward strategy. To decide that U.S. interests in the Mediterranean basin are important enough to require a major effort to preserve the U.S. (and Western) presence in the southwestern quadrant of the basin; to make an aggressive play for influence in all four North African countries even at some domestic U.S. political cost.

The arguments for this approach would be essentially to demonstrate the U.S. intention to stay in this area and to compete actively for influence and that the U.S. does not walk out on its friends. Given doubt about what the Europeans can be relied on to achieve, only U.S. effort can be counted on.

The arguments against are that this would engage the U.S. in an area that is really of principal concern to Western Europe and that the U.S. does not really have the resources given other higher priorities around the world or the domestic political support for such a policy given the fact that this would involve supporting some enemies of Israel.

Alternatives

Issues. 1 Low Political Profile 2 Selectivity Algeria-Libya 3 Selectivity Tunisia-Morocco 4 Forward Strategy

A. Kenitra Withdraw Remain Remain Remain

B. Libyan F-5s Cancel Deliver Cancel Deliver

C. European Preferences *Qualified Acceptance Qualified Acceptance Qualified Acceptance Challenge

D. MAP-Morocco-Tunisia Phase out Minimize Continue Continue

E. Economic Assistance Morocco-Tunisia Phase out Continue Continue Expand

F. Third Country Surrogate Accept Reject Reject Reject

G. US Intervention Reject Accept** (qualified) Accept (qualified) Accept (qualified)

H. Relations with Algeria
a. Hickenlooper Amendment Keep Seek to eliminate Keep Seek to eliminate

b. El Paso Natural Gas Support Support Support Support

* Reservation of US right to seek offsetting compensation in order to preserve US position elsewhere.

** No formal or informal security guarantee; unilateral US decision to consult on appropriate measures with other interested governments if any of four states were subject to external attack

1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Box CL 303, NSC Committees and Panels, Review Group, May 1970. Secret. The entire options paper can be found in National Archives,NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-169, NSSM 87. The trends outlined in this document are discussed in greater detail in NIE 60-70, printed as Document 8.

10. Memorandum From the Acting Staff Director (Lichtblau) to the National Security Council Interdepartmental Group for Africa, Washington, May 11, 1970 10. Memorandum From the Acting Staff Director (Lichtblau) to the National Security Council Interdepartmental Group for Africa, Washington, May 11, 19701

Washington, May 11, 1970

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WASHINGTON
Revised AF/NSC-IG Memorandum No. 53
May 11, 1970

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL INTERDEPARTMENTAL GROUP FOR AFRICA

TO:

AF/NSC-IG

SUBJECT:

NSSM 87

The Department of State understands that no substantive action by the NSC on NSSM 87 may be expected in the near future. Consequently, the question arises as to whether any action should be taken at the level of the Inter-Departmental Group.

In view of the substantial amount of analysis that went into the preparation of NSSM 87 and the wide area of agreement reached with respect to the definition of our interests in North Africa, it is suggested that the Review Group be informed of the Inter-Departmental Group's judgment that although no further action is required at this time with respect to NSSM 87, the following consensus does exist at the Inter-Departmental level: “Within the limits imposed by its resources, the United States should continue an active relationship with North Africa where it maintains appreciable interests. These interests include Moroccan and Tunisian goodwill and their general understanding of U.S. policies, access by the U.S. to communications facilities at Tangier and Kenitra, the improvement of relations with Algeria, the important U.S. private investments in Libya, and potentially important commercial and investment opportunities for American firms. Because of its geographic relationship to the Mediterranean, North Africa will also figure in wider U.S. concerns.

“For historical and other reasons, Western European governments may also be expected to be active in varying degrees in North Africa. Such activity may generally be beneficial to broader Western interests in the area and could coincide with those of the United States. Thus, while remaining mindful of its own specific interests and concerned with their protection, the U.S. should be generally receptive to Western European involvement in North Africa.

“In our relations with area governments, changes in their internal character and possibly in their policies may be expected; we should avoid involvement to the extent possible in those internal changes and remain prepared to cooperate with all governments in the area in furtherance of our interests.

“Decisions on specific issues as they arise in North Africa should be made with the foregoing general posture in mind.”

Your comments are requested by May 18 on the acceptability of the foregoing procedure and statement of consensus.

[signed] George E. Lichtblau
Acting Staff Director, AF/NSC-IG
Extension 20857 Room 5238 NS

Distribution:

AF - Mr. Newsom

CIA - Mr. Roosevelt

JCS - Brig. Gen. Edwards

DOD/ISA - Mr. Lang

NSC - Mr. Morris

NSC - Mr. Saunders

AID - Dr. Adams

USIA - Mr. Reinhardt

AF/N:JJBlake:ac:ab

5/11/70 x 20857

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 1-1 AFR-US. Secret. The minutes of the May 21 Senior Review Group meeting on NSSM 90, into which NSSM 87 was folded, are printed in Foreign Relations, 1969-72, volume XIV, Middle East Region, 1969-1972.

11. Response to National Security Study Memorandum 90, Washington, June 12, 1970 11. Response to National Security Study Memorandum 90, Washington, June 12, 19701

Washington, June 12, 1970

[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to North Africa.]

Mediterranean region is vital to Europe's interests. In fact, the Mediterranean can logically be viewed as an adjunct Europe, and our policies towards the region could be largely cast in terms of our relations to Europe.

Yet the north and central European countries have not tended to see the Mediterranean as a region whose security required their participation.

[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to North Africa.]

The picture is not quite this static, however, and there has been some movement in the past several years as a result of the Europeans' growing economic and political capabilities, the increased Soviet presence, and the deteriorating political situation in much of the North Africa and the Middle East.

[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to North Africa.]

France

DeGaulle saw the Mediterranean region as an important area for developing his third force concept—in a sense, the fulcrum of the lever that was to stretch from Southeast Asia to Latin America. He sought to circumscribe the US role and prestige and reversed France's pro-Israeli policy of the 1956 war to bring it more into line with the aspirations of the Arabs. Under Pompidou, the Mediterranean has assumed an even more central role. The new French leadership has evidently decided to husband its resources by retrenching on some of DeGaulle's distant enterprises and concentrating on the promising area nearer to home.

Pompidou has moved to strengthen there the French position in the Mediterranean region by: —removing political irritants and continuing investment and aid technical assistance programs to reinforce the French position in the former North African territories.

—trying assiduously to keep great power intervention in the Arab-Israeli dispute in a four-power arrangement with French participation;

—promoting arms sales (and thus increasing France's influence) in Spain, Maghreb, Greece, and Iraq;

—taking a concerned view of developments in Lebanon;

—toying with ideas for a neutralization of the Mediterranean and showing increasing interest in some sort of Western Mediterranean entente;

—and, most dramatically, agreeing to sell Mirage aircraft to Libya as the first step in a broad program of economic and military cooperation.

In sum, France has reasserted itself as a force to be reckoned with in the Mediterranean region.

France's interests in the Mediterranean are not only the product of its quest for grandeur. It relies on Libya and Algeria for 45 percent of its oil, and Iraq contributes another 20 percent. Proceeds from sales of arms contribute significantly to French foreign exchange earnings. A solid position in North Africa helps ensure continued access to and influence in Francophone Black Africa. An active Mediterranean policy offers some hope of developing strength against a Soviet presence in the Mediterranean that the French view with concern and an American presence that they view with something less than enthusiasm.

The French are aware, however, that the American presence is still essential. Even in the darkest days of the Franco-US relationship, DeGaulle made clear that he did not want to see the Sixth Fleet withdrawn. Indeed, it is the protective umbrella of the US presence that enables France to pursue its Mediterranean policy.

French hopes of offering an alternative to both the U.S. and the USSR are far from realization and their prospects of becoming the premier power in the Mediterranean are actually slim. The other regional states are no more enthusiastic about French domination than they would be about Soviet or U.S. hegemony. Particularly the former French colonies are anxious to diversify their support in order to avoid the reimposition of a de facto colonial situation presided over by France. The Eastern Arabs, while welcoming France's attitude, know well that only the USSR or the U.S. can decisively influence affairs in their region.

A French role could be effective as the principal component of increased European involvement in Mediterranean affairs. It is difficult to envision France sharing a leadership position with others, however, and the other Europeans would probably find France an extremely difficult partner.

We, too, might find France's role a difficult one. It has already been unhelpful in the Arab-Israeli question, and is not likely to be amenable to suggestions from us on its Mediterranean policy. On the other hand, France has already played a useful role in Algeria by providing an alternative to Soviet involvement, and even the Libyan aircraft sale can be seen in a similar light.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-28, NSC Meeting Files, The Mediterranean, June 17, 1970. Secret; Exdis. The Analytical Summary of the June 12 paper, concluded that “The North Africans in Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia have a character and history which distinguish them from the Eastern Arabs and give them somewhat different foreign policy options, particularly those growing out of their closer relationship with Western Europe. The North African governments are turning toward Western Europe—especially France—and away from the close association with either the United States or the USSR that characterized their policies in the 1950s and 1960s. US influence in North Africa will remain severely limited while the US remains closely identified in Arab eyes with Israel and Israel remains in occupation of Arab territory. The USSR is unlikely substantially to improve its modest political and diplomatic position in North Africa, as least as long as current regimes remain in power.” (Ibid.) The full analytical summary is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969-72, volume XXIV, Middle East Region, 1969-1972.

12. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Irwin) to the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom), Washington, December 9, 1971 12. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Irwin) to the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom), Washington, December 9, 19711

Washington, December 9, 1971

THE UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE
WASHINGTON
December 9, 1971

MEMORANDUM

TO:

AF - Mr. Newsom

THROUGH:

S/S

SUBJECT:

PARA Review — North Africa

Dist to:

S

U

J

D

C

M

U/SA

S/IG

H

PM

CU

INR

EUR

NEA

E

AID/AA/PPC

AID/AA/AFR

RF

Pursuant to the review of November 5, 1971, following are the conclusions of our meeting with respect to U.S. policy toward North Africa for the FY 72 review period.

Approach - Our dealings with the North African countries must be in a bilateral framework. The regional states are not closely bound together, and there is no overriding external issue (East-West problems, Arab-Israeli dispute) that provides scope for dealing with the region as a whole.

Interests - U.S. interests in the region, while limited and not vital, are significant. Our most important interests relate to oil (Libya) and natural gas (Algeria) and the balance of payments benefits that we gain from oil investment. Other interests are the Kenitra facility and the location of Morocco at the entrance to the Mediterranean. Yet these strategic considerations must be kept in proper perspective; in particular, the potential threat to these interests is easily overemphasized.

Threat - Our strategic concerns are protected in reasonable degree by the nationalism of the states in the region, which acts as a barrier to Soviet attempts to install a Soviet military presence or zone of Soviet influence along the southern shore of the Mediterranean. The same nationalism, however, also acts against our interest in maintaining special positions in the region (political in Tunisia; political and military in Morocco). Over time, these positions are likely to erode. The danger to our position in the oil industry is more substantial. While Libyan nationalism is an important threat to it, the problem must be dealt with in the overall context of our global oil policy. (A special study on the international oil situation is now in preparation pursuant to PASM 4.) In sum, despite a fairly high level of U.S. interests, we are limited in what we can do—or, fortunately, need do—to protect them.

Programs - Our programs in North Africa, by and large, appear appropriate to the situation at this time. (See attached Summary Sheet). Aid is concentrated on Tunisia and Morocco and these two countries deserve continued emphasis. (The longer term future of these bilateral aid relationships is a question which we plan to look at more systematically in next year's review.) Also, we should continue to keep under review possible opportunities resulting from the changed situation in the Sudan. We recognize that within the African framework, some shift in aid allocations may be called for away from North Africa in favor of the Black African countries, assuming that Congressional cuts in economic aid appropriations compel us to reassess priorities. We need to keep a continuing close look on military supply programs lest we become too closely identified with regimes whose prospects are not too reassuring (especially Morocco). Similarly, we need to keep a rein on our rhetoric when talking of these regimes. Some increased emphasis on trade promotion, particularly vis-a-vis Algeria, is probably warranted. Current staffing patterns appear appropriate except in Libya where we are in the process of phasing down and Tangier which will be closed.

Europe and Trade Preferences - In the most important fields our interests in North Africa are parallel to those of the Europeans and we welcome their deep and substantial involvement in the area. (In any event there is little that we could do to exclude them.) At the same time, we cannot assume that the European role will always be beneficial to our own interests, in particular in regard to issues in the trade and petroleum areas on which we must take a stand and design policies (e.g. on aid) to support these specific interests. The granting of reverse preferences is such a case. Nevertheless, we should, on balance, be flexible on preferences granted by the European Community to the Maghreb states. In cases where we feel that we should protect these, we must have very specific data on the losses that we stand to incur.

Implementation

Appropriate portions of this memorandum are intended as basic policy guidance for posts in the area and for the Department's representative in the NSC Interdepartmental Group for Africa.

John N. Irwin II
Attachment: As stated

Attachment: As stated.

1 Source: National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 1 AFR-US. Secret; Exdis. The Summary Sheet is attachment but not printed. No record of the review itself was found.

Ch. 2. AlgeriaCh. 2. Algeria

13. Summary of Airgram A-102 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, April 7, 1969

April 7, 1969

The Chief of the Interests Section documented the trends affecting U.S.-Algerian relations in the past year. Algeria's stabilizing political situation enabled the Boumediene Government to focus its attention on domestic programs to boost industrial development and enact agricultural reform. Given these changes, the summary predicted that the chances for renewal of diplomatic relations between the United States and Algeria were nearly even.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 1 ALG-US. Secret. It was repeated to CINCEUR, Bamako, Cairo, London, Paris, Rabat, Tripoli, Tunis, and US NATO. Drafted by Galanto, Hoffacker, and Morin; cleared by POL, CONS, and USIA; and approved by Hoffacker.

14. Airgram A-115 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, April 14, 1969

April 14, 1969

Hoffacker analyzed the Algerian Government's motivations in its conduct of the trial of famed revolutionary Belkacem Krim and its predicted impact on U.S.-Algerian relations, given that the United States had been accused of supporting Krim in his attempts to conspire against the Algerian Government.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 29 ALG. Secret. It was repeated to Paris, Rabat, Tunis, and Tripoli. Drafted by Galanto and approved by Hoffacker. Enclosures 1 and 2 are not printed. A summary of the trial can be found in the April 11 Intelligence Note No. 268. (Ibid.)

15. Intelligence Memorandum, Washington, August 19, 1969

Washington, August 19, 1969

This 17 page report, titled “Algeria: Troubles Ahead?”, outlined the country's relationship with the Soviet Union and its important economic connection with France, then analyzed the ways in which a shift in that balance could end in favor of closer relations with Moscow.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79-R00967A, Box 1, O/NE Memorandum, 1969, May-August. Secret. Prepared in the Office of National Estimates, and discussed with representatives of the Office of Current Intelligence and the Office of Economic Research, who were in general agreement with its judgments.

16. Telegram 174764 From the Department of State to the Interests Section in Algeria, October 15, 1969, 1901Z

October 15, 1969

This telegram transmitted a memorandum of a conversation between the Secretary of State and Algerian Foreign Minister Bouteflika. Over the course of the meeting the two men discussed improving U.S.-Algerian relations, Algeria's relationship with the other major powers and the possible course its new economic programs would follow.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-1969, POL 7 ALG. Secret; Priority; Limdis. It was repeated to Paris, Rabat, and Tunis. Drafted by Lowrie and approved by Bray. The septel was telegram 176130 to Algiers, October 17, in which the Department expressed gratification at the improved tone in U.S.-Algerian relations, but regretted that it stopped short of full diplomatic resumption. It also advised the Interests Section that Acting Director of AF/N Charles Bray would be the official Algerian contact in Washington. (Ibid., POL 17 US-ALG)

17. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, October 20, 1969

New York, October 20, 1969

U.S. representatives met with the Head of the Algerian Delegation to the UN to discuss a rapprochement between Washington and Algiers. Specifically, the group discussed the three key impediments to the U.S.-Algerian relationship—the U.S. war in Vietnam, Algeria's role in the Maghreb, and the protection of the Palestinians in the Middle East.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-1969, POL ALG-US. Confidential; Exdis. Drafted by Bray. The conversation took place in New York City. In telegram 2288 from Algiers, December 29, the Interests Section recorded a similar conversation with an advisor to President Boumediene, who noted that Algeria “needs ‘opportune moment' for renewal [of relations.] Although US is on right track in Vietnam, progress is too slow to provide right occasion. Some step on Middle East issue would be more appropriate.” (Ibid.)

18. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Eliot) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 27, 1969

Washington, October 27, 1969

Eliot forwarded an October 24 memorandum that outlined the implications of President Boumediene's reorientation of Algerian foreign policy on the United States. The memorandum highlighted the positive impact of Boumediene's emphasis toward getting Algeria's economic and financial situation in order.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 735, Country Files, Africa, Algeria, Vol. I. Secret.

19. Telegram 166 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, February 5, 1970, 1830Z

February 5, 1970, 1830Z

Requesting aid to finance a natural gas project, Bouteflika made clear to Chief of the Interests Section Eagleton that, while not prepared for full diplomatic relations, the Algerian Government hoped to extend economic ties with the United States.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL ALG-US. Secret; Limdis. It was repeated to Paris, Rabat, and Tunis. In telegram 32269 to Algiers, March 5, Rogers noted the complexities of responding to Bouteflika's request for financing, urging that the Algerian Government expand its Interests Section in Washington to facilitate the request. (Ibid.)

20. Telegram Secto 36/581 From Secretary of State Rogers in Morocco to the Department of State, February 11, 1970, 2130Z.

February 11, 1970, 2130Z

The telegram summarized the substance of Rogers' meeting in Rabat with the Algerian Ambassador to Morocco at which Rogers articulated the desire of the U.S. Government to renew diplomatic relations with Algeria and emphasized the U.S. opposition to Israel's expansionism.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, ORG 7 S. Secret; Exdis. It was repeated to Rabat.

21. Telegram 64991 From the Department of State to the Interests Section in Algeria, April 30, 1970, 0138Z

April 30, 1970, 0138Z

While the Department favored the expansion of commercial relations with Algeria, it noted that progress was impeded by outstanding disputes between that country and American individuals and corporations.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL ALG-US. Confidential. Drafted by Lowrie on April 28; cleared by E/ORF/FSE, L/AF, E/IMA/FOD, L/C, L/E and AF/N; and approved by Smith. In telegram 652 from Algiers, May 6, Eagleton reported that he had discussed with Algerian officials the fact that Algerian disputes with American oil companies could affect Federal Power Commission (FPC) consideration of the El Paso gas deal. (Ibid.)

22. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, October 14, 1970

Washington, October 14, 1970

Kissinger relayed to Nixon that presidential emissary and astronaut FRANK BORMAN had enjoyed a warm reception in Algiers during his Vietnam POW mission to world capitals. During his time in Algeria, Borman reported that U.S. presence was needed to offset Soviet intrusion into the area and that Boumediene expressed his hope that the economic cooperation between the United States and Algeria would continue. Kissinger goes on to discuss U.S.-Algerian relations in more depth.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 748, Presidential Correspondence, 1969-74, Algeria, Col. Houari Boumediene. Confidential. Sent for action. Kissinger approved for the President. The letter, not printed, was sent on October 16.

23. Telegram 204757 From the Department of State to the Interests Section in Algeria, December 17, 1970, 0012Z.

December 17, 1970, 0012Z

The Department forwarded a record of Secretary of State Rogers' conversation the previous day with new Minister Counselor of the Algerian Interests section Bousselham, in which the latter had stressed the common interests of both countries despite their policy differences.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 17 ALG-US. Confidential. Drafted by Blake; cleared by NEA/UAR, S, and AF; and approved by Eliot. In a December 14 memorandum from Moore to Rogers, Moore had relayed Bousselham's request for an appointment. Updating the Secretary on the status of expropriation negotiations between Algeria and American firms, Moore concluded, “We want to respond to these Algerian actions to assure them that we share the desire for improved relations. The rather unorthodox gesture of your receiving Bousselham at this time would give such a signal. We urge, therefore, that you agree to see him for a 10 minute courtesy call before December 19.” (Ibid., POL 15-1 ALG) In telegram 205697, December 18, the Department reported on Bousselham's talks on economic relations with Deputy Under Secretary Samuels and Assistant Secretaries Newsom and Trezise. (Ibid.)

24. Telegram 58412 From the Department of State to the Embassy in France, April 7, 1971, 1955Z

April 7, 1971, 1955Z

This 5 page telegram transmitted Secretary Rogers account of the April 6 meeting between Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs David Newsom and French Ambassador Lucet at which Lucet inquired as to U.S. relations with Algeria. Lucet was particularly interested in the U.S. importation of Algerian liquefied natural gas.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL ALG - US. Secret. It was repeated to Algiers. Drafted on April 6 by Blake (AF/N); cleared by EUR/FBX, E/ORF/FSE, and AF; and approved by Blake. As a series of documents indicates, Paris, still in negotiations with Algiers over post-independence expropriations, was not eager to see the United States act on the El Paso Company's proposed deal with SONATRACH. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials Project, NSC Files, Boxes 677-678, Country Files, Europe, France) In telegram 65768, April 17, the Department sent an oral message from Nixon to President Pompidou indicating that the United States had no desire to impede France in resolving its problems with Algeria, and that there was time for French-Algerian negotiations to be completed before the natural gas deal was finalized. The restoration of political relations with Algeria, Nixon emphasized, would benefit all in the West. (Ibid., Box 678, Country Files, Europe, France, Volume VIII, 4/71-12/71)

25. Airgram A-11 From the Department of State to the Interests Section in Algeria, June 16, 1971

June 16, 1971

This Airgram transmitted a Policy Planning Paper for Algeria. The paper highlighted the geographic, economic, and political importance of Algeria and outlined U.S. interests and objectives in the African nation over the course of the next five years, Algeria's objectives with respect to the United States, and concluded with a 6 part recommended course of action. The Paper was approved by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for Africa.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 1 ALG-US. Secret; Noforn. Telegram drafted by Edward Holmes (AF/NSC-IG) and approved by Carter. Attached but not printed at Annex A is documentation on U.S. agency expenditures in Algeria; at Annex B is background information; and at Annex C is a list of approved policy guidance papers.

26. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers, July 13, 1971

July 13, 1971

With this memorandum Kissinger conveyed the President's authorization to respond favorably to the Federal Power Commission's request for the administration's views on the importation of gas from Algeria and transmitted a memorandum detailing the Algerian expropriation of United States and French property.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 735, Country Files, Africa, Algeria, Vol. I. Secret. While the tabs are not printed, Tab B is summarized in the footnote to Document 24.

27. National Intelligence Estimate 62-71, Washington, July 31, 1971

Washington, July 31, 1971

This 15 page report analyzed Algeria's international relations, noting that Algeria remained non-aligned with other countries and was skillful at playing the big powers off against each other while retaining its own independence of action. Moreover, Algeria would continue to exploit its natural gas reserves as a means for funding the expensive development projects the Government had undertaken.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79-R01012A, Box 420. Secret; Controlled Dissemination. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, Defense, and NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. The director of CIA submitted this estimate with the concurrence of all members of the USIB with the exception of the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that it was outside their jurisdiction.

28. Telegram 113 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, January 21, 1972, 1420Z.

January 21, 1972, 1420Z

The Interests Section warned the Department that, owing to the continued delay in FPC approval of the El Paso project, the momentum generated by improving U.S.-Algerian relations was slowing and that the delay could cause disillusionment in Algeria.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL ALG-US. Secret. It was repeated to Cairo, Khartoum, London, Paris, Tripoli, Tunis, and Rabat.

29. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, undated

Washington, undated

Kissinger noted that the Algerians had recently approached Raytheon about purchasing an air defense communications network and presented the President with the arguments for and against allowing Raytheon to sell radar equipment to Algeria.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 735, Country Files, Africa, Algeria, Vol. I. Secret; Exdis. Sent for action. The attached February 8 memorandum from Rogers is not printed. Saunders sent the memorandum to Kissinger on March 1 and recommended that he send it to the President for approval. Haig approved the recommendation on behalf of the President.

30. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 11, 1972

Washington, March 11, 1972

Kissinger recommended that Nixon sign a letter of greeting to President Boumediene, to be delivered in Algiers by visiting Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs David Newsom.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 748, Presidential Correspondence, 1969-74, Algeria, Col. Houari Boumediene. Confidential. Sent for action. Tab B, dated March 7, is not printed.

31. Telegram 540 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, March 28, 1972, 1333Z.

March 28, 1972, 1333Z

In a meeting with President Boumediene, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Newsom stressed U.S. initiatives in the international field as well as in U.S.-Algerian relations, and expressed the hope that diplomatic relations might soon be resumed.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, ORG 7 AF. Secret; Priority. It was repeated to London, Paris, Rabat, Tripoli, and Tunis. In the septel, telegram 547 from Algiers, March 29, Newsom urged the Department that “We have opportunity in Algeria for major export gain and for strong economic relationship based on our need for gas. Our recent international initiatives have improved political atmosphere. Complications and delays in approving El Paso, however, still major impediment to our success and resumption relations here. Action requested: we need find urgently possible major economic actions which can demonstrate our interest and maintain our momentum here. I suggest meeting pertinent agencies following my return.” (Ibid.) According to telegram 118270 to Djakarta, June 30, the Federal Power Commission gave its general approval of the El Paso importation of Algerian LNG on June 28. (Ibid., ORG 7 S)

32. Telegram 1171 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, July 2, 1972, 1245Z

July 2, 1972, 1245Z

As instructed, Deputy Chief of Mission of U.S. Interests Section William Eagleton proposed to Deputy Secretary-General Smail Hamdani that the United States and Algeria resume relations, adding that Secretary of State Rogers could come to Algiers himself at the end of his current trip to make the announcement.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL ALG-US. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. In telegram 119670 to Algiers, July 1, Assistant Secretary Newsom had advised Eagleton that since Yemen had restored relations with the United States, and favorable action had been taken by the FPC on the El Paso-SONATRACH agreement, several preconditions to U.S.-Algerian resumption had been met. (Ibid.) In telegram 1200 from Algiers, July 7, Hamdani advised Eagleton that Algeria could not receive the Secretary and renew relations in the present unsettled atmosphere. (Ibid.)

33. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 31, 1972

Washington, July 31, 1972

In an official démarche, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Newsom discussed with Minister Abdelkader Bousselham the hijacking of a Delta Airlines aircraft by members of the Black Panthers, who had been paid a million-dollar ransom.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12 US. Confidential. Following his 1968 flight from the United States to avoid imprisonment for an assault conviction, Eldridge Cleaver, Minister of Information for the Black Panthers, founded a headquarters in Algeria. On June 3, two Black Panthers had demanded and received $500,000 in ransom after hijacking a Western Airlines flight, a sum which the government of Algeria returned to the airline. The Government then released the hijackers to the Black Panthers in Algiers.

34. Telegram 188030 From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations and the Interests Section in Algeria, October 14, 1972, 1933Z

October 14, 1972, 1933Z

The telegram transmitted an October 12 memorandum of conversation between Algerian Minister of Foreign Affairs Bouteflika and Secretary of State Rogers, who summarized the positions of their respective governments on matters of common interest, including the Middle East and hijacking.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 7 ALG. Confidential; Priority. It was repeated to Paris. Drafted by Lane and approved by Newsom.

35. Memorandum of Conversation, October 20, 1972, 3 p.m.

October 20, 1972, 3 p.m.

Minister Bousselham and Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Newsom discussed a range of issues, notably hijacking, the Middle East, Vietnam, and the El Paso deal.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL ALG-US. Confidential. Drafted by Lane and cleared by Newsom. The meeting took place in Newsom's office.

13. Summary of Airgram A-102 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, April 7, 1969 13. Summary of Airgram A-102 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, April 7, 19691

April 7, 1969

AIRGRAM
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
A-102
DATE: April 7, 1969

TO:

Department of State

DEPT PASS:

CINCEUR, BAMAKO, CAIRO, LONDON, PARIS, RABAT, TRIPOLI, TUNIS, US NATO

FROM:amembassy ALGIERS

SUBJECT:

US POLICY ASSESSMENT FOR ALGERIA - 1969

SUMMARY

The period from April 1968 to April 1969, from the viewpoint of U.S. interests and objectives in Algeria, was marked by a slight preponderance of trends favorable to the U.S. On the plus side, Algeria's internal political stability has improved. President Boumediene appears to be ruling the country with increased self-confidence. The GOA has placed first priority on domestic concerns such as industrial development programs, reform of the agricultural sector, establishment of permanent government structures, and maximizing revenues from the oil and gas industry and wine exports. Algeria has of course remained vociferously anti-imperialist, a loud supporter of armed struggle by the Palestinians in the Middle East, and an underwriter of modest assistance for African liberation movements. However, the fact remains that the lion's share of the GOA's money and manpower is being spent on improving the domestic situation. In another significant and favorable trend, Algeria has worked hard over the past few months to improve significantly cooperation with its Maghreb neighbors.

On the minus side, Soviet influence over the past year has continued to grow. Although the Algerians steadfastly maintain they will not grant military bases to foreigners (Russians), Soviet leverage based on substantial military, economic and trade programs is stronger. France remains the key Western influence in Algeria, but during the past year the French role continued to decline.

U.S.-Algerian relations underwent a steady improvement during the year under review, although a resumption of diplomatic relations is still not in sight. The Middle East and Vietnam remain major issues of disagreement. U.S.-Algerian relations in the private business and economic sector have experience a boom. In 1968, the U.S. became the number two supplier to Algeria, with estimated sales of $60 million. The GOA increasingly looked to U.S. firms and technicians to help in the development of the Algerian petroleum and other related industries.

Chances for renewal of diplomatic relations in 1969 are about even. The initiative rightly belongs to the Algerians and we do not advocate any preconditions. The evolution of the Middle East situation is probably the single most important determinant. U.S. business community interests in Algeria merit a shift from neutrality to a more active encouragement from the USG. These business interests form the backbone of the U.S. current presence in Algeria. Private organizations (CARE, CRS, Ford Foundation, IVS, Quakers) have also made an important contribution to the U.S. presence and merit continuation. Resumption of any significant USG cultural program will probably have to await diplomatic relations.

If the principal Western influence in Algeria—France—should lose ground radically in the near future, this would create a new situation which the U.S. would have to examine.

[Omitted here is the body of the airgram.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 1 ALG-US. Secret. It was repeated to CINCEUR, Bamako, Cairo, London, Paris, Rabat, Tripoli, Tunis, and US NATO. Drafted by Galanto, Hoffacker, and Morin; cleared by POL, CONS, and USIA; and approved by Hoffacker.

14. Airgram A-115 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, April 14, 1969 14. Airgram A-115 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, April 14, 19691

April 14, 1969

AIRGRAM
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
A-115
DATE: April 14, 1969

TO:

Department of State

INFO:

PARIS, RABAT, TUNIS, TRIPOLI

FROM:amembassy ALGIERS

SUBJECT:

The Krim Belkacem Trial and its Impact on U.S.-Algerian Relations

The Algerian Revolution Devours More of its Children

On April 7 the Revolutionary Court in Oran passed sentence on some 60 persons accused of conspiring against the security of the Algerian state. The most prominent Algerian on trial was Belkacem Krim, historic figure of the Algerian revolution, principal negotiator of the Evian agreements with France, and since October 1967, head of the opposition MDRA (Mouvement Democratique pour le Renouveau Algerien). The Court sentenced Krim, Tamsaout Belkacem, and Amirat Slimane to death, the former two in absentia. 17 of the 60 defendants were reportedly released. The others received punishment ranging from life to suspended sentences. Details are given in enclosure 1, an account of the Court's verdict as published in the Oran newspaper, La Republique.

Serious Accusations of U.S. Complicity

The high point of the trial was the testimony of “surprise witness” Akli Belahssen, one of Krim's top lieutenants, who flew from Marseilles to Oran on April 5 in order to testify at the Court. Belahssen, who said he was in charge of external and press affairs for the MDRA, made a series of serious accusations of USG involvement in Belkacem Krim's opposition organization. According to local press accounts, he testified that: - After contacts at the American Embassy in Paris, American services agreed to provide funds for Belkacem Krim's opposition movement.

- Michel Leroy, a Krim agent, was received by a high State Department official in Washington.

- American services provided bombs and explosives of a kind “only at CIA disposition”, suggested the training of commando teams to destroy Algerian military airports, and approved a new “draft constitution” and list of personalities to form a new government.

Details of Belahssen's testimony as printed in La Republique of April 6-7 are given in Enclosure 2. Belahssen, by the way, got off with a two-year suspended sentence.

Impact on US-Algerian Relations

These serious allegations of U.S. involvement in internal Algerian affairs come at a time when there has been a steady improvement in U.S.-Algerian relations. The most recent sign came when President EISENHOWER died March 28. Algerian President Houari Boumediene sent a message of condolences to President Nixon, the first communication between the GOA and the USG at this level since the break of relations in June 1967.

How then should the charges made at Oran be interpreted? As a new period of decline in US-Algerian relations or a genuine “incident de parcours"? We tend to believe that the business in Oran was an aberration and that the GOA still remains interested in the gradual improvement of relations with the U.S.

A number of diplomatic and other sources have expressed the view that publishing of Belahssen's testimony is part of Boumediene's internal political balancing act, that a number of Algerians in the Party elsewhere remain chronically suspicious of U.S. intentions and this was the regime's way of tossing them a bone. These same sources also pointed out that strong intimations of involvement by French and Egyptian secret services were also voiced at the trial. Of course these accusations were much less precise. The U.S. is still the easiest and biggest scapegoat available to Algeria. Finally, the Oran trial served a useful domestic purpose—to warn the Algerian public of the harsh punishment which the GOA will mete out to anyone involved in opposition activities.

For what it is worth, the Algerian press made hay of Belahssen's testimony for two days after the trial ended. Then the press campaign was abruptly turned off—as neatly as a water tap.

Perhaps most important as an indicator was the reaction of Layachi Yaker, the number three Foreign Ministry official, when I called upon him to express the concern and displeasure of the USG. Yaker made three points in reply: 1) the GOA had no doubt about the authenticity of the contacts by the opposition group with CIA and other Americans, since they were supported by details of time, place, etc.; 2) that these took place during the Johnson administration, a period of special difficulty in US-Algerian relations; and 3) the GOA nevertheless looked forward with much hope to the absence of such contacts during the present American administration.

Yaker then made a special point of repeating the language which he had used during the December visit of Deputy Assistant Secretary Quimby, Bureau of African Affairs: The GOA will do all that it can to improve bilateral relations and therefore looks with hope to a favorable evolution of the Middle East and Vietnamese situations.

HOFFACKER
[LH initialed]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 29 ALG. Secret. It was repeated to Paris, Rabat, Tunis, and Tripoli. Drafted by Galanto and approved by Hoffacker. Enclosures 1 and 2 are not printed. A summary of the trial can be found in the April 11 Intelligence Note No. 268. (Ibid.)

15. Intelligence Memorandum, Washington, August 19, 1969 15. Intelligence Memorandum, Washington, August 19, 19691

Washington, August 19, 1969

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES
19 August 1969

MEMORANDUM

SUBJECT:

Algeria: Troubles Ahead?*

Algeria has long been a paradox. It is a radical Arab state with fairly close ties to the USSR; it is also a major, wealthy oil-producer, and a long time recipient of subsidies from and favorable treatment by France. Its government is avowedly socialist and anti-US in its public pronouncements, but it has substantial dealings with American technicians and corporations. Alleged by some, particularly the Moroccans, to be a pliable instrument of the USSR, Algeria in fact has occasionally been critical of the Soviets and jealously guards its independence.

Algeria may continue to follow a similarly mixed pattern. Yet quite a different course of developments is possible: one which would entail a deterioration of its relations with France, bring on a change in its dealings with the oil companies so severe as to have international repercussions, and ultimately enhance its ties with the Soviet Union. We do not estimate this to be the probable sequence of events; we do regard it as a serious possibility worthy of careful attention.

1. Algeria became independent in 1962 after a bloody seven year rebellion against the French. General De Gaulle was the sponsor and patron of the settlement. He not merely agreed to the establishment of the state over bitter opposition from the French military and from the politically powerful French settlers in Algeria; he also provided it with the financing for its early and difficult days. From 1962 to 1969, France provided well over a billion dollars in economic aid and technical assistance though on a declining scale. Half a million Algerians continue to work in France and remit their earnings to their families at home. France remains Algeria's principal trading partner. De Gaulle made no special issue out of his failure to get compensation for the French properties seized at independence; rather, he agreed to purchase most of the wine produced by the formerly French-owned estates in Algeria, though in progressively reduced quantities. In 1965, an agreement was negotiated between the two governments which provided for French purchase of Algerian oil at above world market prices. Since then, production has substantially increased — as have revenues — and Algeria has become a relatively wealthy state in the underdeveloped world.*

2. At the same time, the Algerians developed good, even close relations with the USSR. The most effective tie has been an extensive Soviet military assistance program. Since 1963, Algeria has received some $250 million in planes, tanks, ships, and the like from the USSR. Its armed forces are now almost ccmpletely dependent on Moscow for spare parts, replacements, training, and ammunition. There are 1,200-1,500 Soviet military advisors and technicians in Algeria. The Soviets are helping build a large steel mill and a number of small projects. Trade is growing, and substantial Soviet aid projects have been promised. Recently the USSR agreed to buy the large quantities of Algerian wine which France had refused to take and which had been unsalable elsewhere.

3. Though a growing Soviet presence can be ascribed in part to arms supply policy and other aid, much of it results from a considerable parallelism of view and of interests between the Soviets and the Algerians. Algeria is dominated, and may continue to be dominated for some time, by a group of revolutionary leftists whose ideas were forged during the war of independence. Though avowedly non-Marxist, far less sentimentally inclined to follow Moscow's lead than was former President BEN BELLA, and occasionally in disagreement on specific programs, all want some kind of socialism for Algeria.

4. In seeking to develop Algeria along non-capitalist lines, the government has sought the advice of numerous foreign expert economic bodies, including the Soviet's GOSPLAN. And at least some of GOSPLAN's recommendations appear to have been accepted. Since then there have been working ties between Russian and Algerian planners, technicians, engineers and the like, paralleling the working relationships between their military counterparts. The Algerians are seeking to develop as much autarchy as possible by establishing a host of import substitution enterprises. Aided by some 2,000 Soviets, and by even more Frenchmen, Germans, Americans, and other Westerners, Algeria is now embarked on a major economic development program. Most investment is in costly projects designed to make Algeria, ultimately, a sizeable industrial power with jobs and prosperity for all. But many years will be required to produce results. In the interim, as in the USSR, the consumer comes last; living standards are low, taxes high, and goods scarce. There is also widespread unemployment.

5. This development program is far from being Russian directed or administered however. Indeed, one of the Algerian government's principal aims is to acquire or maintain its own control of all elements of the economy, including those in which the Soviets are participating. To this end, it has nationalized or taken over the direction of virtually all foreign private enterprises in Algeria, except for foreign, principally French, oil companies. At the same time, it is launching a host of new joint ventures with Western, including many American, private corporations in such fields as oil exploration. It is also directly hiring the services of American consultants — e.g., Arthur D. Little, Inc. — and is seeking American equipment and expertise for such items as computer systems and even whole factories.

6. Further, the Algerian government-owned oil and gas company, SONATRACH, is seeking to sell its products directly to foreign countries. A recently signed contract with the EL PASO Natural Gas Company is its most notable success so far. If the financing of this project goes through, an investment of over $900 million ($300 million by EL PASO, $600 million by the Algerians) will be made and SONATRACH will sell large quantities of liquified natural gas (about 14 percent of present US consumption) to EL PASO for American use.

7. A common thread runs through all this activity. In each case the Algerian government refuses to surrender control of any project to an outsider. Unlike the traditional oil concessions of the Middle East over the years, which grant outside companies considerable latitude in determining such matters as exploration and production, all Algerian joint venture agreements give the host government 51 percent of the shares — and operating control. The highly paid foreign consultants and technicians are employees of the Algerian government, which can hire and fire them at will. The expensive expertise and equipment being purchased is paid for by Algeria's oil revenues, and this gives it substantial freedom of action.

8. Algeria's foreign policies are not unlike its domestic ones. It seeks to maintain freedom from outside domination and direction, while pursuing courses of action and adopting attitudes consistent with its own revolutionary principles. It normally sympathizes with the socialist world rather than the capitalist one. It views the US government with suspicion and frequently with hostility. It particularly objects to US policy in Vietnam and in the Middle East; it regards the efforts of the Viet Cong and the Palestinians as counterparts of its own revolutionary struggle, and casts the US in the role of the French in that conflict.

9. Soviet-Algerian relations, on the other hand, are generally good. Russian naval craft can call at Algerian ports, but do so very infrequently. The state controlled press printed only the Tass version of the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia. The Soviets, for their part, frequently praise Algeria as a progressive Arab state developing in a correct manner. But even with extensive arms supply programs and many ideological affinities, Soviet influence remains limited. Many more Westerners than Russians are engaged in Algerian development efforts, and there are no signs of change in this respect. The two countries openly disagree on some issues, notably on the Arab-Israeli conflict; the Algerians ridicule Soviet efforts to achieve a peaceful solution, saying that the only acceptable course of action there is for the Palestinians to emulate Algeria's independence struggle.

10. This and other differences may lead to private debates between Algerian and Soviet officials, but to only a few open signs of acrimony; they are being treated on both sides as something to agree to disagree about. All in all, an appraisal of the degree of Soviet influence on the Algerian government eventually becomes an exercise in semantics. The counsels of the Russian Ambassador no doubt carry weight, but are not decisive. Soviet-Algerian relations remain excellent because both parties enjoy mutual advantages from them. The question then arises: could the balance be tipped so that Algeria would some day no longer be in its present strong position to reject Moscow's “advice” on important issues? In this connection, much will depend on Algeria's future relationships with two other major outside forces it deals with: France and the oil industry.

11. The Algerian leaders must be concerned that Pompidou will not show them his predecessor's forbearance and sympathy. Indeed, even before de Gaulle stepped down, strains had appeared between Paris and Algiers. In 1968, under heavy pressure from French growers, Paris ended the purchase of all but small amounts of Algerian wine. In the same year, Algerian immigration into France was all but cut off for a time, though this restriction was eventually eased by De Gaulle.

12. More serious to the Algerians is what they see as the unfriendly policy of the French oil companies, who produce over 80 percent of total Algerian output. Algiers charges that these companies are not exploiting their fields to the fullest; further, it claims that in failing to explore for further oil reserves, the French are not living up to their obligations. The companies counter that virtually all of Algeria's oil reserves have been located, that reserves are being depleted so rapidly that overall output will sharply decline over the next few years.1 These disputes have led to acrimonious Algerian press attacks, to the nationalization (so far without compensation) of virtually all remaining non-petroleum French private businesses in 1968, and even to Algerian participation in the assault on the franc in November of that year.2 De Gaulle took such harassments with forbearance; Pompidou is less likely to do so.

13. For their part, Algerians may be getting ready to make some new and possibly severe moves against the oil companies, which are the principal remaining French assets in Algiers. At least the French are concerned about such a possibility. The opportunity to do so is not too far away; the Franco-Algerian oil accords must be renegotiated between the two governments in late 1970 if either party requests it.

14. Past Algerian treatment of, and demands on US oil companies, which produce about 10 percent of Algeria's oil and whose assets in the country run to some $100 million, may indicate what the French could face. If so, the latter are in for a bad time; the American companies have been treated with a harshness unmatched in the Middle East. Algerian managers were installed by the government during the Arab-Israeli 1967 war, though Americans continue to operate the companies. Further, the companies are forbidden to expatriate any of their earnings. Then in 1969, one of the US firms (Sinclair) was, on a legal pretext, nationalized. Over the years, American oil men have reported harassment and a stubborn unwillingness to compromise on the part of the Algerians.

15. They also report a continuing effort by the Algerians to get them to accept what eventually came to be known as the “Getty formula”. According to the latter, a new joint venture would be formed, with the Algerians, as in their dealings with non-oil companies, holding 51 percent of the shares. In addition to becoming a minority stockholder, the oil company has initially to invest large sums and gets only 12 percent of the profits. This formula is unprecedently favorable to the host government and goes far beyond other petroleum arrangements in the Middle East or elsewhere. It has been pressed by the Algerians at every opportunity (they offered to de-nationalize Sinclair, return its holdings, and free it of many restrictions if it would sign such an agreement). But for a long time no company in Algeria would agree, fearing the precedent that would be set elsewhere.

16. Finally, however, Mr. J. Paul Getty signed on Algeria's terms. He was greeted with effusive publicity, his cooperation was warmly welcomed, and he was given the country's most promising areas for exploration.* The French companies now fear that the Algerians will insist on similar concessions from them in the 1970 negotiations. They are also concerned that they will receive the same treatment meted out to the Americans — harassment, freezing of assets, and even nationalization — if they refuse to meet such demands.

17. Each side can approach the 1970 petroleum negotiations with weapons of its own. On the one hand, the French government may feel it could make Algeria suffer if drastic moves were to be taken against French assets. France might be able, with the assistance of the other major oil companies, to block the sales of Algeria's petroleum and gas, which account for 70 percent of its export revenues, in most parts of the non-Communist world. A cutoff of Algerian petroleum would create no actual shortages in France, as there are ample supplies in other parts of Africa, the Persian Gulf and the Western Hemisphere. Beyond this, the French could refuse to import citrus fruit, minerals and other items from Algeria which remain important sources of income. Pompidou, who would probably be less inhibited than De Gaulle, might even block remittances from Algerians in France to their families at home or, in extremis, expel those workers.

18. Such French retaliations would be strongly supported by the major oil companies, including the American ones; acceptance of such extreme Algerian demands would have a major impact on the world oil industry, in which US firms play the principal role and which provides a very important support to the US balance of payments. As in the past, other governments, e.g., Iran, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, would probably start pushing hard for equal treatment. In these circumstances, most oil companies would probably exert heavy pressures on the French oil companies, and on the French and US governments to resist Algerian demands.

19. The government in Algiers might be vulnerable to such punitive measures. The political climate remains uncertain. In the past two years, President Boumediene had to put down an attempted coup, and narrowly escaped being assassinated. There are opponents of the regime both inside and outside the country and a successful conspiracy might take place in agitated times. The regime's economic approach, which in fact amounts to grinding down the present generation so the next will enjoy high living standards, is probably becoming less and less palatable to the Algerian people. They have remained docile and most of them apolitical; one of the major reasons for this is the war weariness and apathy engendered by the brutal independence struggle. But that was seven years ago, and another generation is on the way. Indeed, there are some strong reasons for the Algerians to keep on good terms with the French. However intense their revolutionary dogmas, they need the money the French oil companies pay to support their ambitious and expensive development program.

20. In these circumstances we might expect that a new Franco-Algerian accord will be forthcoming in 1970 if indeed negotiations take place. The Algerian government now receives some $600-700 million a year in oil and gas revenues; it needs this money for its high priority development program, that much or most of this income could dry up in the event of a crisis. If the two parties behaved rationally, they should arrive at a mutually acceptable accommodation.

21. This may indeed happen, but an opposite case can be made. “Rational” can be a misleading term, particularly when concepts of socialism and national pride are involved and when there is ample room for error in calculations of bargaining strength. If Algeria decides it must have maximum oil revenues with a minimum of French retaliatory acts, it would almost certainly not generate a crisis. However, it may decide that other goals are paramount.

22. There is little doubt that the Algerians would like to fully control all the resources within their territory, and the French oil companies are the only ones of any importance they do not now control. In this respect, Algeria's leaders differ fundamentally from the monarchs of Saudi Arabia or Libya, who feel quite comfortable working with foreign companies on a concession basis. The important question is, do the Algerians think they can getaway with threatening or actually seizing the French companies?

23. The Algerians almost certainly recognize that they have some effective means of putting pressure on the French. They see Paris facing a balance of payments crisis. In the past year, they have noted France drawing down half its foreign exchange reserves and devaluating the franc so as to increase export earnings and decrease import costs. The Algerians could, if they wished, further aggravate Paris' balance of payments problems. Thus in 1970 French oil companies in Algeria will expect to repatriate up to $400 million in earnings to the metropole. Even the threat of an Algerian freeze of these funds would have serious repercussions. In such circumstances the Algerians might reason that the French government could be induced to accept something like the Getty formula, rather than lose everything.

24. Beyond this, the Algerians may calculate that they would not suffer all that much if they moved against the French oil companies. Algerian petroleum comes from west of the Suez Canal and is low in sulphur content — both highly desirable attributes in Western Europe these days. The Algerians may feel they could sell to independent companies in Germany, Italy and elsewhere in Western Europe — without having to share the earnings with the French. They may be right (their nationalization of Sinclair has not hurt them); at present, nobody knows how successful such efforts would be, particularly over a fairly extended period of time. And the Algerians could plan for a fairly extended time of crisis; they have some $600 million in foreign exchange reserves. In any event, the country's leaders have long been accustomed to adopting policies entailing high risks and imposing personal hardships on the Algerian people.

25. They may also feel that the Soviets would, if the worst happens, come to their assistance. Though the USSR is a net exporter of oil, it is already purchasing small amounts from Algeria and might for political reasons, and perhaps for economic ones as well, agree to take substantially more. Armaments aside, the Algerians generally prefer Western industrial equipment to that of Soviet manufacture. But if there were no alternative, they would probably accept the latter in payment for their oil. How far the Soviets would be willing or able to come to the aid of their friends is open to question. But in the event of a rupture in French-Algerian relations, they might take the opportunity to enhance their influence in Algeria.

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79-R00967A, Box 1, O/NE Memorandum, 1969, May-August. Secret. Prepared in the Office of National Estimates, and discussed with representatives of the Office of Current Intelligence and the Office of Economic Research, who were in general agreement with its judgments.

* This memorandum was prepared by the Office of National Estimates. It was discussed with representatives of the Office of Current Intelligence and the Office of Economic Research, who are in general agreement with its judgments.

* Current production is nearly one million barrels a day, giving Algeria an income of about $600 million in 1968.

1 [text not declassified] He believes that output five years from now may be only 60 percent of its present rate unless new fields are discovered. He is not optimistic that they will be.

2 During that monetary crisis Algeria took 500 million francs ($100 million) from its reserves and purchased gold or dollars.

* In eight months of operations, the Getty Company's experience tends to confirm the French thesis that Algerian reserves have been pretty well discovered. Only dry holes have been drilled.

16. Telegram 174764 From the Department of State to the Interests Section in Algeria, October 15, 1969, 1901Z 16. Telegram 174764 From the Department of State to the Interests Section in Algeria, October 15, 1969, 1901Z1

October 15, 1969

TELEGRAM
Department of State 174764
15 OCT 69

ACTION:

amembassy ALGIERS PRIORITY

INFO:

amembassy PARIS

amembassy RABAT

amembassy TUNIS

SUBJ:

Secretary's Meeting with Bouteflika

1. Following memcon Secretary's meeting with Bouteflika New York October 10 is uncleared, subject revision upon review, FYI NOFORN.

2. Secretary said he gathered relations had been improving for last year or two; that this was good trend which we would like to see continued. Asked FonMin's views. FonMin thanked Secretary for providing opportunity to meet. Said that US-Algerian relations had improved since 1967 break; that it not correct call it break, would be more correct to call change “slow-down.” In fact, it seemed that US-Algerian relations had never been better than during “slow-down.” Cultural and economic fields in recent past had been quite positive, notwithstanding day-to-day contingencies and fluctuations of the international scene. He believed we were meeting requirements for quite positive relationship.

3. FonMin indicated that Algerian relations with USSR should not preclude improvement in its relations with US, particularly in economic field. Our relations should develop on same lines as with USSR and France. What had opposed development of relations were political problems of an external character.

4. FonMin felt that two countries should be careful not to engage in changes that might prove “traumatic” and leave sequels in future. Relations in economic field were improving dramatically, particularly in field of hydrocarbons. He believed that Sinclair, one of major oil firms with investments in Algeria, would be acting in its own best interests if it did not create a situation that would be useless and lead nowhere, because there certainly possibilities of settling such disputes through friendly compromise. This was all more important as there were no opposing interests between US oil corporations and Algeria; whereas in case of French investments, very nature and size of holdings are a problem. Compromise settlements with US would be useful in their negotiations with French. It was Algeria's purpose to reduce the “immense” French investments to manageable size.

5. FonMin reiterated his country not preserve of one or another great power, that it does not entertain privileged relations with one great power or another but wanted relations with all major powers.

6. FonMin then summarized his presentation. Algeria was now working to consolidate its relations in all fields and to achieve normalization in all aspects of its economic development through its own efforts and through cooperation with others, in the hope that its relations with US will enter a new era known in past.

7. Secretary asked whether he had any specific ideas on improving relations. FonMin said he recognize that efforts of cooperation are closely tied with political conditions. He said he was now sure beyond a doubt that US was no longer interested in Vietnam as such and that it wished to settle question and establish peace. Algeria would always support any actions US took toward peace. In Middle East a positive US gesture would make a great impact on Algerians. He saw no essential impediments to improvements.

8. Secretary thanked FonMin for his presentation. He said we would consider seriously the question of improving relations and expressed pleasure that relations had improved some between the two countries in last few years. He agreed Algeria was sometimes a “difficult partner” and said that he understood. He noted US public and Congress generally felt that Algeria was an aligned country, because it so often, almost without exception, was aligned against US positions. It was hard to convince them that we received the same treatment as USSR. We hoped these obstacles could be overcome in future because we had no interests in conflict. Secretary said US Congress and public opinion did not expect Algeria to be aligned with US, but they certainly did not want Algeria always aligned against US. If they were always against us it would be hard to convince people Algeria was unaligned. Secretary concluded, however, that US would like to improve relations, and we would meet them half way.

9. FonMin responded that perhaps it would be possible for him to consider designating someone in his Department to be in direct contact with the US Charge in Algeria and vice versa in Washington. Secretary said he thought that was good idea, that we would designate someone promptly.

10. Full memcons follow by pouch. Guidance contained septel.

ROGERS

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-1969, POL 7 ALG. Secret; Priority; Limdis. It was repeated to Paris, Rabat, and Tunis. Drafted by Lowrie and approved by Bray. The septel was telegram 176130 to Algiers, October 17, in which the Department expressed gratification at the improved tone in U.S.-Algerian relations, but regretted that it stopped short of full diplomatic resumption. It also advised the Interests Section that Acting Director of AF/N Charles Bray would be the official Algerian contact in Washington. (Ibid., POL 17 US-ALG)

17. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, October 20, 1969 17. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, October 20, 19691

New York, October 20, 1969

DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT:

U.S.-Algerian Relations

PARTICIPANTS:

Mohammed Yazid, Head of Algerian Delegation

Richard C. Pedersen, Counselor

Charles W. Bray III, Acting Director, North African Affairs

Copies to:

S INR/OD

USUN

U

S/PC

Amembassy ALGIERS

J WH

D CIA

C AF

S/S

NEA

Messers. Pedersen and Bray met with Ambassador Yazid, at his suggestion on instructions from the Foreign Minister, to continue the discussion opened between the Secretary and Foreign Minister Bouteflika on October 10.

Referring to the previous notification that Bray had been designated the point of contact for the GOA in the Department, Yazid said that the contact in the GOA Foreign Ministry would be designated following the conference of Algerian chiefs of mission now taking place in Algiers. Mr. Pedersen said that in making their decision they should know that, depending on the rank of the Algerian designated, we would be prepared to consider the contact on our side at the Deputy Assistant Secretary level. (Yazid made no comment on this.)

Yazid noted that the GOA intended to raise the level of its representation in Washington. He said the decision as to who might head the Algerian Interests Section was not yet taken. In response to Bray's question, Yazid said that if the person were not Counselor Bousselham, it would be someone of at least his seniority.

Mr. Pedersen said that he had heard that Yazid had made a tough speech critical of the U.S. on Viet Nam during the morning. If so its contents would seem to be at variance with the satisfaction expressed by Foreign Minister Bouteflika that the “problem” of Viet Nam was on its way to resolution and his expression of greater understanding of our objective. Mr. Pedersen pointed out that sharp rhetoric on Algeria's side would not make the resolution of our bilateral problems any easier.

Yazid then said that there appeared to be three impediments in U.S.-GOA relations: (1) The first, as his Foreign Minister had said, was Viet Nam. Yazid expressed the view that this problem appeared to be “fading away”. He hoped that with increased confidence between Algeria and the U.S., public and private positions could be as close as possible.

(2) The second problem, he thought, had been Algeria's role in the Maghreb. From his experience in the U.S. he felt that this would be the most important factor in U.S. public opinion. Yazid went into some detail in describing Algerian efforts to achieve an overall detente in the Maghreb. He indicated that now that Algeria's domestic house was in better order President Boumediene felt freer to play an active and constructive role in the Maghreb. He cited the detente between Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia; the Morocco-Mauritania rapprochement; and the defusing of Spanish Sahara as a political issue in North West Africa. He said he hoped that Algeria could be of assistance to the young Libyan government and cited a long, but rather vague, history of GOA-Libyan cooperation. The point was that Algeria was behaving responsibly in North Africa.

(3) The third problem, Yazid said, related to the Middle East. Algeria was less concerned with the state of relations among the “major powers” than it was about the rights and security of the “little people” in the Middle East. Specifically, and in the light of Algeria's own recent history, the GOA was concerned about the right of Palestinians to live in peace and security. The issue of Palestine, as such, should not be overlooked in an eventual settlement. Would it be impossible for the U.S. to be more “even-handed” in dealing with the issue of Palestine and the Palestinians? Yazid's pitch was not (as Raschid Zeghar's had been in earlier conversations in Washington) for any form of support for Al Fatah or the guerrillas. Pedersen said he thought differences of opinion would undoubtedly continue on this issue, as we felt the main objective had to be establishment of peace in the Middle East for all states in the Middle East area. He inquired whether Algeria would interfere if the UAR or Jordan wished to negotiate a peace. Yazid said not if it affected their own soverign concerns; if they sought to abandon the rights of the Palestinians Algeria would come to their support.

Yazid reiterated what Bouteflika had told the Secretary: that relations between Algeria and the U.S. had never been better than they had been since 1967. He alluded to the rapidly increasing array of mutual economic interests, adding that these were giving the Algerians “options” in their attempts to reduce their dependence on both France and USSR to manageable proportions.

Against this backdrop, Yazid said, he knew we had been troubled by the GOA's nationalization of a small American-owned bus company (five buses) in 1963 and by the fact that the GOA had taken over a house and land in Algeria belonging to an American. Algeria had been unable to compensate for these steps because it would have involved them in heavy compensation for French owned properties.

Referring to the Secretary's inquiry about concrete steps that might be taken to improve relations, Yazid noted a number of financial and other steps were still required in connection with the El Paso agreement and other pending matters. Investment guarantees would be useful in persuading financial interests to put up the capital Algeria would require as a result of the El Paso-SONATRACH agreement. Perhaps the guarantees would also make it easier for the EXIM Bank to finance the sale of Boeings to Air Algerie. Yazid said he had also heard that some of El Paso's competitors were unhappy thatalternative sources of natural gas would be entering East Coast markets. He assumed these corporations would be making their case before the Federal Power Commission, and the attitude of the State Department might be significant. Yazid hoped the Department of State might use its good offices to help the Algerians along. He said that the GOA would be willing to talk to us about an investment guarantee agreement that would be in harmony with Algerian laws.

Mr. Pedersen said that we would consider this and give them a reply shortly, but pointed out that the conclusion of such an agreement would be prevented by our laws in the absence of diplomatic relations.

Bray said that he had been pleased to hear that the Algerians considered good progress to have been made on the first two numbered points above. He had also been impressed by Yazid's description of the “options” the U.S. had provided Algeria in its dealings with France and the USSR. Bray pointed out that these “options” all appeared to have benefited Algeria more than the U.S.; he could think of no comparable options that had become available to the U.S. in its dealings with Algeria in the past two years. This was a point the Algerians might keep in mind.

Mr. Pedersen added that insofar as the FPC was concerned, it would be interested in assurances as to the long-range reliability of supplies of natural gas from Algeria. Here again the status of relations between Algeria and the U.S. would be an important factor.

Bray said that in his opinion the GOA faced two problems:

(1) The first was its image in the U.S. At the moment, the image was not good. Mr. Pedersen added that many Americans thought that Algeria was too frequently on the same side of issues as the USSR, for example. Bray said that we were glad that the GOA was upgrading its representation in Washington and hoped that the head of the interests section would be assisted by able officers.

(2) There had been progress on Vietnam and in the Maghreb. The GOA should weigh in its own mind, whether - in the context of U.S.-GOA mutual interests - the issue of “Palestine for the Palestinians” outweighed other considerations of importance to the GOA, e.g. access to American capital markets, etc. The decision was one for the GOA to make; we hoped that it was clear, however, that our door was open at any time.

Yazid acknowledged the image problem and said that he would be coming to Washington in the near future to consult with Congress and the Executive Branch “as other lobbyists do”. He reiterated that our position on Palestine was important to the GOA since the GOA could identify with guerrilla activities in the light of its own history. (He added that the Fedayeen were the only eastern Arabs who need feel no sense of humiliation, since they are still fighting.)

Mr. Pedersen asked whether Yazid had other concrete steps to suggest. Yazid answered that he was expecting a high level economist to come from Algeria in the near future. He would like to bring him to Washington for discussions. Messers. Pedersen and Bray assured him that all useful doors would be open.

Yazid said that he would be in touch to continue the dialogue, most probably in Washington

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-1969, POL ALG-US. Confidential; Exdis. Drafted by Bray. The conversation took place in New York City. In telegram 2288 from Algiers, December 29, the Interests Section recorded a similar conversation with an advisor to President Boumediene, who noted that Algeria “needs ‘opportune moment' for renewal [of relations.] Although US is on right track in Vietnam, progress is too slow to provide right occasion. Some step on Middle East issue would be more appropriate.” (Ibid.)

18. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Eliot) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 27, 1969 18. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Eliot) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 27, 19691

Washington, October 27, 1969

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington, D.C. 20520
October 27, 1969

MEMORANDUM FORMR. HENRY A. KISSINGER
THE WHITE HOUSE

Subject :

President Boumediene's Reorientation of Algerian Foreign Policy: Implications for the United States.

Enclosed, for your information, is a copy of a memorandum dated October 24 concerning Algerian foreign policy.

Theodore L. Eliot
Executive Secretary

Enclosure:

As stated.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington. D.C. 20520
OCT 24 1969

SUBJECT:

Boumediene's Reorientation of Algerian Foreign Policy: Implications for the United States

Algerian President Houari Boumediene made an important foreign policy address on October 21 at a conference of Algerian chiefs of mission, His diplomats were told that, with one exception, they would all soon be transferred to inaugurate a new foreign policy asserting the priority of internal over external affairs. Algeria would shun the example of those “progressive” regimes that had played a “vanguard” role on the international scene only to collapse for internal reasons.

Algeria's foreign policy priorities would henceforth be in this order: “material, political, and ideological”. The main emphasis would be on setting Algeria's economic and financial house in order, and the performance of ambassadors' would be rated accordingly.

Boumediene said that Algerian foreign policy would also be based on a number of key principles: (1) independence of all foreign powers, whatever their position; (2) stability, peace and non-interference in the Maghreb; (3) mutual “cooperation” rather than “alms”; (4) an abhorrence of blocs, military bases, and special preserves; (5) in the Middle East an “escalation of armed struggle” by the Palestinians themselves - which he stated somewhat defensively was not an “extremist” position but simply an extension of Algeria's own independence creed; and (6) continued support to Vietnam and the African liberation movements.

What stands out in this speech is the emphasis on Boumediene's personal philosophy of concentration on internal goals. The theme had figured in earlier Bournediene speeches but had never been fully woven into Algerian foreign policy. Until the past year Boumediene's attention had been preoccupied with internal problems. With these now in hand, he is free to turn more to foreign affairs and to lean more in that field on his own ideas.

This is an attractive refrain, since the assertion of economic interests can be used to justify a bettering of relations with the U.S. In any event, the downgrading of political and ideological concerns may signal the emergence of a more pragmatic, technocratically-oriented Algeria.

Nowhere in the October 21 speech was the U.S. attacked. The old self-image of a beleaguered socialist Algeria “surrounded” by hostile pro-Western states appears to have disappeared. Even the sharper passages in the speech relating to the Middle East seemed designed mainly to demonstrate that Algeria had not renounced its revolutionary heritage.

But it was probably too much to expect that Algeria would completely forsake its old ways. On October 22, Boumediene - perhaps reacting to criticisms of his previous mildness - corrected the record on the U.S. with respect both to Vietnam and the Middle East. He explained that Algeria's criticism of the U.S. had nothing to do with purely national interests but was directed to the international role of the U.S., which he described as “hostile” to just causes. In private, the Algerians now tend to tone down this kind of language, but not yet, it appears, for general consumption.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 735, Country Files, Africa, Algeria, Vol. I. Secret.

19. Telegram 166 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, February 5, 1970, 1830Z 19. Telegram 166 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, February 5, 1970, 1830Z1

February 5, 1970, 1830Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 00166
05 FEB 1970

52 42

ACTION AF-05

INFO OCT-01 SS-20 NSC-10 NSCE-00 INR-06 CIAE-00 E-02 NEA-08 EUR-12 RSR-01 RSC-01 PM-03 DODE-00 FPC-01 AID-12 XMB-01 TRSY-06 PRS-01/090 W 059766

R 051830Z FEB 70

FM AMEMBASSY ALGIERS

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 4652

INFO

AMEMBASSY PARIS

AMEMBASSY RABAT

AMEMBASSY TUNIS

SECTION 1 OF 2 ALGIERS 166/1

SUBJECT:

MEETING WITH ALGERIAN FOREIGN MINISTER

SUMMARY: FONMIN BOUTEFLIKA CALLED ME IN TO DISCUSS U.S.-ALGERIAN RELATIONS AND ASK SECRETARY'S HELP IN OBTAINING FINANCING FOR ALGERIAN PORTION OF EL PASO GAS PROJECT. HE GAVE IMPRESSION THAT WHILE GOA FINDS IT DIFFICULT TO ESTABLISH DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS AT THIS TIME, HE WISHES TO BUILD UP U.S.-ALGERIAN ECONOMIC TIES AND U.S. PRESENCE HERE. END SUMMARY.

1. PROTOCOL ASSISTANT IN FONMIN BOUTEFLIKA'S OFFICE PHONED ME AT 6 P.M. FEBRUARY 4 TO ASK THAT I COME TO FONMINISTRY TO SEE BOUTEFLIKA IMMEDIATELY. CALL WAS NOT ENTIRELY UNEXPECTED SINCE LAST WEEK I HAD BEEN TOLD TO STAND BY FOR MEETING WHICH APPARENTLY WAS DELAYED DUE TO MALIAN AND SYRIAN STATE VISITS.

2. BOUTEFLIKA SPENT FIRST 20 MINUTES PRESENTING DETAILED FORMULATION OF ALGERIAN POSITION RE NUMBER OF QUESTIONS AFFECTING RELATIONS WITH U.S. AND LEADING UP TO REQUEST THAT SECRETARY ROGERS AND DEPARTMENT HELP ARRANGE ALGERIAN PORTION OF FINANCING OF PROPOSED EL PASO GAS PROJECT.

3. FONMIN BEGAN BY DISCUSSING U.S.-ALGERIAN DIPLOMATIC BREAK IN 1967 IN MANNER WHICH AMOUNTED TO ADMISSION THAT IT HAD BEEN A STUPID MISTAKE BUT THAT RENEWAL WITHOUT SOME POSITIVE DEVELOPMENT TO JUSTIFY IT WOULD ONLY CONFIRM ORIGINAL ALGERIAN FOLLY. HE REFERRED TO VIET NAM WHERE U.S. HAD TAKEN POSITIVE STEP BY ENGAGING IN PARIS MEETINGS BUT WHERE NO AGREEMENT HAD YET BEEN REACHED. ON MIDDLE EAST U.S. POLICY APPEARED TO BE CONSTANTLY CHANGING WITH REPORTS FAVORABLE TO ARABS ONE DAY AND PRO-ISRAELI NEXT. HE IMPLIED THAT NEITHER VIET NAM NOR MIDDLE EAST HAD YET PROVIDED PEG ON WHICH ALGERIA COULD RENEW DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS.

4. FONMIN THEN TURNED TO ECONOMIC RELATIONS WHICH HAD IMPROVED SUBSTANTIALLY DURING LAST TWO YEARS SO THAT U.S. FIRMS NOW ENJOYED A “FAVORED POSITION” HERE. ALGERIAN GOVERNMENT WISHED THIS TREND TO CONTINUE SO THAT WHEN DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WERE FINALLY RESTORED THEY WOULD BE BASED ON SOMETHING TANGIBLE AND ENDURING. MOST IMPORTANT FIELD OF ECONOMIC COOPERATION FOR FUTURE WAS IN LIQUEFIED GAS PROJECTS, SUCH AS EL PASO DEAL. HE HAD HAD LONG TALK WITH EL PASO PRESIDENT BOYD WHO WAS IN ALGIERS RECENTLY AND HE HAD BEEN STRUCK BY FACT THAT ORIGINAL PROJECT CALLING FOR DELIVERY 10 BILLION CUBIC METERS PER YEAR AMOUNTED TO ONLY 2 PERCENT OF TOTAL U.S. CONSUMPTION. BOYD HAD TOLD HIM THAT PROSPECTS WERE GOOD THAT SALES COULD BE EXTENDED AN ADDITIONAL 5 BILLION CUBIC METERS PER YEAR.

5. REFERRED TO TWO ASPECTS OF EL PASO DEAL WHICH INVOLVED USG. FIRST WAS APPROVAL OF PROJECT BY FPC. SECOND, WHICH WAS MAIN PURPOSE OF HIS CALLING ME IN, WAS FINANCING OF ALGERIA'S SHARE OF PROJECT. DURING HIS MEETING WITH SECRETARY ROGERS IN OCTOBER SECRETARY HAD “PROMISED TO BE HELPFUL IN SUCH MATTERS”. HE NOTED THAT SECRETARY WAS EX-OFFICIO MEMBER OF BOARD OF EXIMBANK. HE THOUGHT THAT BANK COULD PLAY MAJOR ROLE IN ARRANGING FINANCING OF EL PASO PROJECT AND WISHED ME TO CONVEY TO DEPARTMENT AND SECRETARY HIS REQUEST FOR THEIR SUPPORT. HE ALSO WONDERED WHETHER THE IBRD MIGHT BE HELPFUL, THOUGH HE WAS CENTERING HIS REQUEST ON EXIMBANK.

6. IN REPLY I RECIPROCATED FONMIN'S DESIRE TO BUILD ECONOMIC RELATIONS AND NOTED THAT STATE DEPARTMENT WAS TAKING POSITIVE POSITION IN THIS REGARD. FOR EXAMPLE EXIMBANK LOAN OBTAINED FOR ALGERIA'S PURCHASE OF BOEINGS. I ALSO REFERRED TO QUESTION OF FPC APPROVAL AND SAID WE WERE ON WHOLE OPTIMISTIC, BUT PROCESS MIGHT TAKE LONG TIME. I UNDERTOOK TO TRANSMIT FONMIN'S REQUEST TO DEPARTMENT AND SECRETARY AND SAID I WOULD ALSO HAVE OPPORTUNITY IN KINSHASA TO SEE NOT ONLY SECRETARY BUT ASSISTANT SECRETARY NEWSOM AND COUNTRY DIRECTOR FOR NORTH AFRICA BLAKE AND OTHERS WHO WERE INTERESTED IN ALGERIA.

7. I OBSERVED THAT PRINCIPLE THAT ALGERIA COULD USE EXIM FACILITY APPEARED TO HAVE BEEN ESTABLISHED, BUT FINANCING OF EL PASO DEAL WAS LARGE AND COMPLEX MATTER REQUIRING A NUMBER OF SOURCES MANY OF WHICH WOULD BE PRIVATE. I REFERRED TO WIDESPREAD IMPRESSION THAT ALGERIAN GOVERNMENT CONSIDERED IBRD HOSTILE. WE BELIEVED THIS WAS A MISTAKE SINCE WE UNDERSTOOD THAT DOORS AT IBRD WERE OPEN TO AN ALGERIAN APPROACH. WE HAD BEEN SURPRISED AT RECENT ATTACK ON IBRD AND ROBERT MCNAMARA IN RECENT ISSUE OF QUASI-OFFICIAL ALGERIAN NEWSPAPER.

8. FONMIN REPLIED THAT IT WAS TRUE THAT ALGERIA FELT THAT IBRD WAS HOSTILE. HE WAS VERY INTERESTED, HOWEVER, IN MY STATEMENT THAT WE THOUGHT A DIALOGUE WITH BANK COULD BE USEFUL. HE SAID ALGERIAN GOVERNMENT HAD HIGHEST REGARD FOR MR. MCNAMARA, AND GAVE IMPRESSION THEY MIGHT TAKE INITIATIVE IN APPROACHING IBRD.

9. FONMIN SAID HE WAS GLAD TO KNOW THAT I WOULD BE SENDING REPORT OF OUR CONVERSATION TO WASHINGTON BY TELEGRAM. ALGERIA WAS IN A HURRY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND WAS ANXIOUS TO HAVE A REPLY AS SOON AS POSSIBLE. HE WONDERED WHETHER I COULD GO TO RABAT DURING SECRETARY'S VISIT THERE TO DISCUSS MATTER WITH HIM. I OBSERVED THAT SECRETARY'S SCHEDULE IS TIGHT, THAT IT WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE FOR HIM TO RECEIVE CHIEFS OF MISSION WHO MIGHT WANT TO INTERCEPT HIM ALONG PATH OF HIS AFRICAN TRIP AND IN ANY CASE I COULD DISCUSS MATTER IN KINSHASA.

10. FONMIN SAID GOA WOULD LIKE TO KNOW AS SOON AS POSSIBLE WHETHER OR NOT USG COULD ARRANGE FINANCING OF EL PASO DEAL. I REPLIED THAT QUESTION OF FINANCING WAS EXTREMELY COMPLICATED AND AGAIN MENTIONED FACT THAT EXIMBANK WAS ONLY ONE POSSIBLE ELEMENT IN A FINANCIAL PACKAGE. QUESTION WAS NOT WHETHER USG COULD PROVIDE FINANCING BUT EXTENT TO WHICH DEPARTMENT COULD BE HELPFUL IN FACILITATING ALGERIAN EFFORTS TO FIND FINANCING. THUS IT WAS NOT QUESTION OF A YES OR NO REPLY. I HOPED, HOWEVER, THAT I WOULD BE ABLE TO GIVE HIM DEPARTMENT'S AND SECRETARY'S VIEWS WHICH COULD HELP ALGERIA MOVE PROJECT FORWARD.

11. SINCE BOUTEFLIKA SEEMED INCLINED TO CONTINUE CONVERSATION I REFERRED TO HIS STATEMENT ABOUT CHANGES IN U.S. POLICY IN MIDDLE EAST. HE SAID THAT HE AND OTHERS IN ALGERIAN GOVERNMENT HAD BEEN FAVORABLY IMPRESSED BY SECRETARY'S SPEECH LIMDIS OF DECEMBER 9. HE ALSO APPRECIATED VERY MUCH OUR HAVING MADE AVAILABLE TO HIM ON CONFIDENTIAL BASIS DOCUMENTS OUTLINING AMERICAN POSITION. HE HAD PERSONALLY SUGGESTED THAT SMAIL HAMDANI ACT AS SPECIAL LIAISON ON SUCH MATTERS SINCE HAMDANI HAD CLOSE CONTACTS BOTH WITH HIM AND WITH PRESIDENT BOUMEDIENE. RE MIDDLE EAST, HE HAD IMPRESSION U.S. POSITION HAD SLIPPED SINCE ARAB SUMMIT MEETING. I REPLIED THAT THIS WAS NOT THE CASE AND CONVERSATION CONTINUED BACK AND FORTH FOR MOST PART AVOIDING ISSUES ON WHICH U.S. AND ALGERIAN POINTS OF VIEW DID NOT AGREE. BOUTEFLIKA IN SEMI-SERIOUS VEIN REMARKED HOW BLATANTLY OPPORTUNISTIC FRENCH HAVE BEEN IN THEIR COURTING OF ARABS EVEN THOUGH THEIR POSITION ON MIDDLE EAST IS FAR LESS PRO-ARAB THAN IT APPEARS. HE ALSO SPOKE SYMPATHETICALLY OF DILEMMA FACED BY U.S. AND UNFORTUNATE OPPORTUNITY IT GAVE FOR “OUTSIDE POWER TO MOVE INTO AREA”. SEVERAL TIMES IN CONVERSATION HE SINGLED OUT ALGERIAN POLICIES THAT WERE IN OPPOSITION TO SOVIETS, SUCH AS ALGERIAN POSITION THAT ALL NON-MEDITERRANEAN FLEETS SHOULD LEAVE MEDITERRANEAN.

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 00166
05 FEB 1970

52 42

ACTION AF-05

INFO OCT-01 SS-20 NSC-10 NSCE-00 INR-06 CIAE-00 E-02 NEA-08 EUR-12 RSR-01 RSC-01 PM-03 DODE-00 FPC-01 AID-12 XMB-01 TRSY-06 PRS-01/090 W 059771

R 051830Z FEB 70

FM AMEMBASSY ALGIERS

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 4652

INFO

AMEMBASSY PARIS

AMEMBASSY RABAT

AMEMBASSY TUNIS

SECTION 1 OF 2 ALGIERS 166/2

SUBJECT:

MEETING WITH ALGERIAN FOREIGN MINISTER

12. REFERRING TO HAMDANI'S LIAISON ROLE, I SUGGESTED THAT IF THERE WERE EVER ANY ASPECT OF U.S. POLICY THAT FONMIN WISHED TO CLARIFY HE SHOULD HAVE HAMDANI COME IMMEDIATELY TO US FOR EXPLANATION. FOR EXAMPLE, THERE HAD BEEN A FALSE DOCUMENT CRICULATING AT RABAT SUMMITI BOUTEFLIKA BROKE IN TO SAY THAT THIS DOCUMENT HAD BEEN GIVEN TO ALGERIAN DELEGATION WITH REQUEST THAT ALGERIAN PRESS PUBLISH IT. ALGERIANS HAD NOT BEEN SO EASILY TAKEN IN, HOWEVER, SINCE THEY THOUGHT IT UNLIKELY THAT GENUINE INSTRUCTIONS FROM SECRETARY OF STATE WOULD BE CIRCULATING AT RABAT. I AGREED AND NOTED ANOMALY IN EMBASSY ADEN'S BEING ADDRESSEE. AT ONE POINT IN CONVERSATION FONMIN REFERRED DISPARAGINGLY TO “LATEST WORD OUT OF CAIRO” (HIS EUPHEMISM FOR NASSER'S RECENT SPEECH) WHICH HE SAID HAD CASTIGATED USG IN UNPRECEDENTED MANNER. INFERENCE WAS THAT HE CONSIDERED NASSER'S ATTACK IRRESPONSIBLE.

13. AS CAN BE SEEN FROM ABOVE, CONVERSATION WHICH BEGAN IN A STRUCTURED VEIN BECAME INCREASINGLY INFORMAL AND ENDED WITH BOUTEFLIKA APPLYING HIS MOST CHARMING MANNER. IN REPLY TO HIS FRIENDLY CLOSING REMARKS, I SAID THAT HE COULD BE CERTAIN DEPARTMENT WOULD INTERPRET HIS HAVING RECEIVED CHIEF U.S. INTERESTS SECTION ALGIERS AS A POSITIVE STEP IN IMPROVEMENT IN U.S.-ALGERIAN RELATIONS. HE REPLIED THAT IF AT ANY TIME I WISHED TO SEE HIM PERSONALLY ON ANY IMPORTANT OR URGENT MATTER, I SHOULD LET HAMDANI KNOW AND HE WOULD RECEIVE ME AT ONCE. (CHIEFS OF MISSION OFTEN WAIT WEEKS FOR INTERVIEWS WITH BOUTEFLIKA.)

14. COMMENT: THIS IS FIRST TIME BOUTEFLIKA HAS RECEIVED A U.S. DIPLOMATIC REPRESENTATIVE IN ALGIERS SINCE 1967 BREAK. HE NOW SEEMS TO WISH TO MOVE RELATIONS FORWARD ON BASIS PERSONAL CONTACT HE ESTABLISHED WITH SECRETARY AT OCTOBER I0 MEETING IN NEW YORK. HIS REQUEST RE USG HELP IN FINANCING EL PASO DEAL SEEMED SOMEWHAT NAIVE. PERHAPS HE HAD BEEN BRIEFED TO PRESS FOR SECRETARY'S HELP ONLY IN OBTAINING EXIMBANK LOANS COVERING EQUIPMENT PURCHASES IN U.S., THOUGH HE GAVE THE IMPRESSION THAT HE EXPECTED EXIMBANK TO HELP PUT TOGETHER FINANCIAL PACKAGE FROM OTHER U.S. SOURCES. WHATEVER HIS EXPECTATIONS, HIS APPROACH PROVIDES OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO RE-ESTABLISH HIGH LEVEL CONTACT WITHIN GOA AND FURTHER TEST ALGERIA'S DESIRE TO IMPROVE RELATIONS. I WILL HOPE TO OBTAIN GUIDANCE ON SUBSTANCE OF OUR INITIAL REPLY AND FUTURE TACTICS AT KINSHASA CONFERENCE.

GP-3

EAGLETON

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL ALG-US. Secret; Limdis. It was repeated to Paris, Rabat, and Tunis. In telegram 32269 to Algiers, March 5, Rogers noted the complexities of responding to Bouteflika's request for financing, urging that the Algerian Government expand its Interests Section in Washington to facilitate the request. (Ibid.)

20. Telegram Secto 36/581 From Secretary of State Rogers in Morocco to the Department of State, February 11, 1970, 2130Z. 20. Telegram Secto 36/581 From Secretary of State Rogers in Morocco to the Department of State, February 11, 1970, 2130Z.1

February 11, 1970, 2130Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
ADDIS ABABA 0581
P R 112130Z FEB 70

82

ACTION SS-45

INFO OCT-01 SSO-00 CCO-00 FILE-01/047 W 093627

P R 112130Z FEB 70

FM AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2301

INFO

AEMBASSY RABAT

ADDIS ABABA 0581

SECTO 36

1. THIS MESSAGE SUMMARIZES HIGH POINTS OF MEETING HELD 9 FEB 1700 HOURS IN RABAT BETWEEN THE SECRETARY AND ALGERIAN AMBASSADOR TO MOROCCO, AMB OSMAN. THE MEETING WAS HELD AT RESIDENCE OF THE MOROCCAN DIRECTOR OF THE ROYAL CABINET.

2. SECRETARY TOLD AMBASSADOR USG IS WILLING TO CONTINUE WORKING TOWARD IMPROVING RELATIONS AND ASKED FOR SUGGESTIONS AMB MIGHT HAVE. AMB REPLIED THAT WHEN HIS PRESIDENT CAME TO RABAT, HE DISCUSSED WITH KING QUESTION OF HIS COUNTRY'S RELATIONS WITH THE UNITED STATES. EARLIER TODAY KING HAD SAID UNITED STATES ATTACHES NO CONDTION TO RENEWAL OF RELATIONS. AMB SAID HE VERIFIED THIS BY CALLING HIS FOREIGN MINISTER. HE RECALLED THAT IN HIS MEETING WITH THE SECY IN NEW YORK, THE FOREIGN MINISTER HAD EXPLAINED HIS COUNTRY HAD BROKEN OFF RELATIONS FOR TWO MAIN REASONS: THE MIDDLE EAST AND THE FAR EAST. ON THE FIRST SCORE HIS COUNTRY WOULD LIKE TO SEE AN ENCOURAGING INITIATIVE ON PART OF U.S. HE SAID GOA BELIEVED U.S. SHOULD NO LONGER EXTEND UNCONDITIONAL SUPPORT TO ISRAEL. U.S. HAS INTERESTS IN THE ARAB WORLD, IT HAS REASONS TO LEAN TOWARDS ISRAEL BUT IT MUST BE ABLE TO STRIKE A BALANCE. CITING WHAT HE THOUGHT TO BE DISCREPANCIES BETWEEN ROGERS' DEC 9 STATEMENT AND PRESIDENT NIXON'S LATER MESSAGE TO JEWISH LEADERS, THE AMB ASKED IF THERE WERE NEW ELEMENT.

3. SECY RESPONDED USG WOULD LIKE RENEW DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS NOT IN CONTEXT OF EAST-WEST RELATIONS OR OUR RELATIONS TO ISRAEL BUT BECAUSE WE DEEM IT DESIRABLE TO HAVE RELATIONS AND FEEL THAT MAGHREB COUNTRIES COULD CONTRIBUTE SIGNIFICANTLY TO THIS REGION. BUT THERE WAS NO HURRY. STEPS WE HAD TAKEN SO FAR HAD BEEN DESIRABLE STEPS TO TAKE AND WE WERE PLEASED WITH THEM AND WE WERE READY TO MOVE WHENEVER HIS COUNTRY WAS READY. SECRETARY POINTED OUT THAT ONE COULD HAVE DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH A COUNTRY WITHOUT NECESSARILY HAVING TO AGREE WITH THAT COUNTRY ON EVERY POINT. IT WAS IMPORTANT IN FACT TO HAVE DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH A COUNTRY WITH WHICH ONE DIFFERED. WE WERE HESITANT HERE AT THE THOUGHT THAT RELATIONS WOULD BE BROKEN OFF IF THERE WAS ANOTHER DISAGREEMENT BETWEEN US.

4. CONCERNING THE MIDDLE EAST OUR SOLE CONCERN WAS TO BRING PEACE. WE HAD MANY FRIENDS BOTH ARAB AND ISRAELI AND WE WERE IN THE UNCOMFORTABLE POSITION OF ALWAYS BEING CASTIGATED BY ONE OR THE OTHER. OUR POLICY WAS CONTAINED IN THE DEC 9 SPEECH. IT COULD NOT BE CONSIDERED A PRO-ISRAEL STATEMENT. PRESIDENT NIXON PRESS CONFERENCE CLEARLY STATED DEC 9 SPEECH REPRESENTED THE ADMINISTRATION'S POLICY. SECRETARY EMPHASIZED WE OPPOSED ISRAEL'S EXPANSIONISM AND WILL CONTINUE DO SO. WE ALSO OPPOSED TO IDEA ISRAEL MAY BE DESTROYED AND WILL CONTINUE OPPOSE THIS. WITHIN THIS FRAMEWORK WE WANT TO DO EVERYTHING WE CAN FOR PEACE. WE DOUBT THE SOVIET UNION IS SO INCLINED ITSELF. THE SOVIETS ARE DOING VERY WELL AT THE MOMENT. THEY THRIVE ON TURMOIL AND USUALLY GAIN THEIR OBJECTIVES IN THAT FASHION.

5. SECY THEN ASKED IF VIETNAM CONTINUED TO BE A PROBLEM. THE AMB SAID THIS NO LONGER THE CASE. THEY WERE PLEASED WITH VIETNAMIZATION PROGRAM AND TROOP WITHDRAWAL AND WERE CONTENT THAT VIETNAMESE SHOULD BE LEFT TO SETTLE THEIR PROBLEMS AMONG THEMSELVES. HE CONCLUDED BY STRESSING HIS COUNTRY'S DESIRE TO COOPERATE WITH THE UNITED STATES. HIS COUNTRY HAD MANY INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS AND DID NOT WISH TO EXCLUDE THE UNITED STATES FROM PARTICIPATION IN THEM. SECY POINTED OUT THAT USG PARTICIPATION WAS NOT EASY ABSENCE OF DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS BUT WE WOULD HELP WHERE WE COULD FACILITATE PRIVATE ENTERPRISE. HE ASKED AMB TO TRANSMIT HIS PERSONAL REGARDS TO THE FOREIGN MINISTER AND EXPRESS THE DESIRE TO KEEP DIALOGUE OPEN.

HALL

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, ORG 7 S. Secret; Exdis. It was repeated to Rabat.

21. Telegram 64991 From the Department of State to the Interests Section in Algeria, April 30, 1970, 0138Z 21. Telegram 64991 From the Department of State to the Interests Section in Algeria, April 30, 1970, 0138Z1

April 30, 1970, 0138Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State 064991
30 APR 70

ACTION:

USINT ALGIERS

REF:

Algiers 592, 595

1. Department continues to favor expansion commercial relations with Algeria. It has become increasingly clear, however, that our ability to encourage this relationship by positive acts is likely to be limited by lack of progress toward settlement of outstanding claims of American nationals against Algeria and disputes with American corporations. We have on several occasions tried to make this clear to GOA, most recently in Secretary's message to Bouteflika (State 032269). We wish to avoid giving Algerians impression our moves are related only to EL PASO project or that we are pressing them too hard. At same time, we consider Bouteflika's request that the Secretary facilitate El Paso project an important initiative to which we are attempting to be responsive.

2. We are hopeful that SONATRACH President Ghozali's recent statements to Gibson (Algiers 592 and 595) indicate Algerian awareness of desirability of reaching settlement with oil companies. Department suggests you seek early meeting with Ghozali to explore his approach including status of disputes with American oil companies mentioned reftels. Further, you should make clear to Ghozali that statement which appeared in “International Commerce” that settlement of disputes will probably have to await Govt to Govt negotiations after resumption of relations does not represent Department policy. We believe the sooner progress can be shown toward settlement of claims and disputes the better. Absence of diplomatic relations need not delay this effort. Recent communications from Department (Blake-Newsom memo of April 16 on status of nationalizations and restrictions on US-owned property) and copies of Phillips and Sinclair interventions in Distrigas case before FTC should provide you with most recent info available to Dept. As you noted in Algiers 592, USG is unable to speak for oil companies. In any case, we envisage your first meeting with Ghozali as exploratory and largely for purpose of assuring that Gibson conveyed Ghozali's statements accurately. We leave to your discretion whether or not to have Bray accompany you to see Ghozali.

3. Concurrently, you should seek appointment with Ould-Rouis or equivalent level Foreign Ministry official to initiate talks on claims arising from GOA 1963 nationalizations, eleven of which were submitted to GOA in late 1965 and early 1966 (there may be additional claimants who have not furnished complete dossier). As you aware, GOA recognized principle of compensation or restitution at its discretion in these cases before negotiations ceased with rupture of diplomatic relations in June 1967. You should have sufficient documentation on hand to make this initial approach. You should make clear that we consider settlement of these claims in interest of long-range US-Algerian relations since outstanding nature of these claims make USG actions favorable to Algeria considering more difficult than would otherwise be the case.FYI. We will want GOA reaction to reopening of these claims before proceeding further. If GOA should respond that it is unable to undertake substantive discussion of claims pending consideration of French, Swiss, Italian and other claims, you should make clear that this is problem between GOA and those governments, but is not in our opinion sufficient reason to delay progress on US claims. END FYI.

4. AF/N officers (Blake and Lowrie) made strong pitch to head of Algerian Interests Section Ben-Allou on April 28 covering most of above points.

END

ROGERS

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL ALG-US. Confidential. Drafted by Lowrie on April 28; cleared by E/ORF/FSE, L/AF, E/IMA/FOD, L/C, L/E and AF/N; and approved by Smith. In telegram 652 from Algiers, May 6, Eagleton reported that he had discussed with Algerian officials the fact that Algerian disputes with American oil companies could affect Federal Power Commission (FPC) consideration of the El Paso gas deal. (Ibid.)

22. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, October 14, 1970 22. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, October 14, 19701

Washington, October 14, 1970

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION
October 14, 1970

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM: Henry A. Kissinger [HK initialed]

SUBJECT:

Letter to President Boumediene

You will recall greeting FRANK BORMAN in San Clemente upon his return from the POW mission to world capitals as your personal emissary. Borman has told us of his extremely cordial and friendly reception in Algiers where he met both with President Boumediene and Foreign Minister Bouteflika. It is our understanding that Borman's stop in Algeria was, in fact, the highlight of his mission.

He reports that: — On the POW issue, Boumediene expressed interest in being helpful but felt that the opposition considers the prisoners their trump card at the Paris negotiations. However, Foreign Minister Bouteflika promised to raise the question during a forthcoming trip to Hanoi.

— On the Mid-East situation, both leaders made these points in a lengthy discussion:

— The Rogers Plan was a good first step but a Palestinian role will have to be taken into consideration.

— A U.S. presence is definitely needed to offset Soviet intrusion into the area.

— There is nothing specific troubling US-Algerian relations except the overall Mid-East context which prevented resumption of formal relations at this time. [Bouteflika went so far as to say that the Algerians would like to find a “political hook” on which to hang resumption.]

— Economic cooperation between our two nations was flourishing and Boumediene hoped that economic, technical and commercial ties would expand.

— President Boumediene extended his best wishes to you.

State feels that Borman's reception—in the absence of diplomatic relations—was noteworthy and recommends that you send a note of thanks to Boumediene for his hospitality to Borman as a way of keeping the lines open to the Algerian leader.

There is also a related action. Presidential confidant, Rachid Zeghar, who performs liaison functions with our Interests Section in Algeria and who helped to arrange Borman's visit, gave Borman some gifts—for you, a dagger which belonged to Algeria's most famous 19th century figure, Emir Abdelkadar, and for Mrs. Nixon and Julie two intricately woven brocade gowns from Constantine. These gifts should be acknowledged, although it will be difficult for you to send a letter to Zeghar if you do not send one to President Boumediene.

The issue is whether you wish to capitalize on the opportunity that the POW reception for Borman presents to keep an open door to Boumediene. By all accounts, the Algerians went out their way to make Borman's layover a success and they seized the opportunity to express interest in improving ties with us.

As you know, our relationship with Algeria at the moment is primarily a pragmatic, economic one. Boumediene has categorically stated that his primary interest is in economic development. He is anxious to have greater access to U.S. energy markets, capital resources and technology, and commercial ties with the U.S. have flourished even in the absence of diplomatic relations. It can be assumed that the main interest in resuming relations would be to improve access to the U.S. for commercial reasons, rather than for any shift in political ideology. Most recently, we have reports that the Algerians are sending small arms resupply to the Palestinian fedayeen, and there is little to suggest that they will not continue ideological and practical support for so-called liberation movements of all kinds, including the Black Panthers. It is interesting to note, nevertheless, that they have just recently upgraded their Interests Section here in Washington. However, the Head of our Interests Section who is here on consultation does not overrate the chances for resumption of relations in the near future.

With reference to Rachid Zeghar's gifts, they were not apparent as part of the official Algerian reception. Two letters—to Boumediene and Zeghar—might have the effect of diluting the first. A single letter to Zeghar would be awkward. Lucy Ferguson would have no problem acknowledging the gifts through her channels.

Recommendation: That you sign the letter to President Boumediene at Tab A and, in so doing, authorize Lucy Ferguson to acknowledge the gifts from Rachid Zeghar. Jim Keogh concurs.

[HAK approved for Pres.]

No letter to Boumediene; ask Mrs. Ferguson to acknowledge the gifts

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 748, Presidential Correspondence, 1969-74, Algeria, Col. Houari Boumediene. Confidential. Sent for action. Kissinger approved for the President. The letter, not printed, was sent on October 16.

23. Telegram 204757 From the Department of State to the Interests Section in Algeria, December 17, 1970, 0012Z. 23. Telegram 204757 From the Department of State to the Interests Section in Algeria, December 17, 1970, 0012Z.1

December 17, 1970, 0012Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State 204757
17 DEC 70

ACTION:

USINT ALGIERS 1

1. Secretary received Bousselham December 16 in accordance latter's request for opportunity make courtesy call. After preliminary exchange, during which Secretary complimented Bousselham on his appointment as head of “upgraded” Algerian Interests Section, Secretary asked Bousselham to convey his best wishes to Foreign Minister Bouteflika, whom he regretted not having seen at this year's General Assembly session but hoped to see again. Secretary then expressed belief that US policy in Middle East had assumed more “even-handed” character since his meeting with Bouteflika a year ago. Noted that US policy in Middle East is now subject to criticism by Israelis as well as Arabs. Secretary noted USG in handling Middle East problem sometimes felt like tennis ball: it gets hit from both sides of the net but game could not go on without it.

2. Bousselham, replying courteously to Secretary's compliments on his appointment, stated he also wished convey Bouteflika's best wishes to Secretary. Referring to Secretary's comments on policy, he indicated that despite policy differences between Algeria and the US, GOA wished emphasize common interests of both countries as basis for cooperation. Bousselham noted US commercial activity with Algeria had increased over 100 per cent since 1967 break in diplomatic ties. He expressed confidence strengthening of Algerian-US economic relations would lay foundation for increased cooperation between both countries in future.

3. In reply to Secretary's comment that diplomatic relations should exist between countries despite their differences over policy, Bousselham stated that he, personally, saw his assignment to Washington as one step to be followed by others in expanding relations.

4. Secretary then inquired re Algerian policy with respect to acceptance so-called political refugees and exiles. Secretary indicated that he thought he understood policy but that he was puzzled by Algerian acceptance of certain individuals, such as Timothy Leary. Bousselham explained policy as one occasionally marked by mistakes which he attributed to “youthfulness.” Stated that Algeria had been surprised by arrival of Leary who had literally “dropped from the skies,” GOA had endeavored to fob him off on Lebanese and Egyptians, both of whom, however, shunted him back to Algiers. Bousselham concluded by stating GOA fully recognizes “danger Leary poses for Algerian youth” and that he is being kept under surveillance to prevent any contact with Algerian youth.

5. Secretary assured Bousselham of Department's desire to be of every assistance in facilitating his mission and expressed appreciation for courtesies and assistance given by GOA to Eagleton and members of USINT Algiers. In response to Secretary's query re his family, Bousselham indicated he would be returning to US with his wife and four children and declared that he thought his children would greatly benefit from their sojourn here.

6. Following meeting Bousselham expressed deep appreciation of Secretary's consideration in receiving him despite Secretary's heavy schedule. He obviously pleased with range of initial contacts he has made in Department and deeply impressed by Secretary's warm, friendly welcome and informal manner. Bousselhamls own manner has been markedly outgoing and it was obvious after first few minutes with Secretary that he felt very much at ease.
GP-3
END

ROGERS

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 17 ALG-US. Confidential. Drafted by Blake; cleared by NEA/UAR, S, and AF; and approved by Eliot. In a December 14 memorandum from Moore to Rogers, Moore had relayed Bousselham's request for an appointment. Updating the Secretary on the status of expropriation negotiations between Algeria and American firms, Moore concluded, “We want to respond to these Algerian actions to assure them that we share the desire for improved relations. The rather unorthodox gesture of your receiving Bousselham at this time would give such a signal. We urge, therefore, that you agree to see him for a 10 minute courtesy call before December 19.” (Ibid., POL 15-1 ALG) In telegram 205697, December 18, the Department reported on Bousselham's talks on economic relations with Deputy Under Secretary Samuels and Assistant Secretaries Newsom and Trezise. (Ibid.)

24. Telegram 58412 From the Department of State to the Embassy in France, April 7, 1971, 1955Z 24. Telegram 58412 From the Department of State to the Embassy in France, April 7, 1971, 1955Z1

April 7, 1971, 1955Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State 058412
07 APR 71

ACTION:

Amembassy PARIS

INFO:

USINT ALGIERS

1. French Ambassador Lucet called on Assistant Secretary Newsom April 6 in connection with Ambassador's planned consultations Paris next week. Lucet indicated he would appreciate rundown on US-GOA relations, particularly USG intentions with respect to importation LNG from Algeria.

2. Newsom indicated he welcomed opportunity review subject with Ambassador as he had done with Le Gourrierec and Landy in February. Recalled that at that time he had assured Quai representatives USG respects French role in Algeria and that USG has no intention creating any difficulties for France in its relations with Algeria, particularly at this difficult time. Newsom indicated we aware doubts in some French circles re US intentions with respect to French interests in Algeria and North Africa generally. He therefore welcomed opportunity repeat assurances he had given to Le Gourrierec this subject.

3. Newsom noted many of doubts re US role in Algeria stemmed from activities private American companies there. He stated such activities were taken on initiative of companies themselves and without stimulation by USG. For example, EL PASO arrangement with SONATRACH for importation LNG was begun by company on its own over two years ago. Matter was brought to attention of Department and other agencies of government only as requirement for USG role, such as FPC approval, became evident. Newsom indicated there are three aspects of El Paso matter which relevant to timing of decisions USG will be called upon to make: progress toward settlement claims by American companies against GOA; FPC hearings; and, finally, Eximbank consideration of loan requested by SONATRACH.

4. Re claims, Newsom stated settlements had now been made on all with exception of Esso and Newmont Mining, with prospects for Esso settlement good. Re FPC hearings on El Paso application for LNG imports scheduled begin April 8 and first place would require number of weeks for completion. FPC would determine whether such imports were in national interest. Some opposition to imports expected. Re Eximbank, Algerians probably under impression SONATRACH loan would be made if settlement of company claims effected. However, Eximbank action on SONATRACH application for $285 million loan probably would remain in abeyance for several weeks. Sometime after commencement first phase FPC hearings, Department would be submitting letter to FPC in response latter's request as to whether there exists any objection on foreign policy grounds to importation of LNG. In response Lucet's query, Newsom said letters in previous cases had indicated no such objection and so far as he now aware this was probably position Department would take in El Paso case.

5. Lucet then commented that it appeared probable that in normal course of events FPC approval would be obtained for LNG imports and Eximbank would be favorably disposed to loan. Newsom concurred while noting decision by FPC and Eximbank not predetermined and in any event several weeks away. Newsom further noted that Eximbank would not take all of $285 million loan; roughly half would have to be sought from private banks under Eximbank guarantee. Newsom noted parenthetically that $285 million covered Arzew liquefaction plant. Total expenditures in project as a whole, by Algerians as well as El Paso, would amount to about one billion. Lucet appeared impressed. Newsom further noted several of tankers required by El Paso would be constructed in French shipyards.

6. Lucet then asked whether there was any significantly new development in US-Algerian political relations. Newsom replied that while commercial and economic ties appeared to be evolving significantly, broader USG-Algerian relations appear to be pretty much same as they had been in the past. We and Algerians talk more to each other than was case a year or so ago, and Algerians now tend to include head of USINT Algiers in more functions than was case in past, most notably in funeral ceremonies for Colonel Chabou. Newsom also noted that Algerians, after delay of more than a year since Secretary Rogers and Foreign Minister Bouteflika had discussed subject, had finally sent senior diplomat to head Algerian Interests Section Washington last December.

7. Lucet expressed appreciation briefing by Newsom. Indicated he would return from Paris around April 21 and would provide Quai views at that time. He felt certain, however, US Embassy Paris already fully informed his government's interests and concerns this whole subject.
GP-3
END

ROGERS

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL ALG - US. Secret. It was repeated to Algiers. Drafted on April 6 by Blake (AF/N); cleared by EUR/FBX, E/ORF/FSE, and AF; and approved by Blake. As a series of documents indicates, Paris, still in negotiations with Algiers over post-independence expropriations, was not eager to see the United States act on the El Paso Company's proposed deal with SONATRACH. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials Project, NSC Files, Boxes 677-678, Country Files, Europe, France) In telegram 65768, April 17, the Department sent an oral message from Nixon to President Pompidou indicating that the United States had no desire to impede France in resolving its problems with Algeria, and that there was time for French-Algerian negotiations to be completed before the natural gas deal was finalized. The restoration of political relations with Algeria, Nixon emphasized, would benefit all in the West. (Ibid., Box 678, Country Files, Europe, France, Volume VIII, 4/71-12/71)

25. Airgram A-11 From the Department of State to the Interests Section in Algeria, June 16, 1971 25. Airgram A-11 From the Department of State to the Interests Section in Algeria, June 16, 19711

June 16, 1971

AIGRAM
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
A-11
JUN 16 71

TO:

U.S. INTERESTS ALGIERS

FROM:Department of State

SUBJECT:

Policy Planning Paper

REF:

CA-5632, November 3, 1970

Attached are three copies of the Policy Planning Paper for Algeria, as approved by the members of the NSC Interdepartmental Group for Africa.

The paper constitutes an official statement of US policy towards Algeria and should be used as a guideline by all elements of the Embassy in the preparation of policy statements, action plans and future budgetary projections.

ROGERS

Enclosure:

As Stated

ALGERIA: Policy Planning Paper

Approved by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for Africa
June 1971

ALGERIA: Policy Planning Paper

Introduction

Algeria is the most dynamic and important nation of North Africa. It has a young aggressive leadership that appears determined to maintain Algeria's political independence from any major power, while drawing pragmatically on outside capital and technology to exploit its natural resources and develop the country. This approach has led rapidly to a substantial improvement in U.S.-Algerian relations, both political and economic. We see our broad interests well served if this trend continues. Algeria has settled satisfactorily the compensation claims of American corporations, and is actively reviewing the private American claims. There is now a potentially very large market for U.S. technology and capital in Algeria. As the economy expands, significant private U.S. investment opportunities in the form of joint partnerships should develop.

The U.S. demands for fuel energy are outpacing supply, and the contemplated El Paso-SONATRACH project for the importation Algerian gas will play a significant role over the next twenty years. We also see this project, of such importance to the Algerians, as associating them closely with western (specifically U.S.) economic interests.

It is not in our interest to work actively to undermine the historic French position in Algeria. France itself is too important for us to attempt anything so antagonistic and, despite their troubles; the remaining ties of the French with Algeria cannot easily be broken. Realistically, however, we expect the Algerians to move away from the French (as they are already doing in the critical petroleum sector). We do see it to be in our interests to fill, at least in part, a vacuum left by the French in this strategically, economically and politically important North African and Mediterranean country. We consider a close relationship with the countries of Western Europe, and not to turn to the Soviet Union.

A. U.S. Interests in Algeria

1. Because of its geographic position, substantial resources (chiefly in petroleum and natural gas) and its leadership, Algeria is potentially the most important country in the Maghreb.

2. The Algerian interest in economic development and in access to U.S. technology offers opportunities for U.S. exports of capital equipment and for services.

3. As its economy expands, peripheral but profitable areas for U.S. private investment may develop, probably through partnership arrangements with the Algerian state.

4. The US strategic interest in Algeria derives from its geographic location and NATO's responsibility for defense of western Europe while denial of military operating rights in Algeria will not significantly restrict NATO's ability to carry out its mission in the Mediterranean, which would be contrary to our interests if the Soviet role as Algeria's chief supplier of military equipment resulted in basing privileges for Soviet military units.

B. U.S. Objectives Over the Next Five Years

1. Improvement of the U.S.-Algerian dialogue on matters of mutual interest through the reestablishment of diplomatic relations.

2. Significant progress in settlement of the private American claims against Algeria.

3. Access to Algerian natural gas on a long-term basis.

4. Expansion of U.S. commercial exports to Algeria and development of service arrangements.

5. Encouragement of a continued Western European, as well as American, interest in Algeria, chiefly as an offset to Algerian reliance or dependence on Soviet technical and military assistance.

C. Algeria's Objectives vis-a-vis the United States

1. Access to the growing U.S. market for natural gas.

2. Access to U.S. official and private sources of capital to assist in Algeria's economic development.

3. U.S. support of Algeria's interest in IBRD financial assistance in connection with Algeria's economic development.

4. Achievement of its economic objectives while maintaining maximum freedom of political maneuver, i.e., to keep its critical distance from the U.S. on major world political issues.

D. Recommended Courses of Action

1. Use Algeria's economic interests as a lever to obtain progress on the reestablishment of diplomatic relations.

2. Get Algerians moving on reexamination of U.S. private claims with a view to consolidating them and finding an imaginative solution.

3. Support arrangements for the export of Algerian natural gas to the U.S. as a function of overall improvement in U.S.-Algerian relations; encourage maximum American participation in related projects.

4. Expand economic and commercial activities of U.S. Interests Section to promote further increases in U.S. exports of goods, services, and technical/managerial skills.

5. Promote higher level American-Algerian contacts in Algeria and the U.S. on the basis of the mutual interests involved.

6. Conduct quiet educational, information and cultural activities as exemplified by ongoing Mission support for programs of English teaching, American studies and cultural presentations, in a continuing effort to improve the general atmosphere of U.S.-Algerian relations.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 1 ALG-US. Secret; Noforn. Telegram drafted by Edward Holmes (AF/NSC-IG) and approved by Carter. Attached but not printed at Annex A is documentation on U.S. agency expenditures in Algeria; at Annex B is background information; and at Annex C is a list of approved policy guidance papers.

26. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers, July 13, 1971 26. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers, July 13, 19711

July 13, 1971

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
July 13, 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE

SUBJECT:

FPC Request for State Department Views on Natural Gas Imports from Algeria

The President has approved your recommendation of June 25, 1971 and authorizes you to respond favorably to the Federal Power Commission's request for views on applications to import gas from Algeria.

[signed] Henry A. Kissinger

Dispatched 7/14/71, Rept 2625, also LDX 7/14/71 @11:59 a.m.

CC: Col Kennedy, Mr. Saunders, Peter Flanigan, Peter Peterson sls

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

MEMORANDUM FOR:THE PRESIDENT

FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [Haig signed for]

SUBJECT:

Natural Gas

Secretary Rogers (Tab A) recommends that you authorize State to inform the Federal Power Commission (FPC) that on foreign policy grounds it has no objections to the approval of the applications of three U.S. firms to import natural gas from Algeria.

Issues

There is general agreement that the U.S. will require natural gas imports from foreign sources to meet future requirements, that U. S. exports will benefit from the project (Ex-Im has already approved a preliminary commitment of $256.5 million for construction of facilities for the project in Algeria), and that it would improve relations with Algeria while reducing Soviet influence and strengthening elements within Algeria who favor closer ties with the U.S. The security risk of depending on foreign supplies is minimal, since these imports from Algeria represent only about 1.5 percent of U.S. consumption, a large number of foreign sources are being actively considered as future sources of natural gas, gas is not essential to our military machine, and domestic gas by virtue of its lower price will be favored over foreign gas.

The major issue concerns the question of Algeria expropriation of foreign property, both U.S. and non-U.S. After discussing the expropriation problem with Secretary Connally you directed that we hold up on this project. However, I now believe that the expropriation issue should not stand in the way of our approval. Several important changes have occurred:

—U.S. Expropriated Property - Algeria recently settled all expropriation claims with U.S. petroleum companies. Some smaller claims remain unresolved; but Algeria has indicated a willingness to settle these claims, making payments through El Paso revenues.

—French Expropriated Property - Last February Algeria nationalized French gas interests, including part of the field which will be the origin of gas exports to the U.S. In March, President Pompidou asked that we take no action that would complicate Franco/Algerian relations while negotiations for nationalized properties were under way. In April (Tab B) you replied through Ambassador Watson that there would be no preliminary Ex-Im Bank commitment to Algeria for six or seven weeks, that State Department would have to give the FPC its views on gas imports from Algeria in response to a standard requirement of the FPC, and that we did not expect a final FPC decision until September. In response, Pompidou expressed disappointment but made no further request.

—Since your April message: . We have honored our word to Pompidou. (The Ex-Im Bank preliminary commitment for financing the El Paso project was not given until more than six weeks after your message was conveyed to Pompidou, and State believes that the French are reconciled to Ex-Im's assisting Algeria with the project and our importing the gas there from.)

. French companies have continued to invest in projects for new gas exports from Algeria to France and have continued to import gas into France from Algeria.

. Algeria has just completed an agreement settling the claims of one of the two expropriated French companies, and settlement with the other company is likely to follow. (Tab C)

Proposed Scenario

FPC hearings on the applications will be completed in early July. State therefore must submit its views as soon as possible, since the FPC staff cannot make its recommendations without them. Further delay might mean postponement of the FPC decision until after September, in which case construction costs—totaling more than $1 billion—would increase and contracts might have to be renegotiated or canceled (cost increases will ultimately be passed on to U.S. consumers). A delay would cause serious frictions in our relations with Algeria and might jeopardize the entire project, which would be a serious setback for our relations with Algeria.

Because of the progress which has been made in negotiations between the French companies and U.S. petroleum interests, the expressed willingness of Algeria to settle with the other U.S. firms, and the important foreign policy gains of improving our relations with Algeria, I believe that Secretary Rogers' recommendation should be approved. Peter Flanigan and Pete Peterson concur.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you approve Secretary Rogers' request authorizing State to respond as soon as possible to the FPC that it has no objection on foreign policy grounds to approval of applications to import natural gas from Algeria.

Approve [Haig signed for HAK for Pres.]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 735, Country Files, Africa, Algeria, Vol. I. Secret. While the tabs are not printed, Tab B is summarized in the footnote to Document 24.

27. National Intelligence Estimate 62-71, Washington, July 31, 1971 27. National Intelligence Estimate 62-71, Washington, July 31, 19711

Washington, July 31, 1971

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NIE 62-71
31 July 1971

Algeria's International Relations

NOTE

The portions of this Estimate concerning the implications of the proposed El Paso natural gas project in Algeria were prepared in response to a Department of State request for an intelligence assessment on this question.

CONCLUSIONS

A. President Boumediene is clearly in charge of Algeria. His regime has no credible challengers in sight, but the system is dependent on his personal leadership. His departure from the scene could bring on considerable political uncertainty. Boumediene will continue pressing his policies of state ownership or control of all major economic enterprises in Algeria, and of developing heavy industry, even at the cost of agricultural stagnation and heavy unemployment.

B. Out of interest and sentiment, Algeria remains non-aligned and generally aloof from most other countries. Save for the Arab-Israeli dispute, it will continue to be little interested in most developments in Arab states and other parts of the Third World. But the Palestinian issue does arouse strong feelings in Algeria; in times of an acute Arab-Israeli crisis (as in June 1967) the government might feel compelled to take at least temporary action against Israel's supporters even at the expense of Algeria's own economic interests.

C. Boumediene skillfully plays off the major powers against one another. The USSR has provided nearly all of Algeria's arms and some economic aid, and France a variety of economic and other benefits including some military assistance in recent years. Much expensive American equipment and many technicians are being used by the national oil industry. In addition, the US offers a potentially large market for Algeria's gas reserves. In no case, however, have the Algerians allowed themselves to come under strong influence from any outside power, nor are they likely to.

D. A substantial oil producer, Algeria will continue to rely on rising oil revenues to pay for its increasingly expensive development projects. Its February 1971 partial nationalization of two French oil companies (the only large foreign-owned concerns left in Algeria) promises Algeria increased income from its petroleum. Though this move set off a fairly serious crisis with the French, tensions are now receding. An accord has been reached with one French company and, over time, probably will be with the other one as well.

E. But Algeria's best hopes for added income probably lie in its mostly unexploited natural gas reserves, which are among the three or four largest in the world. Its first effort to export major quantities of natural gas has been its agreement with the El Paso Natural Gas Company of the US. If this is approved, the Algerians would begin shipping gas to the US in the mid- or late-1970s, and would initially receive about $120 million a year in new export earnings. Algeria probably sees this as but a beginning and will push for further foreign gas sales.

(Section III assesses the implications of approval or disapproval of the El Paso project, and Algeria's long-term reliability as an energy supplier)

DISCUSSION

1. Algeria has had more of an impact on the international scene than its small population and its newness as a nation would seem to warrant. This has resulted, at least in large part, from the actions of an aggressive and intensely nationalistic leadership which has decolonized and socialized the country's economy, adroitly played off several of the great powers for his own benefit, and given loud verbal and some material support to insurgencies in various parts of the world.

2. The Algerian commitment to a non-aligned international posture seems to run deep, yet its attitude toward the US will also continue to be conditioned by its irritation over the US stance in the Arab-Israeli conflict. Such factors, along with the Algerian Government's record of extremely tough dealings with foreign oil companies, raise questions both about the general course of US-Algerian relations over the next several years and about Algeria's long-term reliability as an energy supplier for the US and Western Europe.

I. DOMESTIC SCENE

A. The Regime and its Policies

3. President of the Revolutionary Council and of the council of Ministers Houari Boumdiene is clearly in charge; he directs a dictatorial regime, albeit not a very tyrannical one. Long the chief of the armed forces, he seized power from Ahmed Ben Bella in 1885. Since then he has consolidated his power, purged his opponents, quashed an attempted coup in 1967 by the then armed forces' Chief of Staff Colonel Zbiri,and put those loyal to him in the important posts. Boumediene is almost totally lacking in charisma, a respected but somewhat withdrawn figure. His authority derives not from mass popularity but from the well equipped, well paid, and loyal Algerian military and security establishment, particularly the 60,000-man army.

4. If Boumediene's personality has seemed enigmatic, his policies are not. He has, over the years, put virtually all remaining foreign-owned properties and assets under Algerian ownership or control. Until Independence, Algeria was dominated—politically, socially, and economically—by the French. The 1962-1963 exodus of 90 percent of the million French residents of Algeria meant the abandonment of their prosperous their government sinecures, and many of their commercial enterprises to their former subjects. But a number of factories, businesses, mines, oil operations, and other enterprises continued under French and to a lesser extent other foreign ownership. Since 1965, virtually all of these have been taken over and are now being run by the Algerians' themselves.1

5. Beyond ending foreign ownership and control, the regime has ambitious long-term plans for the development of the nation's economy, which has a mix of weaknesses and strengths. On the minus side, Algeria has a problem of population pressure on available arable land—a problem exacerbated by a very high birth rate. (Population is now 14 million people; the rate of increase is 3.1 percent a year.) Unemployment is extensive both in the cities and rural areas. Most Algerians are still poor farmers, dependent on the weather for the growth of enough wheat to feed themselves. Nearly all the best agricultural land had been taken over by French settlers, who made most of it into large estates producing wheat, citrus fruit, and wine for the metropole. These properties are now operated by the ex-employees of the departed owners along with recently arrived war veterans and land-less peasants; management standards, productivity, output, and personal incomes of the farmers themselves have all dropped sharply. Further, the former protected French market for wine has been cut off, and many Algerian vineyards are being slowly converted to the production of other crops.

6. Though agriculture is the occupation of most Algerians, it is a matter of fairly low priority to the government, which continues to allocate limited resources to it. Rather, the regime is out to develop heavy industry on a large-scale, and has many of the assets needed for such an effort. Besides having a highly developed infrastructure inherited from colonial days, the country is rich in exportable mineral resources: principally oil, natural gas, and some iron ore. Algeria's gas reserves are large, but only a fairly small amount has so far been exported. Petroleum is another matter; Algeria is an important world oil producer. Its income from the sale of oil reached some $650 million in hard currency in 1970 (71 percent of its export earnings). This has enabled the regime both to build up foreign exchange reserves of several hundred million dollars, and to begin work on an ambitious scheme designed, perhaps over two or more decades, to make Algeria an affluent industrial power. This effort will be extremely expensive; it will require ever larger imports of costly capital goods which in turn will depend on the receipt of more and more foreign exchange. Greatly enhanced export earnings over present levels, along with fairly strict austerity at home to restrain import levels, will be needed to carry out such a program.

7. The Boumediene regime has been actively pursuing these policies over the past few years. A general belt tightening and higher taxes have been imposed. Private foreign travel is discouraged. Strict controls over imports of consumers goods are in effect. A number of import substitution industries, such as textiles, have been built. Efforts to get more petroleum revenues from—or in spite of—the French have been pursued with tenacity. With the proposed El Paso agreement to export natural gas to the US, efforts to earn large sums from Algeria's rich gas deposits have begun.2 Ten to 15 percent of current oil earnings are being plowed back into exploration for more revenue yielding oil reserves, and for the construction of more pipelines. The principal planned industrial projects now underway, a steel mill and three petrochemical complexes, are designed not to provide many new jobs, but to bring in new export earnings and to provide further import substitutes. Concentrated government efforts in these fairly limited areas have led the overall Algerian economy to grow at a statistical rate of 5-6 percent a year, despite the poor performance in the agricultural sector and the continued low living standards of most of the people.

8. Algeria continues to proclaim itself a socialist state, but it is an unusual one. In practice, it is developing something akin to capitalism. Government corporations, with varying efficiency, now operate such specific sectors of economic activity as mining, textiles, and petroleum—in all of which they have a monopoly. With the limits of basic central government policies, each corporation is more or less autonomous. The best known and most effective of these is SONATRACH, the state corporation responsible for petroleum and natural gas. Developed by the able Belaid Abdesselam, now the Minister of Industry and Energy, SONATRACH has shown itself capable of handling all aspects of the petroleum industry, including exploration, extraction, refining and marketing. In these efforts they have had extensive help from hired foreign advisors including Americans. It is too early to tell whether SONATRACH will retain its present high standards, or whether other state corporations will come to approach them. If they do, such competent management would be of great assistance in achieving Algerian development goals.

B. Political Prospects

9. We know of no opposition to Boumediene or his in the government or armed forces, The public at large apparently continues to demonstrate the political apathy prevalent since the end of the independence war. The government's long-term development program, even with the austerity it entails, appears to have fairly general acquiescence, save for the small but hard pressed middle class. Nonetheless, the Algerian regime—no matter how stable it now appears—remains a vulnerable one. The marginal living standards of most of its farmers, the gross lack of employment opportunities, the additional hardships imposed on the people by the development program, the presence of a small educated bourgeoisie chafing under rule by hardnosed, socialist army officers add up to the potential for expressions of mass public unrest. There is no way of predicting if or when popular explosions might occur, but they cannot be ruled out.

10. The present system is highly dependent on the continued personal leadership of Boumediene. There is no Deputy President or generally recognized number two; neither is there any institutionalized procedure for choosing a successor. A new constitution was promised years ago but has never been promulgated. Some controlled local and regional elections have been held, but there have been no national ones. There is a single official political party, the National Liberation (FLN), and it is seeking to reorganize and strengthen itself, but the FLN is so inherently weak and subordinate to the government as to make it a negligible political force. Algeria is still too new and its political traditions and institutions too undeveloped to permit a very confident assessment of long-term prospects were Boumediene to lose his grip or leave the scene altogether.

11. Were he to do so, the surviving principals in the Council of Ministers and the army would probably step in at once and seek to play the major role in ruling the country; they might institute some form of collegial rule. But without Boumdiene's strong direction, splits—brought on both by ideological and personal differences—and infighting could easily develop over time. Indeed, there are already reports of disputes among the top leadership; at least one minister is alleged to oppose the regime's austerity measures. Boumediene's defeated rivals, BEN BELLA and Colonel Zbiri, are still alive—the first under detention and the second in exile; they both probably have some backing in the country. In any event, while the domestic scene now appears stable and quiet, Algeria's longer term political future is far from assured.

II. FOREIGN AFFAIRS

A. Algeria's Foreign Outlook

12. As a strategically located, potentially wealthy, moderately influential Arab-African country, the Algerian Government is inclined both by interest and sentiment to avoid alignment with any of the Great Powers. Rather, it normally seeks, in the classic Third World pattern, to play major outside states off against each other for its own benefit, and it has become quite skilled in doing so. At the same time it stubbornly resists efforts of outsiders to interfere in its affairs.

13. Ideology and sentiment, much of it created during the bloody 1954-1962 war of independence, usually incline the Algerians the same way. During that war fought against the French, Algeria got little or no assistance from either the US or the USSR (for, of course, very different reasons), at least until it became clear that victory was inevitable.3 Fellow Arabs provided arms, safe haven, and verbal support, but were careful not to become directly Involved. Whatever outside assistance they received, the Algerians believe that basically, it was because of their own fighting heavy sacrifices that they won their independence. Innately suspicious of outsiders anyway, and not particularly grateful to anyone, they cherish freedom of action, and are very sensitive to any external pressures.

14. Most politically aware Algerians have very strong feelings on the Arab-Israeli dispute, feelings which could lead to moves against those considered to be allies of the Israelis—particularly the US which, in the eyes of many Algerians, is tainted with other sins as well. In times of acute crisis, these sentiments can become so strong that the regime cannot ignore them. In the June 1967 Arab-Israeli war, public opinion was so aroused that the government felt impelled, though probably reluctantly, to impose a temporary embargo on all trade with the US and UK (alleged to be fighting alongside the Israelis) and to break diplomatic relations with the US (those with the UK had been severed previously). Though these moves had little short- or long-term practical effect, the regime might, in a comparable situation, again feel it would have to take similar measures, even at the price of damage to the Algerian development effort or the economy as a whole.

15. Other than in such critical times, the Algerian Government does not pay much attention to the Mideast situation. Despite its rigid anti-Israeli stand, its public rejection of a ceasefire, its avowed refusal to countenance any compromise settlement with the Israelis or to abandon the rights of the Palestinian Arab people, the Boumediene regime's actual military and economic involvement is negligible. In 1967 it did send a small military force to join the Egyptians along the Suez Canal, but withdrew these troops in 1970 when the Israeli cease-fire provided an excuse. Algeria does provide Palestinian guerrillas with arms, training, and verbal support—much as Arab countries far from the battlefield aided it in its own war of independence. Otherwise, the Algerian leaders publicly and privately express a low opinion of Eastern Arab officials and their military forces; they are likely to continue, as much as possible, to avoid real involvement in the problem of the Middle East.

B. Relations with the Third World

16. Algerian policy toward the rest of the Third World is partly a function of geographical proximity. Tunisia and Morocco have loomed quite large, beginning with the early 1960s, when relations with both were seriously strained by mutual suspicions and as a consequence of Moroccan and Tunisian claims on large parts of Algeria. In 1963, Morocco bested Algeria in a brief border war; relations were tense throughout the area during much of the 1960s. Subsequently, for a variety of reasons including the shelving of the border claims and a gradual appreciation of their common interests, the situation has greatly eased. Relations have so improved that the three countries now envisage such modest cooperative ventures as a joint international airline. Though unforeseeable incidents could change this picture, Algeria's relations with Tunisia and Morocco seem likely to remain fairly placid. Wealthier, having no territorial claims against its neighbors, possessing the most powerful military force in the area, Algeria now sees little threat in the Maghreb, and maintains good bilateral relations with all its neighbors. These circumstances will permit Algeria to concentrate on its own parochial problems, though it will continue to give lip service to the idea of some loose federation of the Maghreb states, and will hope eventually to become the dominant state in the area.

17. Algeria's reaction to the abortive coup in Morocco was a careful one of restraining comment until the situation became clear. Although the Algerians sympathized with the idea of a republican Morocco and consider it likely to come in time, the Boumediene regime fears the advent of an erratic nationalistic Morocco, particularly one which might revive territorial claims against Algeria, and thus apparently now prefers predictable rule by King Hassan to uncertain alternatives.

18. Algeria's relations with Africa have been marked by a declining patience with the liberation movements and a growing emphasis on governmental relations. The Boumediene government continues to support those African rebels fighting the Portuguese, Rhodesians, and South Africans with modest inputs of arms, training and propaganda. But its attention has turned to improving relations with individual African states such as its Saharan border neighbors—now objects of Algerian aid and training—and certain states sharing other common interests.

19. Algeria's relations with most of the other, more distant peoples of the Third World are relatively aloof. The principal exceptions to this have been the Vietnamese Communists whom for years the Algerians have sincerely and vehemently supported. The Algerians believe the Vietnamese Communists have much in common with themselves in that they have, at considerable sacrifice, mounted a major, sustained, and not unsuccessful struggle against a great power. Further, the Algerians are asked for nothing but political, diplomatic, and propaganda support—all of which are emotionally satisfying, sincerely given, and cheap. As far as the other lesser powers of the world are concerned, the Boumediene government pays little attention to them save as potential customers.

C. Relations with the USSR

20. When Algerian independence came in 1962, formal diplomatic relations with the Soviets were established, but little else. But as BEN BELLA proclaimed himself a socialist revolutionary and an ideologue somewhat on the Castro model, a thaw ensued and the Soviets extended large offers of economic aid. When Algeria's ill-equipped army came off second best against the Moroccans in the fall of 1963; BEN BELLA turned to Moscow for military supplies and got a quick and gratifying response. By 1964, Algeria was being vigorously lauded in the Russian media; BEN BELLA was accorded a hero's welcome in Moscow and ties became quite close. BEN BELLA's ouster in 1965 did not immediately change the appearance of things; the Maghreb was engaged then and for some years in a cold war of its own. The Soviets were accused of, or suspected to be supporting Algeria in its quarrels with Morocco and Tunisia; the US came in for similar accusations about backing Algeria's hostile neighbor. An image of Algeria was publicized by some of its enemies depicting it as a new North African Cuba, loyal to the socialist camp, under the strong influence of if not direction from Moscow, shouting defiance at and promoting revolution throughout the non-Communist world.

21. Such charges were not completely without foundation, at least in the days of BEN BELLA. During 1963 and 1964, the USSR extended $231 million in economic credits, and $235 million in military grants and credits. Since Boumediene took power, the Soviets have extended $5 million in economic credits and $150 million in military assistance, including a $100 million agreement signed in February 1971. The Algerian Armed Forces are almost completely equipped with Soviet armaments. These forces are of course dependent on Moscow for spare parts, ammunition and the like. Some 1,000 Russian military technicians are in Algeria as instructors in the use and maintenance of Soviet furnished equipment including 149 jet fighters/fighter bombers, 325 tanks, 9 guided missile patrol boats, and air defense radar and weapons including SA-2 missiles. About 2,000 Soviet economic technicians are also present under the economic aid agreement.

22. The Soviets have not been able to translate this significant investment of military and economic aid into a similar amount of influence over the Boumediene government. Although, under usual international rules, the Soviet Navy may with prior permission call at certain Algerian civilian ports, all Soviet attempts to obtain naval and air bases have been sharply rebuffed. Contrary to some recent reports there are no Soviet combat units, or Russian-piloted Tu-16s or Foxbats in Algeria.

23. There are several factors which have curbed Soviet influence. Most of the military and economic aid was extended in BEN BELLA's day. Economic credits have been drawn down very slowly; the Algerians show a marked preference for Western equipment and know-how. The Algerians have sought to limit their dependence on Soviet military support by buying small amounts of such French equipment as jet trainers and by arranging for military training programs in France and to a smaller degree in other West European countries—e.g., Italy.4 The Algerians are also probably aware, whatever their dependence on the USSR for ammunition and military spare parts, that there is little likelihood of these being cut off. A Russian arms embargo imposed on a non-aligned, Arab, often anti-Western and pro-Soviet country would have extremely unfavorable repercussions throughout the Middle East and the Afro-Asian world so far as Moscow is concerned.

24. Further, while normally not openly critical of Soviet foreign policy, Algeria does not go along with Moscow on everything. Thus it has regularly denounced the Russians for supporting the Middle East ceasefire and the various efforts in and out of the UN to find a peaceful solution in that area. The Algerian leaders have also demanded the departure of all foreign—including Russian—naval forces from the Mediterranean. Thus while Algeria has ties with the USSR which are often very useful and profitable, in the last analysis its policies parallel those of the USSR only when Algeria's own definition of its interests and sympathies dictate. The ultimate test of this assessment would be whether the Algerian Government would—like Egypt—permit regular Soviet military forces to be based on its own territory. We doubt it very much. Unlike Egypt, Algeria is not critically dependent on the USSR for its defense, and it is hard to conceive of its becoming so. It would probably take extreme circumstances, such as another Arab-Israeli war in which the US was believed to be directly involved on the Israeli side and the USSR was thought to be fighting with the Arabs to impel the Algerians to grant even temporary base privileges to the Soviets.

25. The city of Algiers has become and remains a principal safe haven for revolutionary exiles from all over the world. American Black Panthers, Quebec separatists, and South American prisoners released as ransom for political kidnappings have been accepted and given accommodation. This of course derives from Algeria's own “revolutionary” heritage. Algerian enthusiasm for these non-African exiles—whom it provides little or nothing more than the equivalent of room and board—may be waning. To our knowledge, Algeria supports and subsides none of their activity against their respective homelands. Rather it has viewed some, such as Dr. Timothy Leary, with open hostility and others, such as Brazilian revolutionaries and the Black Panthers with obvious discomfort.5 One reason, no doubt, is the incompatibility between extending support to revolutionary militants on the one hand, and the desire for reasonably good relations with the governments they oppose on the other.

D. Relations with the West

France

26. Oil was discovered in Algeria by the French in the 1950s, and production has grown continuously since. By 1970, output was close to one million barrels per day (bpd). The value of this oil is enhanced by its very low sulphur content and the fact that the fields are west of Suez and relatively close to European markets. When Boumediene took over in 1965, French companies produced about 70 percent of the total, other European and American firms the rest. The non-French producers were taken over by the Algerian Government between 1967 and 1970, and all were eventually nationalized with mutually agreed on compensation.

27. Algerian relations with the two French companies (ERAP and CFP) operating the remaining foreign-owned fields became more and more strained in this period. Negotiations between the two governments stretched on for nearly two years, and became more and more acrimonious and inconclusive.6 Finally, in February 1971, the Algerian Government unilaterally nationalized enough of the French companies' assets to raise its participation in them to 51 percent. Algerian managers were put in charge, prices sharply raised, and compensation arbitrarily set.

28. The moves set off a serious though temporary French-Algerian crisis, with many angry words and some acts by both sides. The French announced that the “special relationship” with Algeria was dead. According to the French, this meant that over time Algeria would no longer be given special privileges (particularly as contrasted with Tunisia and Morocco) with respect to immigration quotas, to tariff preferences, to technical assistance programs at reduced costs, and to special quotas for wine imports. Of immediate impact was the termination of a $65 million a year financial aid program. Further, the French Government gave up responsibility for negotiating with the Algerians on oil matters and turned it over to CFP and ERAP. These companies' initial response was tough—withdrawing French technicians from fields and refineries, rejecting Algeria's terms for nationalization, refusing to lift any more oil from Algerian ports, buying substitute oil elsewhere, and threatening to take legal action against anyone who bought Algerian oil (though they have not carried out this threat).

29. The Algerians responded by imposing a boycott on imports of all but the most essential French goods, and harming French residents in Algeria. They also issued announcements abut a series of favorable agreements between SONATRACH and a host of American corporations associated with the petroleum industry. Of greater consequence were active and—so far—relatively successful efforts by SONATRACH to market the oil from the formerly French-owned properties. By June 1971, something over half the previous levels of petroleum exports were being regularly sold to independent oil dealers in Europe.7 Algeria, no longer sharing the income with CFP and ERAP, was then getting about the same revenue as before February 1971. Prospects are that sales will continue to rise.

30. French recognition of this fact, along with the continuing strong, though partly intangible, ties which still exist between the two countries, have brought about an easing of the situation, and indeed the likely end of the crisis. Algeria and CFP have signed a new agreement apparently involving compromises on both sides. CFP accepted the terms of nationalization and promised further investment in its share of operations. The Algerians agreed to 20 percent higher compensation for properties taken over, and apparently—though we do not know the exact terms—to provide CFP with oil at prices lower than they had initially decreed. ERAP has begun negotiations with Algeria. Its somewhat different circumstances are bound to make the process of reaching an agreement more complicated (CFP's Algerian holdings amounted to only about 20 percent of its overseas producing assets before nationalization; in ERAP's case the figure is roughly 80 percent). Nevertheless, an eventual accord with ERAP now seems likely, though not certain.

31. Even if difficulties with ERAP continue, official Franco-Algerian relations appear to have stabilized. The two remain major trading partners. Algerian workers in France remain economically useful to both8 French language and culture struck very deep and pervasive roots in the 130-year occupation (9 percent of the Algerians read and write only French, 5 percent only Arabic, 11 percent both) and this will continue for decades at least. Both parties continue to value the French cultural and technical aid program, under which some 6,000 French teachers and several thousand technicians are in Algeria. Politically the two are not likely to be very cooperative; disputes, some acrimonious, are almost certain, but none now appears likely to bring on a permanent rupture in Franco-Algerian relations. Algeria serves as an important link for France with the Arab world. France of course will serve as a useful counter to other great powers, e.g., a potential supplier of arm and training if the Soviets prove difficult, and as a potential source of skills and market for gas if the US were to present problems.

The United States

32. A number of issues will continue to trouble US-Algerian relations. These include Algerian resentment of US supply of military equipment to France during the independence war, Algerian dislike of most US foreign policies, the nationalization of US firms in Algeria, the sharply differing ideological outlooks of the two countries, normal Algerian suspicions of foreigners, and safe haven given exiles from the US. But this again is not the complete picture. Determined to increase their export earnings, the Algerians have evidently concluded that the US, of all the developed countries, offers the most sophisticated skills and the highest quality equipment needed to develop and operate complex modern projects. And of course they see the US as a source of development capital and as a potentially lucrative market for exports of Algerian natural gas. Thus despite a good deal of harsh rhetoric, a number of steps have been taken over the past few years which have put US-Algerian relations on a more amicable basis than before.

33. Several hundred highly trained and well paid US specialists have been hired, mostly by SONATRACH but also by other state corporations and the government. Much sophisticated US equipment is being imported. Several joint ventures, with an Algerian state corporation holding 51 percent of the shares and a US firm 49 percent, have come into operation. These include such schemes as construction of an elaborate computer center and various advanced oil exploration projects. The cumulative value of these projects is not negligible. There is little trade between the two countries, outside that related to the petroleum industry. In 1969 Algeria imported about $80 million in goods and services from the US.

34. Along with this has been, over the put few years, the evolution and negotiation of the proposed El Paso project, which would provide substantial quantities of Algerian natural gas to the American market by the mid- or late-1970s. If finally approved, it would entail total investment (at 1970 prices) of about $1.2 billion, with the costs split about evenly between SONATRACH and the El Paso Natural Gas Company, SONATRACH, with loan and credit guarantees from the US Export-Import Bank amounting to $285 million, would build a huge gas liquefaction plant and a pipeline to the Hassi R'Mel gas field. The latter is a sizeable one; even with the large volumes contemplated, only about 10 percent of it would be exploited. El Paso would order from 6 to 9 specially built liquid natural gas (LNG) tankers, and construct facilities on the east coast of the US to reconvert the LNG into gas. The entire operation, even if approved immediately could not go into production until 1975-1976 at the earliest, after which time Algeria would begin receiving about $120 million a year in export earnings from it. But of course the agreement would imply making the US a much larger trading partner earlier than that.

35. There is little doubt that the Algerian Government has put a very high priority on this arrangement, and for good reason. Algeria's natural gas reserves are enormous (exceeded only by those of the US, the USSR, and possibly Iran), and mostly untapped. They provide probably the only potential for sharply increased earnings of the foreign exchange needed for the country's ambitious industrial development programs.9 With non-polluting natural gas coming into greater demand in nearby Western Europe as well as the US, the Boumediene regime clearly sees the El Paso project as the first step in what could ultimately become a very large, very profitable enterprise.10

36. The spade work and negotiations with respect to the El Paso project have led to a noticeable lessening of frictions between the Algerian Government on the one hand and the US Government and American private firms on the other. US oil properties which were originally sequestered or confiscated have now been paid for on mutually agreed terms. Day-by-day bilateral discussions are generally businesslike and not characterized by propagandistic rancor. Vietnam and Israel are not forgotten, but they are no longer very active subjects of debate. US-Algerian relations are now—from the Boumediene government's point of view—principally concerned with finding mutually acceptable means of enhancing Algeria's profitable energy exports. In this context, the outcome of the pending El Paso project will play a major role in determining future US-Algerian relations.

III. IMPLICATIONS OF THE EL PASO PROJECT

A The Short-Term Outlook

37. Beyond a certain level of generalization, Algeria's immediate courses of action following approval or disapproval of the El Paso project cannot be specifically estimated in advance. Approval would strongly reinforce the present even, businesslike atmosphere of US-Algerian relations, but it would lead to no marked shift in Algeria's international outlook, much less in its relationships with other powers. The Boumdiene regime sees the El Paso contract as a commercial venture, and approval of the deal would not give the US much political leverage over the prickly Algerians. They would not react to US approval of the project with a burst of gratitude, nor would they refrain from, say, counseling the Libyans on courses of action which could ultimately lead the oil companies there (80 percent US-owned) to face a future similar to that of the companies formerly in Algeria.

38. Whether approval would lead the to take the initiative in restoring diplomatic relations with the US is an open question; there are reasons for and against their taking such a step. A diplomatic relationship would enable each side more fully to staff its embassies, and thus facilitate further commercial transactions. But the two powers retain Interest Sections in the respective capitals which have become embassies in everything but the formal trappings of protocol. They provide—as the El Paso negotiations have shown—adequate means for the two countries to deal with each other. Further, the break in 1967 was essentially a symbolic protest against US Middle Eastern policy; in Algerian eyes, the latter has changed but little. Other Arab countries that broke relations with the US in 1967 have not made any move to restore them. For all their independence of, and sense of superiority to, other Arabs, the Algerians are likely to be wary about taking such a conspicuous first step, particularly if it seemed to be part of a single commercial project. But, over time, particularly if other economic ties should grow, the prospects of restoring diplomatic relations would be enhanced as a result of the El Paso deal.

39. Disapproval of the El Paso operation would, of course, bring forth angry reactions. Just how angry, and just what concrete steps would follow would depend to some extent on the manner in which the rejection was announced. If done in such a way as to lead the Algerians to believe they were being insulted or blackballed for political reasons, the reaction could be fiery, at least in a verbal sense. And a rejection would almost inevitably be ascribed to political motives. Other than the Interests Section itself—which might be expelled if the Algerians felt provoked enough—there are virtually no tangible US assets available for the government to seize as reprisals. The several hundred American specialists employed by SONATRACH might receive some personal harassment, but being “unofficial” they are not likely to be expelled. The Algerians would probably denounce the US in such organizations as OPEC and throughout the Arab world. Radical oil producers in that area, e,g., Iraq and Libya, would be sympathetic to Algerian complaints, but rejection of the El Paso project would probably not in itself lead them to take any new immediate anti-American steps.

40. Despite its pique with the US, we doubt that Algeria could or would turn east and seek from the Russians what they could not get from the EL Paso Natural Gas Company. They are almost certainly aware that the USSR does not need the gas, probably could not soon produce the LNG tankers to ship it, and lacks the foreign exchange to pay for it. They might take out their immediate resentment on the French. The ever wary Algerians suspect Paris of plotting to kill the El Paso deal, both to keep the Americans out of their sphere of influence and to punish the Algerians for their recent anti-French acts. Though the great bulk of French properties have already been taken over, there are still enough French interests—e.g., their remaining 49 percent holdings in the oil companies and their large export market in Algeria—to make them more vulnerable than others to retaliatory actions. Whether the Algerians would actually retaliate against the French is essentially unpredictable, but would depend, among other things, on whether the French might be prepared to step in to take the gas originally intended for the US.

B. The Longer Term Outlook: Algeria's Probable Reliability as an Energy Supplier

41. If the El Paso contract is approved, it is to run for a period of 25 years. No one can posit with much certainty Algeria's—or most other countries'—reliability as an energy producer over so long a period. We list below those factors bearing on the problem which are most likely to be of continuing relevance.

42. Incentives for the Algerians to continue shipments of gas to the US, even in time of severe political stress, are strong, and likely to get stronger over the years. Algeria needs the money, and as time passes it will need it even more. Despite its oil revenues, it is not just another rich Mideastern oil producer; it has 18 times the population of Kuwait, while producing only a quarter to a third as much oil. Unlike Kuwait, Libya, Abu Dhabi, and other wealthy Arab mini-states, Algeria has not and cannot pile up huge foreign exchange reserves simply because it lacks ways of usefully spending the money. From an economic point of view, Algeria's situation is more like that of Iran; it is committed to spending ever more on increasingly costly development schemes.11 As projects get further along, it will become more and more difficult for Algeria to do without the regular increment of funds needed to continue them; it is easier to discard plans for a steel mill than to abandon it three-quarters completed. This would almost certainly remain the case even if the present or a future Algerian regime were to shift its priorities from building heavy industry to promoting employment through subsidized labor intensive industries; any economic plan aimed at boosting living standards will require very substantial funding.

43. Further, natural gas is Algeria's real hope for greatly increased revenues over the next several decades. Geological surveys to date indicate that it will not be able to rival countries like Venezuela or Saudi Arabia in volume of petroleum produced. But Algeria may very well become the world's principal exporter of gas; over the longer term both the amounts extracted and the revenues received may become very great indeed. One of the important prerequisites for bringing this about is to make the product attractive enough to generate a rising demand for it and to attract the huge amounts of capital necessary to exploit it. Such Algerians as Belaid Abdesselam (and very probably Boumediene) are well aware that playing politics with gas sales is not the way to lure more customers.

44. Rational economic interest is not, of course, necessarily going to be the determinant of Algerian policy in all circumstances. We have discussed above an element in Algerian thinking—the intense anti-Israeli sentiments—which could motivate Algerian actions harming it as much or more than the targets of its ire. Specifically, Algeria could, in the heat of an Arab-Israeli crisis, ban the export of natural gas to the US.12

45. Such a ban could have no great practical effect before 1975 at the earliest. We cannot know who will be in charge then. An impetuous, doctrinaire leader like BEN BELLA would be far more inclined to cut off shipments than the more practical Boumediene. The degree of damage the Algerians believed they could inflict on the US and El Paso by an embargo would also be a factor. The very nature of the El Paso project is such that there is almost nothing in that country owned by El Paso which the government could seize, other than say office furniture and automobiles. Nor with El Paso owning and controlling most if not all the LNG tankers, could the Algerian Government arbitrarily divert gas shipments elsewhere. If it thought such an act would impose real damage on the American economy, it might be more inclined to take such a step than if it believed the US had alternative sources of supply available or would suffer only minor inconveniences.

46. To sum up, we cannot entirely rule out—in times of crisis—irrational, impetuous acts by the Algerian Government against US economic interests in general and the El Paso Natural Gas Company in particular. But even if such moves were undertaken, they would be more likely than not to be of short duration; economic incentives to resume would reassert themselves once the political purposes of an embargo had been assured. In general, however, the Algerians are likely to be a reliable commercial partner if a deal is made. Indeed, because of small foreign exchange reserves and probable increasing dependence on additional revenues from gas sales, Algeria is less likely than most other Arab producers of hydro-carbons to impose a long-term embargo on the US.13

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79-R01012A, Box 420. Secret; Controlled Dissemination. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, Defense, and NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. The director of CIA submitted this estimate with the concurrence of all members of the USIB with the exception of the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that it was outside their jurisdiction.

1 At least until recently, the government has shown little interest in socializing the properties of those relatively few affluent Algerian professional men, estate owners, and capitalists who had previously thrived under the French. This hands-off policy appears to be changing, however. For example, an agrarian reform law just published calls for the breakup of large Algerian landholdings.

2 Paragraphs 34-48 below discuss the El Paso project in detail.

3 The Algerian rebels did receive substantial arms, public support, and diplomatic backing from the Chinese fairly early on. But in recent years, the Algerian-Chinese relationship has been one of long distance cordiality. China provides virtually no economic or military aid and the level of mutual trade is very low.

4 Similarly the Algerians have blunted French economic pressures by selling wine-embargoed by Paris and mostly unsalable elsewhere in the West—to the USSR, though on less favorable terms to Algeria. Most vital export revenues, of course, are earned in Western Europe and the US, and the Algerians clearly intend to keep it that way.

5 In early July, Algeria announced a set of stringent guidelines on the treatment of airplane hijackers. If applied, they guarantee at least an initial term in jail for anyone hijacking a plane to Algeria in all but the most exceptional circumstances. Thus was an American citizen to hijack a plane to Algiers, he would automatically be granted asylum only if the US Government requested this be done.

6 Under the Franco-Algerian “special relationship” instituted by De Gaulle, petroleum agreements were to be worked out on a state-to-state basis, and entailed political as well economic considerations. The recent negotiations covered a variety of disputes and issues, some of a general political nature, some quite technical. In the last analysis, however, nearly all were concerned with Algerian efforts (and French resistance) to get control of operations and to obtain more money for the oil.

7 At the time of nationalization, SONATRACH was producing roughly 300,000 bpd, ERAP 340,000, and CFP 280,000. In addition a few small French and American companies collectively produced something under 100,000 bpd.

8 There are now over 800,000 Algerians in France. They hold low paying, menial jobs which Frenchmen refuse to accept. Serving as a safety valve for the Algerian population explosion, they also repatriate about $200 million a year to the homeland—supporting a number of unemployed relatives and bolstering Algeria's exchange position. Barring a total—and unlikely—rupture between the two nations, the present Algerian residents in France will probably not be disturbed.

9 Algeria's proven petroleum reserves in relation to output are relatively small. Some experts believe that unless substantial new reserves are discovered soon, output will actually begin to drop within a few years.

10 It should be noted that while in February 1971 Algeria nationalized 51 percent of the French companies' petroleum assets; it took over 100 percent of their gas deposits. Prior to that time it had had the right to purchase all the gas it wanted at the cost of production.

11 Like Algeria, Iran has a fairly large population and promising economic potential. Iran embarked an expensive economic development program long before Algeria did. This is now well along, has so far been successful but has become increasingly costly. Levels of exchange reserves are low; indeed foreign indebtedness is increasing. Ever more strongly committed to the program, the Iranian Government is both endlessly wrangling for more money while showing great care not to bring about even a temporary halt in income.

12 It might also do so in the heat of some other crisis situation, e.g., another Algerian-Moroccan war if Morocco were backed by the US.

13 By 1975, Libya will have exchange reserves so large (perhaps $5 billion or more) that it could shut down all oil production and live on the interest it would draw. Algeria cannot, for decades at least, hope to be in a comparable position.

28. Telegram 113 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, January 21, 1972, 1420Z. 28. Telegram 113 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, January 21, 1972, 1420Z.1

January 21, 1972, 1420Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
USINT ALGIERS 0113
R 211420Z JAN 72

53

ACTION AF-13

INFO OCT-01 EUR-20 NEA-09 SS-14 NSC-10 L-03 PRS-01 OEP-01 E-11 FRG-01 COM-08 INT-06 TRSE-00 OPIC-12 CIEP-01 CIAE-00 INR-06 NSAE-00 RSC-01 DODE-00 RSR-01/119 W 060114

P 5114202 JAN 72

FM USINT ALGIERS

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 6916

INFO

USINT CAIRO UNN

USINT KHARTOUM UNN

AMEMBASSY LONDON UNN

AMEMBASSY PARIS UNN

AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI UNN

AMEMBASSY TUNIS UNN

AMEMBASSY RABAT UNN

SUBJECT:

US/ALGERIAN RELATIONS

1. SUMMARY: US/ALGERIAN RELATIONS PICKED UP CONSIDERABLY IN 1971 BUT SINCE SEPTEMBER MOMENTUM HAS BEEN LOST BECAUSE OF CONTINUED DELAY IN FPC APPROVAL OF SONATRACH/EL PASO LNG PROJECT. RELATIONSHIP WILL REQUIRE CONSTANT ATTENTION DURING THIS PERIOD OF MARKING TIME, BUT ONCE EL PASO PROJECT CLEARS FPC WE ANTICIPATE NEW FORWARD MOVEMENT ON BOTH ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL POINTS.

2. DURING 1971 US/ALGERIAN RELATIONS CONTINUED TO IMPROVE AS COMMERCIAL, FINANCIAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL LINKS GREW, AMERICAN VISITORS WERE RECEIVED AT HIGH LEVELS AND DOORS OPENED TO AMERICAN BUSINESSMEN AND OFFICIALS. MOMENTUM FROM VISITS BY EXIMBANK PRESIDENT KEARNS AND DEPASSTSEC SMITH IN FEBRUARY AND ROBERT O. ANDERSON AND FRANK BORMAN IN APRIL WAS MAINTAINED BY AMERICAN NEUTRALITY IN FRENCH-ALGERIAN DISPUTE AND SHOULD HAVE PEAKED IN SEPTEMBER WHEN EL PASO OFFICIALS EXPECTED FPC APPROVAL OF SONATRACH-EL PASO LNG PROJECT (FINANCED BY EXIMBANK LOANS AND GUARANTEES).

3. SEPTEMBER CAME AND WENT AND ALGERIAN OFFICIALS WERE TOLD FPC DECISION WOULD BE DELAYED. THEY ASSUMED THIS MEANT TILL LATE 1971 OR EARLY 1972. NOW, NO ONE HERE MENTIONS DATES AND VOICES GROW WEARY WHEN EL PASO IS MENTIONED.

4. PRESIDENT BOUMEDIENE CLAIMS THERE IS NO HURRY RE EL PASO “SINCE IT IS NOT IN FOUR-YEAR PLAN (“1970-74”). AT SAME TIME HE HAS LET US KNOW THAT THROUGH EL PASO PROJECT HE “EXTENDED HAND TO AMERICANS AND IS WAITING FOR THEM TO GRASP IT.”

5. FACT THAT BOUMEDIENE IS RESERVING HIS JUDGMENT SEEMS TO HAVE FILTERED DOWN TO SOME ALGERIAN OFFICIALS WHO ARE NOW MORE CAUTIOUS THAN BEFORE IN THEIR DEALINGS WITH U.S. OFFICIALS. NEVERTHELESS, US/ALGERIAN ECONOMIC RELATIONS CONTINUE TO PROSPER AS WITH SONATRACH'S NEW CONTRACTS WITH CORCO AND ESSO. POSITION OF USINT HAS ALSO IMPROVED. WE NOW HAVE GOOD ACCESS TO ALGERIAN OFFICIALS AS OTHER EMBASSIES AND CHIEF USINT IS ON FONMINISTER'S INVITATION LIST FOR OFFICIAL DINNERS.

6. THERE IS NO INDICATION THAT ALGERIAN LEADERSHIP HAS SECOND THOUGHTS RE THEIR STATED DESIRE TO BUILD A LONG-TERM MUTUALLY BENEFICIAL RELATIONSHIP. FURTHERMORE, IN SPITE OF HOSTILE ATTITUDE OF ALGERIAN MEDIA, GOA HAS AS A CONSCIOUS POLICY TRIED TO INSULATE BILATERAL US/ALGERIAN RELATIONS FROM MIDDLE EAST DEVELOPMENTS AND POLITICAL DIFFERENCES ELSEWHERE IN THE WORLD.

7. ALTHOUGH THERE ARE GROUNDS FOR SATISFACTION, OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH ALGERIA IS STILL FRAGILE AND REQUIRES CONSTANT ATTENTION. IF FORWARD MOVEMENT ON EL PASO PROJECT DOES NOT COME SOON THERE IS NO DANGER THAT, IN ABSENCE OF OTHER GESTURES, BOUMEDIENE MIGHT BECOME DISILLUSIONED AND PULL BACK. HOWEVER, WE CAN PROBABLY SAFELY MARK TIME FOR ANOTHER MONTH OR TWO.

8. WHEN EL PASO PROJECT CLEARS FPC THERE SHOULD BE SOME IMPROVEMENT IN ATMOSPHERE AND OPENINGS TOWARD NEW GAS AND OTHER CONTRACTS, HOPEFULLY FOLLOWED IN DUE COURSE BY RESTORATION OF DIPLOMATIC TIES.

GP-3

EAGLETON

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL ALG-US. Secret. It was repeated to Cairo, Khartoum, London, Paris, Tripoli, Tunis, and Rabat.

29. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, undated 29. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, undated1

Washington, undated

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION 1386

MEMORANDUM FOR:THE PRESIDENT

FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HK initialed]

SUBJECT:

Air Defense Network for Algeria

The Algerians have approached Raytheon about purchasing an air defense communications network. For Raytheon to do this would involve items from the Munitions Control List for which Algeria is ineligible according to present policy—not by law—because it does not have diplomatic relations with the US. The question is whether we would accept Algeria from the ban for this project. Secretary Rogers recommends we do so, but seeks your concurrence (attached).

What is involved is a $60-$80 million air defense network, essentially a radar system for all purposes including military. It is not an offensive system and no weapons would be involved—although obviously the net effect would be to improve Algeria's defense capability. The British, French and Italians are also interested.

The immediate operational question stems from the fact that the sale would have to include items from the Munitions List. Raytheon does not want to go ahead and prepare an offer without an understanding that the USG is prepared to exempt Algeria from the ban in this case. There is no legal inhibition; this would be strictly a policy decision. Raytheon will also need financing, but State has discouraged them from thinking about any USG assistance which is prohibited by law.

The broader issue is whether we want to take another step towards developing a presence outside the framework of formal political ties in the Mid East.

The Arguments

On the pro side, such a project would give us the first contact with the Algerian military since the 1967 break in relations and would dilute the Soviet position as the sole supplier of the Algerian air force. There would be advantage in a pragmatic broadening of our relationship with an important Arab state and no significant impact on the Arab-Israeli military balance because Algeria is so far from an active Arab-Israeli military front. Also among the advantages are the gain to US industry and the further broadening of the American technological and commercial presence in Algeria.

On the other hand, there is the argument that we do not see eye-to-eye on issues like Vietnam—although they have been helpful on the prisoner question—or the Palestine question. There is also the fact that Americans would be involved in helping Algeria strengthen its military defenses—with some effect on our friends in Tunisia and Morocco. The Secretary would propose briefing the Israelis at an appropriate time, putting it in the perspective that it is in our mutual interests to have an entree to the Algerian military and some leverage on the Soviet position there.

On balance, it seems to me that the US has an interest in developing a presence in the area which can supplement inter-governmental relations when they are at low ebb as now. In this connection, we have encouraged the private sector to look for opportunities. Raytheon's opportunity is one such case. Algeria is potentially one of the leaders of that area, and we have encouraged increasing—albeit commercial—ties with it.

RECOMMENDATION: That no objection be posed to Raytheon's bidding on this project and that State Department be authorized to provide necessary munitions export licenses.

Approve [Haig signed for Nixon]
OTHER

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 735, Country Files, Africa, Algeria, Vol. I. Secret; Exdis. Sent for action. The attached February 8 memorandum from Rogers is not printed. Saunders sent the memorandum to Kissinger on March 1 and recommended that he send it to the President for approval. Haig approved the recommendation on behalf of the President.

30. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 11, 1972 30. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 11, 19721

Washington, March 11, 1972

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION 2051
March 11, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR:THE PRESIDENT

FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HK initialed]

SUBJECT:

Letter to President Boumediene

Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, David Newsom, has accepted a long-standing invitation to visit Algeria later this month. Secretary Rogers (Tab B) recommends that Newsom carry a letter from you to President Boumediene. The letter (Tab A) expresses your satisfaction in the growing contacts between Algeria and the US, notes that it is in our common interests to continue this trend and concludes with the general observation that this complements our efforts toward better understanding among nations around the world.

Algerian-US relations have developed over the last few years primarily through substantial commercial exchange. While the Algerians have not abandoned their philosophical positions on such issues as the Palestinian revolution and Vietnam, Boumediene's pragmatic interest in developing Algeria has made possible a foundation for relating to the US in areas—primarily economic—matching Algeria's needs. Out of this and despite political differences has grown a series of relationships over the last two years. Astronaut FRANK BORMAN's visit was one highlight; you and President Boumediene have exchanged various greetings; and you have sent your foreign policy report to him. A letter from you carried by Newsom would appropriately fit in the context of this already existing—albeit limited—series of exchanges.

RECOMMENDATION: That you sign the letter to President Boumediene at Tab A. [text cleared with Mr. Price]

[Tab A]

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
March 13, 1972

Dear Mr. President:

On the occasion of his visit to Algeria, I have asked Assistant Secretary of State Newsom to convey to you my best personal wishes and my feeling of satisfaction with the favorable trend in relations between our two countries.

Those relations rest on a firm foundation of interests common to Algeria and to the United States. For this reason, they hold the promise of substantial benefits for both the Algerian and American people. I believe our governments have shown what can be done to promote advantageous cooperation and contacts despite differences in social systems and policies.

As you know, the United States is also engaged in major efforts to encourage understanding and cooperation in other areas of the world. Such efforts are essential to building the more stable world all of us want.

Please accept, Mr. President, my warm regards and best wishes for the prosperity of Algeria and of the Algerian people.

His Excellency
Houari Boumediene
President of the National Council of the
Revolution and President of the Council
of Ministers of the Democratic and
Popular Republic of Algeria
Algiers

Sincerely,
[signed Richard Nixon]

His Excellency

Houari Boumediene

President of the National Council of the Revolution and President of the Council of Ministers of the Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria

Algiers

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 748, Presidential Correspondence, 1969-74, Algeria, Col. Houari Boumediene. Confidential. Sent for action. Tab B, dated March 7, is not printed.

31. Telegram 540 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, March 28, 1972, 1333Z. 31. Telegram 540 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, March 28, 1972, 1333Z.1

March 28, 1972, 1333Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
USINT ALGIERS 540
P R 281333Z MAR 72

50

ACTION AF-13

INFO OCT-01 EUR-20 NEA-09 SS-14 NSC-10 CIAE-00 INR-06 NSAE-00 RSC-01 EA-11 NEA-09 E-11 L-03 PRS-01 AID-20 RSR-01/121 W 030017

P R 281333Z MAR 72

FM USINT ALGIERS

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7170

INFO

AMEMBASSY LONDON

AMEMBASSY PARIS

AMEMBASSY RABAT

AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

AMEMBASSY TUNIS

SECTION 2 OF 2 ALGIERS 0540

SUBJECT:

MEETING WITH BOUMEDIENE

1. SUMMARY: IN HOUR THREE QUARTER MEETING WITH ME MARCH 27 PRESIDENT BOUMEDIENE PRAISED PRESIDENT NIXON'S CHINA INITIATIVE, GAVE US CREDIT FOR PROGRESS ON VIET NAM, STATED BELIEF WE COULD DO MUCHMORE ON PALESTINIAN PROBLEM. HE WAS POSITIVE ON BILATERAL RAPPORT, BUT VAGUE ON TIMING AND CIRCUMSTANCES ANY RESUMPTION RELATIONS. ACTION: NONE. END SUMMARY

2. PRESIDENT BOUMEDIENE ASKED ME SEE HIM ALONE AT PRESIDENCY MARCH 27. ONLY OTHER PRESENT WAS IDRISS JAZAIRY, COUNSELOR TO PRESIDENT, WHO SERVED AS INTERPRETER.

3. PRESIDENT NIXON'S LETTER OF MARCH 13 HAD NOT YET ARRIVED ALGIERS, BUT I GAVE PRESIDENT PHOTOCOPY, EXPLAINING DELAY IN POUCH, AND EMPHASIZING KEEN INTEREST BOTH PRESIDENT AND SECRETARY OF STATE IN RELATIONS WITH ALGERIA. PRESIDENT ACCEPTED SUBSTITUTE, EXPRESSED PLEASURE AT MY VISIT, HIS FIRST DIRECT CONTACT WITH SENIOR AMERICAN DIPLOMAT SINCE BREAK IN RELATIONS.

4. IN OPENING REMARKS, I STRESSED U.S. SEARCH FOR NEW PATHS TO PEACE, MINIMIZING DIFFERENCES AND SEEKING BASIS FOR FRIENDSHIP FOUNDED ON MUTUAL INTEREST AND RESPECT. I EMPHASIZED NO NATION CAN CHANGE COURSE WITHOUT TAKING INTO ACCOUNT PAST OBLIGATIONS AND NATIONAL SECURITY. WE WOULD, THEREFORE, CONTINUE OUR PRESENCE IN EUROPE AND MEDITERRANEAN, UNTIL THERE IS CLEAR PROGRESS IN WORLD SECURITY AND DISARMAMENT, REMAINING WILLING AT SAME TIME DISCUSS ALL ASPECTS WORLD SECURITY PROBLEMS. WITH ISRAEL AND AFRICAN PROBLEMS IN MIND, I STRESSED LIMITATIONS ON U.S. INFLUENCE ON BASIC POLICIES OTHER NATIONS, PARTICULARLY WHEN THEIR OWN VITAL INTERESTS INVOLVED. FINALLY, NOTING DEBATE IN U.S. ON NATIONAL PRIORITIES, I ASSURED PRESIDENT U.S. WOULD CONTINUE PLAY VITAL ROLE IN WORLD, EMPHASIZING PARTICULARLY, AND INCREASINGLY, ECONOMIC ASPECTS.

5. EMPHASIZING PRESIDENT NIXON'S ERA OF NEGOTIATIONS AND SEARCH FOR GENERATION OF PEACE, I OUTLINED CURRENT POLICIES WITH RESPECT VIET NAM, MIDDLE EAST, SOVIET UNION, AND CHINA. ON VIET NAM, I STRESSED UNWILLINGNESS NORTH VIET NAM AND VIET CONG GENUINELY TO NEGOTIATE, DESPITE SUBSTANTIAL PROOF OF OUR DESIRE FOR SETTLEMENT. PRISONER ISSUE OF VITAL IMPORTANCE, BUT WE WOULD NOT WALK AWAY FROM AND DEPOSE SOUTH VIETNAMESE GOVERNMENT; WE BELIEVED PEOPLE OF SOUTH SHOULD HAVE OPPORTUNITY GENUINELY TO EXPRESS THEIR OWN WILL. ON MIDDLE EAST, U.S. HAD SHOWN RESTRAINT, SOUGHT PEACE, RECOGNIZED IMPORTANCE OF PALESTINIANS, BUT ARAB RESPONSE TO U.S. EFFORTS HAD BEEN DISAPPOINTING. RELATIONS WITH SOVIET UNION, IN ANTICIPATION OF VISIT, WERE POSITIVE WITH SALT TALKS PARTICULARLY SIGNIFICANT. ON CHINA, I READ PRESIDENT VERSION IN FRENCH OF BRIEFING ON VISIT.

6. ON BILATERAL PLANE, I STRESSED GROWING MUTUAL INTEREST WHICH BALANCES U.S. NEEDS FOR ENERGY AND WITH ALGERIAN REQUIREMENTS FOR TECHNICIANS, CAPITAL, AND MARKETS. RECOGNIZING WHAT ALGERIA HAS DONE IN SETTLTNG CLAIMS, IN UPGRADING INTERESTS SECTION WASHINGTON AND IN MODERATING POSITION TOWARD U.S. ON SEVERAL ISSUES, I STRESSED U.S. HAD ALSO TAKEN SIGNIFICANT AND UNUSUAL STEPS TO FACILITATE ECONOMIC RELATIONS; ENCOURAGING PRIVATE ENTERPRISE AND TECHNICIANS; PROVIDING CCC CREDITS FOR WHEAT; POSITIVE ATTITUDE ON IBRD AND ALGERIA; PERMITTING U.S. FIRMS BID ON AIR DEFENSE CONTRACT; EXIMBANK INTEREST WITH POTENTIAL BEYOND $800 MILLION; AND OFFICIAL EXPRESSION OF CONFIDENCE IN ALGERIA AS ENERGY SOURCE. PROBLEMS IN APPROVAL NATURAL GAS DEALS STEMMED NOT FROM LACK OF CONFIDENCE IN ALGERIA, BUT FROM INTERNAL QUESTIONS FLOWING NATURALLY FROM FACT U.S. FOR FIRST TIME WOULD BE IMPORTING SUBSTANTIAL QUANTITIES LNG. EAGLETON

50

ACTION AF-13

INFO OCT-01 EUR-20 NEA-09 SS-14 NSC-10 CIAE-00 INR-06 NSAE-00 RSC-01 EA-11 NEA-09 E-11 L-03 PRS-01 AID-20 RSR-01/121 W 033176

P R 281333Z MAR 72

FM USINT ALGIERS

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7171

INFO

AMEMBASSY LONDON

AMEMBASSY PARIS

AMEMBASSY RABAT

AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

AMEMBASSY TUNIS

SECTION 2 OF 2 ALGIERS 0540

SUBJECT:

MEETING WITH BOUMEDIENE

7. HAVING STRESSED WHAT WE HAD DONE AND PERSONAL INTEREST PRESIDENT AND SECRETARY, I EXPRESSED STRONG HOPE IN WASHINGTON THAT NEW U.S. INITIATIVES IN INTERNATIONAL FIELD AND GROWING ECONOMIC RELATIONS MIGHT SOON PROVIDE BASIS FOR RESUMPTION NORMAL DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS.

8. BOUMEDIENE TOOK TOPICS IN TURN. ON VIET NAM HE RECALLED HE HAD TOLD VISITING AMERICANS IN 1966 THEY WERE ON WRONG TRACK IN SEEING VIET NAM AS PROBLEM WITH COMMUNISTS RATHER THAN AS NATIONALISTIC STRUGGLE. AT SAME TIME IN CONTACTS WITH NVN, HE HAD STRESSED THAT U.S., AS MAJOR POWER, MUST BE GIVEN CHANCE WITHDRAW GRACEFULLY. RECOUNTING ALGERIAN EXPERIENCE, HE SAID NO NATIONALIST WILL TRUST ELECTIONS WHILE TROOPS OF “IMPERIALIST” POWER REMAIN IN COUNTRY. AT SAME TIME, ALGERIANS GAVE FRANCE MANY CONCESSIONS TO PERMIT THEIR DEPARTURE. VIETNAMESE SHOULD DETERMINE FUTURE, ALTHOUGH HE DID NOT SEE ANY EARLY UNION BETWEEN NORTH AND SOUTH.

9. WHEN I REITERATED FLEXIBILITY OUR RESPONSE, FEELING THAT NORTH VIET NAM NOT PREPARED NEGOTIATE IN GOOD FAITH, AND IMPORTANCE PRISONER ISSUE, HE REPLIED HE HAD DISCUSSED PRISONER ISSUE WITH NVN. THEY CANNOT GIVE WAY ON THAT SINCE IT IS “THEIR ONLY CARD” TO BRING ABOUT U.S. WITHDRAWAL BOTH OF TROOPS AND SUPPORT FOR THIEU. THEN HE ASKED: “WOULD WE ACCEPT ANY GOVERNMENT IN SOUTH VIET NAM?” I REPLIED WE HAD PROPOSED INTERNATIONALLY SUPERVISED ELECTIONS AND WE WERE PREPARED ACCEPT ANY GOVERNMENT SOUTH VIETNAMESE CHOOSE IN SUCH ELECTION. I REITERATED OUR DESIRE FOR GENUINE NEGOTIATIONS, SUCH AS ALGERIANS HAD FINALLY HAD WITH FRENCH.

10. RE CHINA, HE CALLED PRESIDENT NIXON'S TRIP “INTELLIGENT STEP”, WELCOMED BY ALL. ALGERIA WAS “EQUIDISTANT” BETWEEN CHINA, RUSSIA AND AMERICA AND WOULD REMAIN THAT WAY. WHEN ALL THREE CAN WATCH MOON LANDING TOGETHER, THERE MUST BE UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN THEM. HE WELCOMED PRESIDENT'S TRIP TO MOSCOW IN SAME VEIN. HE HAD NO SPECIAL OBLIGATION TO MOSCOW AND HAD TOLD KOSYGIN DURING LAST VISIT THAT HE (BOUMEDIENE) WISHED TO SEE BOTH U.S. AND U.S.S.R. FLEETS LEAVE MEDITERRANEAN.

11. BOUMEDIENE RESERVED LONGEST SPEECH FOR MIDDLE EAST, ASKING FOUR RHETORICAL QUESTIONS: (1) ARE THERE ARAB LANDS OCCUPIED?; (2) ARE THERE OR ARE THERE NOT PALESTINE PEOPLE IN EXILE?; (3) DOES THIS SITUATION CONSTITUTE THREAT TO PEACE?; (4) IS IT IN INTEREST OF U.S. TO REMAIN SEEN IN ARAB WORLD AS SOLE SUPPORT OF ISRAEL? ISRAEL HAS WON FIGHT AND WILL STAY SO LONG AS U.S. SUPPORTS IT TECHNOLOGICALLY, BUT ARABS WILL NOT GIVE UP. U.S. WITH INTEREST IN ENERGY, CANNOT AFFORD IGNORE FACT ARABS CONTROL MAJOR SOURCES OF ENERGY. ALGERIAN SOLUTION IS PALESTINE IN WHICH JEWS AND ARABS COEXIST; ANY OTHER SOLUTION IS MERELY PROLONGED ARMISTICE. BOUMEDIENE ADDED HE STILL BELIEVED U.S. HAD POTENTIAL TO INFLUENCE SITUATION AND WOULD BENEFIT SUBSTANTIALLY BY DOING SO.

12. RE RELATIONS, BOUMEDIENE WOVE BILATERAL CONCERNS WITH CONTINUING REFERENCE PROBLEM OF PALESTINE AND TEN PER CENT ALGERIANS WHO DIED DURING WAR WITH FRENCH. HE EXPRESSED SATISFACTION AT “OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK” OUR PRESENT RELATIONS AND ACKNOWLEDGED THAT WHEN U.S. TOOK 20 MILLION CUBIC METERS OF ALGERIAN GAS, THERE WOULD BE SUBSTANTIAL RECIPROCITY IN EXPORTS. WHEN I EXPRESSED DESIRE RETURN TO WASHINGTON WITH CLEAR IDEA OF HOW HE SAW CIRCUMSTANCES FOR POSSIBLE RESUMPTION. HE REPLIED: “LOOK AT MY POSITION. SYRIA, EGYPT, AND SUDAN BROKE AT SAME TIME AS ALGERIA. HOW CAN I EXPLAIN IT TO THEM IF I RESUME NOW?” HE AGREED RESUMPTION WAS NOT MATTER OF PRINCIPLE, BUT MATTER OF TIME. HE AGREED WHEN I INTERPRETED HIS REMARKS TO MEAN THAT WHILE MIDDLE EAST REMAINED IMPORTANT CONSIDERATION, HE DID NOT EXCLUDE POSSIBILITY FINDING WHOLLY BILATERAL AND ECONOMIC BASIS FOR RESUMPTION ONCE PRESENT ECONOMIC PROJECTS (PRIMARILY GAS) WERE APPROVED. HE MENTIONED RESUMPTION WITH WEST GERMANY, WHO HAD TAKEN YEAR TO REPLY TO ALGERIAN OVERTURE. I TOLD HIM AS FAR AS U.S. WAS CONCERNED, BALL IN HIS COURT. WE HAD DONE MANY EXCEPTIONAL THINGS FOR ALGERIA. WE FORESAW ADVANTAGES TO BOTH IN HAVING FLAGS FLYING IN RESPECTIVE CAPITALS. WE CONSIDERED NEXT MOVE UP TO THEM. HE ASKED IF THIS MEANT CRITICISM OF ALGERIAN POSITION. I REPLIED IT WAS MERE STATEMENT OF FACT. HE AGREED.

13. COMMENT ON MEETING AND VISIT IN GENERAL WILL FOLLOW IN SEPTEL.

GP-3

EAGLETON

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, ORG 7 AF. Secret; Priority. It was repeated to London, Paris, Rabat, Tripoli, and Tunis. In the septel, telegram 547 from Algiers, March 29, Newsom urged the Department that “We have opportunity in Algeria for major export gain and for strong economic relationship based on our need for gas. Our recent international initiatives have improved political atmosphere. Complications and delays in approving El Paso, however, still major impediment to our success and resumption relations here. Action requested: we need find urgently possible major economic actions which can demonstrate our interest and maintain our momentum here. I suggest meeting pertinent agencies following my return.” (Ibid.) According to telegram 118270 to Djakarta, June 30, the Federal Power Commission gave its general approval of the El Paso importation of Algerian LNG on June 28. (Ibid., ORG 7 S)

32. Telegram 1171 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, July 2, 1972, 1245Z 32. Telegram 1171 From the Interests Section in Algeria to the Department of State, July 2, 1972, 1245Z1

July 2, 1972, 1245Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
USINT ALGIERS 1171
0 02 1245Z JUL 72 ZFF-4

FM USINT ALGIERS

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC NIACT IMMEDIATE 7573

FOR NEWSOM

REF:

STATE 119678

1. I CALLED ON DEPSECGEN PRESIDENCY HAMDANI 1100 JULY 2 AND GAVE HIM PROPOSAL RE SECRETARY'S VISIT AND RESUMPTION US/ALGERIAN RELATIONS (REFTEL).

2. HAMDANI REPLIED THAT THIS WAS IMPORTANT MATTER WHICH WOULD BE GIVEN SERIOUS STUDY. BOUTEFLIKA WOULD BE RETURNING ALGIERS LATE TODAY OR TOMORROW (IMPLYING THAT WE WOULD NOT HAVE REPLY FOR SEVERAL DAYS). HIS ONLY QUESTION WAS FOR CLARIFICATION WHETHER WE WERE CLEARLY LINKING SECRETARY'S PROPOSED VISIT WITH RESUMPTION DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS.

3. I REPLIED THAT THIS WAS THE CASE SINCE WHATEVER OTHER REASONS THERE MIGHT BE FOR SECRETARY TO VISIT ALGIERS, IT WOULD BE ASSUMED, PARTICULARLY FOLLOWING RENEWAL WITH YEMEN, THAT A MAJOR PURPOSE OF VISIT WOULD BE RESUMPTION DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS. THEREFORE, FAILURE TO DO SO COULD BE INTERPRETED AS SETBACK IN RELATIONS.

4. HAMDANI AGREED AND RECALLED THAT HE HAD TOLD NEWSOM THAT HE DID NOT WANT VISIT SUCH AS THAT OF NEWSOM END OF MARCH TO BE INTERPRETED BY ANYONE AS HAVING FAILED TO ACHIEVE OBJECTIVES, AS HAD PARTLY BEEN CASE IN CONNECTION WITH NEWSOM'S EARLIER VISIT TO SUDAN.

5. CONVERSATION CONTINUED WITH MY REEMPHASIZING CONFLUENCE OF FAVORABLE CONDITIONS AND ADVANTAGES OF SEIZING MOMENT FOR RAPID ACTION. HAMDANI NODDED BUT ADDED THAT WHATEVER DECISION AT THIS PARTICULAR TIME (MEANING POSSISLE NEGATIVE DECISION) IT WOULD NOT FORECLOSE ACTION IN FUTURE.

6. COMMENT: BELIEVE ALGERIANS WILL GIVE SERIOUS CONSIDERATION TO PROPOSAL BUT SUSPECT CURRENT ODDS ARE AGAINST RENEWAL. FAVORABLE FPC DECISION RE EL PASO WAS MAJOR FACTOR WHICH WE BELIEVE WILL LEAD TO RESUMPTION RELATIONS. RENEWAL WITH YEMEN IS ALSO HELPFUL IN LONG RUN THOUGH ALGERIANS WOULD NOT WANT ANY DIRECT CONNECTION BETWEEN THAT RENEWAL AND THEIR OWN, AND HENCE IT MIGHT WEIGH AGAINST IMMEDIATE ALGERIAN RENEWAL. MAJOR PROBLEM FOR ALGERIANS, WHO ARE EVER MINDFUL OF THEIR REPUTATION IN THIRD WORLD, WILL BE CURRENT HEIGHTENED MILITARY ACTIVITY IN INDOCHINA. IDEAL TIMING FROM THEIR POINT OF VIEW WOULD PROBABLY BE A FEW MONTHS HENCE WHEN EL PASO PROJECT IS UNDERWAY AND WHEN MILITARY ACTIVITY IN INDOCHINA MIGHT HAVE BEEN REDUCED. I MENTIONED TO HAMDANI THAT ASSTSEC NEWSOM WAS PREPARED TO COME TO ALGERIA. HAMDANI DID NOT GIVE DIRECT REPLY, BUT I BELIEVE FROM WHAT HE SAID PREVIOUSLY THAT HE WOULD NOT WANT TO RISK “FAILURE” OF SUCH A MISSION AND THEREFORE WOULD WANT IT ONLY IF DECISION TO RENEW RELATIONS HAD ALREADY BEEN MADE. IN SUCH CASE, I BELIEVE NEWSOM'S VISIT TO ALGERIA JUST BEFORE AND DURING SECRETARY'S VISIT WOULD BE HELPFUL IN PROVIDING LATEST WASHINGTON IMPRESSIONS FOR BILATERAL TALKS.

EAGLETON

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL ALG-US. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. In telegram 119670 to Algiers, July 1, Assistant Secretary Newsom had advised Eagleton that since Yemen had restored relations with the United States, and favorable action had been taken by the FPC on the El Paso-SONATRACH agreement, several preconditions to U.S.-Algerian resumption had been met. (Ibid.) In telegram 1200 from Algiers, July 7, Hamdani advised Eagleton that Algeria could not receive the Secretary and renew relations in the present unsettled atmosphere. (Ibid.)

33. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 31, 1972 33. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 31, 19721

Washington, July 31, 1972

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

DATE:

July 31, 1972

PARTICIPANTS:

David D. Newsom Assistant Secretary for African Affairs

Bertram W. Rein Deputy Assistant Secretary for Transportation and Telecommunications

George M. Lane Algerian Desk Officer

Alec Toumayan Interpreting Branch

Abdel Kader Bousselham Chief, Algerian Interests Section

Abdel Kader Mekideche Third Secretary, Algerian Interests Section

Mr. Newsom thanked Mr. Bousselham for coming in to talk to him about this new and extremely serious incident. He wanted to say - first of all, that USG did not wish to negotiate with Algeria on this subject. It was obvious that we had no control over the aircraft which was presently en route from Miami to Boston; it's ultimate destination presumably being Algiers. The passengers had been let off, $1 million ransom collected. There were three men, two women and three children involved in the hijacking group.

We did not intend to ask Algeria any question on what would be done if the plane landed in Algeria. We felt that if there is any responsibility anywhere it lies in the fact that Algeria did give asylum to the previous hijackers—a fact which was widely circulated by the press—and a statement was recently issued by the Panthers HQ in Algiers, and picked up by the US press, containing encouragement to carry out similar acts.

There can be no question about Algerian responsibility concerning the life of the crew and the safety of the aircraft. This is clearly a national responsibility under the terms of the Chicago convention which Algeria has signed.

Speaking now as a friend, continued Mr. Newsom, and one who has served and worked hard and long to improve relations between the US and Algeria, he could not over-emphasize the seriousness with which this second incident is viewed at the highest level of the USG nor the effect that its outcome will have on the progress of our relations.

We have to consider—many people in this country will indeed feel this way—that encouragements are being given to commit similar acts and that this constitutes a direct intervention into the domestic affairs of the U.S. No country is more conscious than Algeria of what intervention into one's domestic affairs means.

We were not suggesting any conditions nor directing requests at GOA but the steps that one might normally expect to be taken by any government were clear. Such steps would be liberation of the plane and its crew, immediate return of the $1 million, action against the hijackers which unlike the previous case would signify to them that they were not welcome, would not receive asylum and would be dealt with in conformity with the crime they had committed.

Mr. Newsom then repeated that he did not feel useful or proper to engage in a discussion of what steps might be taken, Algeria might be able to handle the situation while still able to meet some of its own problems. It might for instance let the hijackers off, then take them into custody and if it did not want to treat with them directly could send them on to a third country. It might allow the plane to land but only to refuel and proceed.

USG did not intend to embarrass or pressure GOA but Mr. Bousselham must be aware that Algerians have created a very, very grave situation for us. In the eyes of many US officials the statement issued from Algiers constitutes an encouragement to perpetrate such acts in the future, this endangers civil aviation users and the resulting situation can only be termed intolerable.

Mr. Rein pointed out that the measures Mr. Newsom alluded to were not the result of any bilateral obligation of GOA but rather were the sort of measures that Algeria might want to take under its Chicago convention and ICAO memberships. It was not something that was owed to USG by Algeria.

Mr. Bousselham responded that normally he would just express his thanks and hurry back to his office to transmit Mr. Newsom's comments to his government but he felt constrained to remark on some of the points made by Mr. Newsom which had come as a painful surprise to him. Mr. Newsom had said that GOA encourages hijacking. He did not think that his government encouraged these acts in one way or the other. GOA's behavior in previous cases had consistently been to participate in the saving of the lives of the crew and the aircraft involved. GOA does not intend to encourage hijacking throughout the world or interference in US domestic affairs. Mr. Newsom must surely know this being an expert and the officer responsible for relations between the US and Africa. Mr. Newsom had quoted a statement that was unknown to Mr. Bousselham, he was sure GOA was unaware of it also. It was a statement made by an irresponsible person and Algeria could not be made to assume responsibility for it. How could anyone pretend to SPEAK for GOA and pretend to make such appeals in its name. He wished to denounce this statement as a falsehood if it had been made in the name of GOA. He attached absolutely no value to it and rejected the responsibility of its author.

Mr. Newsom pointed out that he had suggested that GOA bore a measure of responsibility because at the time of the first incident we had stated that unless GOA took legal measures against the hijackers this would only serve to encourage future incidents. Instead the Panthers had publicly announced two weeks ago the granting of asylum and the international Panthers HQ located in Algiers in facilities supplied to them by the Algerian Party Organization had thanked GOA for the considerate and comradely attitude shown in this case and had stated that it would seek to carry out other acts of expropriation against the US.

Mr. Newsom recalled that we had raised the question of asylum granted to the Panthers HQ only once when they had an article in NYT advocating the assassination of the President. Following our demarche GOA had then placed some restrictions upon them. Obviously the Panthers HQ is in a country which has control over what goes on in its territory. The two hijackers had been turned over to the Panthers organization and that organization's statement must obviously have had the encouragement or even clearance of GOA. It is very hard indeed to think the GOA does not bear some responsibility. Mr. Newsom invited Mr. Bousselham to consider that if a New York-based group advocating the overthrow of the GOA was receiving exiles from Algeria, who at gunpoint had extorted $1 million and then proceeded from Algeria to New York then he, Mr. Bousselham, would be sitting where Mr. Newsom was sitting now making very sharp representations.

Mr. Bousselham responded that the relation between our two countries go back many years, have gone through difficult times but the difficulties have always been overcome by calm and equanimity. The recent hijacking case had been solved in this spirit in spite of the complications brought by the world wide campaign of threats of boycott against Algeria, going as far as the Security Council. In this case again, Algeria had not asked for this airplane to be diverted towards its territory; he would check very closely into the situation and hope that it would have a normal outcome. GOA would do everything to insure the safety of the crew and aircraft. He wished to assure Mr. Newsom on this point without even awaiting instructions from his government. As for the rest, he urged Mr. Newsom to trust in the good relations and the climate existing with his country, he was sure that the same procedure based upon good will would obtain in this present case. He stressed the need to allow GOA to act in a calm atmosphere, not in a climate of artificial tempest, under pressure and threat. He expressed his thanks to Mr. Newsom and reiterated the esteem of his leaders for Mr. Newsom and all the efforts he has made which are highly appreciated. He urged Mr. Newsom not to allow his work to be placed in jeopardy by a situation which Algeria had not sought and which the US had not wished but of which both were the victims. He stressed that at times it is more difficult to guide one's friends than one's foes.

Mr. Newsom stressed that he understood fully Mr. Bousselham's position but we in the Department do not determine what the public reaction will be or how airline pilots will react. We did not try to stimulate such a reaction last time; we will not this time. The problem remains with us; it grows more serious each time.

Speaking as a friend and not as a part of his official demarche he wanted to stress the importance of mutual confidence in the fabric of the relationship we are trying to build between our two countries. If he were to repeat to Mr. Bousselham some of the language used at the time of the previous hijacking and some of the views held now at the highest level of USG, Mr. Bousselham would be shocked.

Mr. Newsom continued that however hard we may strive to detach events for which neither of us bear any responsibility from the general state of our relations we will not succeed because in the view of many USG officials there is only one country which so far has not fully cooperated in hijacking problems, at the time when such problems aroused world-wide concern and that country is Algeria and this per force puts Algeria in a very special category. It also complicates our task of maintaining confidence in Algeria and in her respects of international committments. Mr. Newsom concluded that he would do the utmost so that all concerned would give GOA some more time to work things out if the plane did indeed land in Algeria. It was his personal view that at some point Algeria must make a choice between the responsible image that it wants to have, that we want Algeria to have also and the benefits it derives from sheltering exiles and permitting such exiles to encourage the perpetration of criminal acts seemingly with Algeria's support or acquiescence.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12 US. Confidential. Following his 1968 flight from the United States to avoid imprisonment for an assault conviction, Eldridge Cleaver, Minister of Information for the Black Panthers, founded a headquarters in Algeria. On June 3, two Black Panthers had demanded and received $500,000 in ransom after hijacking a Western Airlines flight, a sum which the government of Algeria returned to the airline. The Government then released the hijackers to the Black Panthers in Algiers.

34. Telegram 188030 From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations and the Interests Section in Algeria, October 14, 1972, 1933Z 34. Telegram 188030 From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations and the Interests Section in Algeria, October 14, 1972, 1933Z1

October 14, 1972, 1933Z

TELEGRAM
DEPARTMENT OF STATE 188030
141933Z OCT 72

PRIORITY:

USUN NEW YORK

ALGIERS PRIORITY

ROUTINE PARIS

SUBJ:

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION - THE SECRETARY AND FM BOUTEFLIKA (ALGERIA)

OCTOBER 12, 1972, 4 PM NEW YORK

1. PARTICIPANTS: ALGERIA - FOREIGN MINISTER BOUTEFLIKA; AMBASSADOR RAHAL, PERM REP; ABDELKADER BOUSSELHAM, HEAD, ALGERIAN INTERESTS SECTION, WASHINGTON; US - THE SECRETARY; MR. NEWSOM; MR. DE SEABRA (INTERPRETER)

2. SUMMARY: IN COURSE OF TWO HOUR DISCUSSION, SECRETARY EXPRESSED PLEASURE AT IMPROVING US-ALGERIAN RELATIONS, AND OUTLINED US POSITION ON ME PROBLEMS, TERRORISM, AND HIJACKING. BOUTEFLIKA RESPONDED WITH RESTATEMENT OF GOA POSITION ON PALESTINE PROBLEMS AND ME QUESTIONS, AND SAID, REGARDING TERRORISM AND HIJACKING, THAT GOA MAKES A DISTINCTION BETWEEN BANDITRY AND THE ACTIONS OF NATIONAL LIBERATION MOVEMENTS. END SUMMARY.

3. THE SECRETARY WELCOMED BOUTEFLIKA AND SAID HE HOPED OUR RELATIONS COULD CONTINUE TO IMPROVE EVEN THOUGH THERE ARE OBVIOUS PROBLEMS. SECRETARY SAID HE WAS GLAD THAT EL PASO/SONATRACH CONTRACT WAS GOING WELL.

4. BOUTEFLIKA REPLIED THAT POLITICAL PROBLEMS ARE NOT PERMANENT, IN SPITE OF THEIR COMPLEXITY. HE DID NOT BELIEVE THAT EVENTUAL SOLUTIONS ARE IMPOSSIBLE, NOR DID HE CONSIDER PARTICULAR SOLUTIONS AS PRE-CONDITIONS FOR THE RESUMPTION OF DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS BETWEEN OUR TWO COUNTRIES. WHAT WE AGREED UPON THE LAST TIME WE MET WAS TO TRY TO WORK TOGETHER EVEN MORE CLOSELY THAN IF WE HAD DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS. BOUTEFLIKA EXPRESSED HIS GRATITUDE FOR EVERYTHING SECRETARY HAD DONE PERSONALLY TO INCREASE NUMBER OF PROJECTS OF COMMON INTEREST TO U.S. AND ALGERIA.

5. SECRETARY REPLIED WE HAVE MANAGED TO IMPROVE OUR RELATIONS WITH PRACTICALLY ALL NATIONS. WE HOPE ECONOMIC RELATIONS BETWEEN ALGERIA AND THE U.S. CONTINUE TO DEVELOP. BOTH HE AND ASST SECRETARY NEWSOM ARE DOING ALL THEY CAN TO ENCOURAGE AMERICANS TO BE ACTIVE IN ALGERIA, AND HOPE THAT FOLLOWING TODAY'S MEETING, ADDITIONAL PROGRESS WILL BE MADE.

6. SECRETARY SAID U.S. WANTS TO CARRY OUT POLICY OF IMPROVED RELATIONS WITH ARAB COUNTRIES, BECAUSE SUCH A POLICY IS IN OUR INTEREST. THERE IS NO REASON WHY THOSE RELATIONS CANNOT IMPROVE, IN SPITE OF SERIOUS PROBLEMS THAT REMAIN IN MIDDLE EAST. THE ARABS HAVE NOTHING TO FEAR FROM U.S., U.S. HAS NO ULTERIOR MOTIVES AND DOES NOT WISH TO INTERFERE IN THEIR INTERNAL AFFAIRS. ONLY ME PROBLEM REMAINS. WE HOPE TO PLAY HELPFUL ROLE BUT ARAB WORLD DOES NOT SPEAK WITH SINGLE VOICE, AND THIS MAKES IT DIFFICULT TO MOVE AHEAD. WE HOPE AT SOME POINT THERE IS GOING TO BE A WILLINGNESS TO ENGAGE IN ACTIVE DISCUSSION ON THE PART OF ALL THE PARTIES CONCERNED. SUCH DISCUSSIONS DO NOT NECESSARILY HAVE TO BE FACE TO FACE, BUT AN ACTIVE DIALOGUE AMONG NATIONS IS NEEDED TO SEE WHAT CAN BE DONE IN MATTER OF ACCOMMODATIONS. DISCUSSIONS CAN LEAD TO INTERIM AGREEMENT, WHICH WILL BE A FIRST STEP TOWARD A FINAL SOLUTION. WE SEE NO ALTERNATIVES; TO HAVE PROGRESS THERE MUST BE A COMMITMENT TO START DISCUSSIONS WITH A VIEW TO COMPLIANCE WITH RESOLUTION 242. WE ALSO RECOGNIZE NEED FOR SOLUTION TO PROBLEM OF THE PALESTINIAN PEOPLE.

7. REGARDING TERRORISM, THE SECRETARY SAID THAT WHILE WE RECOGNIZE THAT ACTS SUCH AS BLOWING UP PLANES, BOMBS THROUGH THE MAIL AND THE KIDNAPING OF DIPLOMATS, MAY APPEAR JUSTIFIED IN THE MINDS OF THOSE COMMITTING THEM, AS THEY BELIEVE THEY ARE SERVING A GOOD CAUSE, WE FEEL THAT SUCH ACTS SET CAUSE BACK. ACTS OF TERRORISM AGAINST INNOCENT PEOPLE CANNOT BE ADMITTED BY CIVILIZED PERSONS. WE ARE NOT SPEAKING OF LIBERATION MOVEMENTS OR THE PALESTINE PROBLEM, BUT OF AVIATION. NO CAUSE, NO MATTER HOW JUST, CAN JUSTIFY BLOWING UP OR HIJACKING A PLANE. USG APPRECIATES RETURN OF PLANES, CREW AND MONEY (IN THE WESTERN AND DELTA CASES), AND HOPES THAT IF GOA CANNOT EXTRADITE IT CAN AT LEAST PROSECUTE THE HIJACKERS. IF GOA PROVIDES A SAFEHAVEN, OTHERS WILL BE ENCOURAGED AND WE AND OUR CHILDREN WILL FACE DANGER OF BEING BLOWN UP. ALGERIA HAS A MODERATE AND REASONABLE GOVERNMENT AND IS ATTRACTIVE TO AMERICAN INVESTMENT, BUT HIJACKING INCIDENTS HAVE DAMAGED ALGERIA'S IMAGE.

8. BOUTEFLIKA REPLIED THAT USG IS TOO COMMITTED TO ISRAEL. IF US CONTINUES PRESENT POLICY, ITS INTERESTS IN ARAB WORLD ARE DOOMED. HE URGED THAT IN WAKE OF SOVIET WITHDRAWAL FROM EGYPT, US REVISE ITS POLICY.

9. IN COURSE FULL DISCUSSION OF PALESTINE PROBLEM, BOUTEFLIKA RESTATED GOA POSITION THAT KEY TO ME SETTLEMENT IS JUSTICE FOR PALESTINIANS. PALESTINIANS ARE HOMELESS AND DESPERATE. ONE SHOULD NOT JUDGE THEM TOO HARSHLY. IT IS ISRAEL, NOT THE ARAB STATES, THAT HAS BLOCKED IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ROGERS PLAN, THE JARRING MEMO OF FEB 8, AND EFFORTS OF THE BIG FOUR. ALGERIA WILL NOT HINDER ANY PEACE INITIATIVE THAT IS CONSISTENT WITH JUSTICE.

10. CONCERNING TERRORISM AND HIJACKING, BOUTEFLIKA RECALLED THAT ALGERIA HAS CONSIDERABLE EXPERIENCE WITH THIS PROBLEM. FRENCH HAD HIJACKED A PLANE CARRYING ALGERIAN LEADERS DURING ALGERIAN REVOLUTION AND ISRAELI PLANE HAD BEEN HIJACKED BY PALESTINIANS TO ALGERIA. IN LATTER CASE, BOTH ISRAELI CREW AND PASSENGERS HAD BEEN RELEASED AND SOME PALESTINIANS FREED. GOA RECOGNIZES THAT THIS IS A SERIOUS PROBLEM AND THAT THERE IS A DISTINCTION BETWEEN NATIONAL LIBERATION AND BANDITRY. BOUTEFLIKA REFERRED TO PREVIOUS GOA SUGGESTION THAT USG SEND GOA A DOCUMENT ASKING IT NOT TO PERMIT HIJACKED AIRCRAFT TO LAND AND SECRETARY REPLIED THAT THIS WOULD CREATE OTHER PROBLEMS CONCERNING SAFETY OF AIRCRAFT CREW AND PASSENGERS. BOUTEFLIKA SAID GOA DOES NOT WANT TO BECOME HAVEN FOR CRIMINALS BUT IT IS IMPORTANT NOT TO MAKE MARTYRS OF THE HIJACKERS. (BOUTEFLIKA APPEARED UNAWARE THAT TWO OF HIJACKERS IN DELTA CASE WERE ESCAPED CONVICTS). HE SAID US AND GOA SHOULD BE ABLE TO WORK TOGETHER REGARDING COMMON CRIMINALS.

11. BOUTEFLIKA SAID GOA WOULD JEALOUSLY GUARD ITS OWN NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE AND WOULD SUPPORT NATIONAL LIBERATION MOVEMENTS OF PEOPLES DEPRIVED OF THEIR RIGHTS BY COLONIAL POWERS. THIS INCLUDES SUPPORT OF LIBERATION MOVEMENTS IN PORTUGUESE AFRICA, SOUTH AFRICA AND RHODESIA, BUT NOT MOROCCO, WHERE GOA CONSIDERED KING HASSAN WAS LEGITIMATE RULER. BOUTEFLIKA SAID GOA IS INTERESTED IN DEVELOPING ITS RELATIONS WITH U.S. AND ADDED THAT BLACK PANTHERS DO NOT MAKE ANY EFFECTIVE CONTRIBUTION TO ALGERIA FROM REVOLUTIONARY, IDEOLOGICAL OR MORAL STANDPOINT.

12. IN CLOSING, SECRETARY EXPRESSED REGRET FOR ANY DAMAGE THAT MAY HAVE OCCURRED TO ALGERIAN EMBASSY IN HANOI OCT 11.

13. ABOVE MEMCON IS UNCLEARED, FYI, AND SUBJECT TO REVISION.
GDS

YY

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 7 ALG. Confidential; Priority. It was repeated to Paris. Drafted by Lane and approved by Newsom.

35. Memorandum of Conversation, October 20, 1972, 3 p.m. 35. Memorandum of Conversation, October 20, 1972, 3 p.m.1

October 20, 1972, 3 p.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT:

General Discussion of US-Algerian Relations

PARTICIPANTS:

Abdelkader Bousselham, Chief, Algerian Interests Section, Washington, D.C. Sid Ahmed Hadj-Mokhtar, Councilor, Algerian Interests Section

David D. Newsom, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs George M. Lane, Country Officer for Algeria

COPIES TO:

AF - 2

USINT Algiers EB/AV - 1

AF/N - 2

EB/FSE - 1

NEA - 2

AF/RA - 1

Mr. Bousselham, at his request, called on Mr. Newsom for a general discussion of US-Algerian relations.

Rogers-Bouteflika Meeting

Both Mr. Newsom and Mr. Bousselham agreed that the meeting between Secretary Rogers and Foreign Minister Bouteflika in New York on October 12 had been a positive contribution to our bilateral relations, Subjects of interest to both countries had been frankly and fully discussed and the high-level dialogue between senior officials maintained. Mr. Bousselham said he hopes the U.S. Government now understands why the GOA cannot take immediate action on certain matters of interest to us, but must wait for an appropriate moment to do so.

Hijacking

Mr. Bousselham said that the GOA still believes a written exchange of letters between our two governments on the question of how to handle hijackers would be useful. He emphasized that the GOA wishes to deal with us on this question bilaterally. Mr. Newsom replied that the formula proposed by Bouteflika and Bousselham (forbidding a hijacked aircraft to land in Algeria) is difficult for us to accept because of the risk to the passengers, the crew and aircraft itself. Mr. Bousselham referred to the observation made by Mr. Rein in their conversation of September 14. Even though he understood that Mr. Rein's observation did not represent the official position of the USG, he wondered if we could not consider it as a point of departure in an attempt to find a formula that would be satisfactory to both countries. Mr. Newsom agreed that we would continue to examine this question.

Mr. Newsom mentioned that two of the hijackers of the Delta aircraft were escaped convicts. Although we had several times informed the GOA of their criminal records, Foreign Minister Bouteflika appeared unaware of this fact when the subject came up in the discussion with the Secretary in New York. The Foreign Minister had said, however, that we should be able to work together regarding common criminals. Mr. Bousselham asked that he be provided with a complete legal dossier on these two hijackers which would enable the Algerian judicial authorities to present a formal case against them in an Algerian court. It was agreed that the two governments would remain in touch on this question.

The Middle East

Turning to the Middle East, Mr. Bousselham referred to the discussion between Secretary Rogers and Foreign Minister Bouteflika and asked if the USG now has a plan for a Middle East settlement. Mr. Newsom replied that Mr. Sisco is much more deeply involved in this problem than he and that Mr. Bousselham might wish to call on him for a fuller explanation. Speaking personally, Mr. Newsom said that it was his impression, after having participated in some of the Secretary's bilateral meetings in New York, that the Secretary intends to continue his efforts to find a solution to the Middle East problem, beginning with a partial settlement at the Suez Canal. No one could say at the moment exactly what proposal the USG might make or what steps we might take, but no one in Washington is satisfied with the present situation.

Mr. Bousselham asked, “Are you thinking of the Palestinians?” and Mr. Newsom replied that we fully realize the need for a settlement that takes into account the rights of the Palestinian people. The problem, as Secretary Rogers said, is who speaks for the Palestinians? Mr. Bousselham replied that history and justice speak for them. During the Algerian Civil War not all Algerians spoke with one voice, yet there was an obvious solution—to stop the fighting and set up an interim government. Mr. Newsom replied that as far as the USG is concerned, no “solution” which threatens the existence of Israel is acceptable. Israel's exact frontiers, however, are another question. As for a Palestinian state or provisional government, each Arab country would have its own view and each would try to influence the Palestinians. Egypt, for example, had proposed a provisional Palestinian Government, but now seemed to be backing away from that proposal. If there were a clear, unified Arab/Palestinian position, it would be easier to deal with. Mr. Bousselham repeated Foreign Minister Bouteflika's remark to Secretary Rogers that the GOA does not want to frustrate any initiatives; since the Palestinian problem affects bilateral GOA/USG relations, the GOA is naturally interested in finding a solution.

Vietnam

Mr. Bousselham inquired concerning the present state of negotiations on Vietnam. He said that the GOA is convinced that Hanoi has real problems and it is now seriously looking for a solution. Mr. Newsom replied that he had the impression that the present negotiations are perhaps for the first time going to the heart of the problem. The problem is not an easy one for the U.S., which must find a solution which gives the South Vietnamese people an opportunity to determine their own future and at the same time does not give the American people a feeling that they have deserted an ally. Dr. Kissinger is searching for the right formula. Mr. Bousselham said that the GOA strongly hoped a solution could be worked out. Although he was without instructions, he was sure that his government would be willing to assist in any way that the USG thinks would be helpful. Mr. Newsom replied with thanks to the GOA for its previous assistance in Vietnam problems and said that everything was now in the hands of the President and Dr. Kissinger.

El Paso-SONATRACH

In a brief discussion of the El Paso-SONATRACH contract, Mr. Bousselham expressed optimism. He said that some officers of Chemico had recently gone to Algiers to discuss the construction of the liquefaction plant and that he is confident that an agreement on the assignment of proceeds issue can be worked out. Finance Minister Mahroug had reserved only the point of whether GOA should be required to pay one month in advance. Mr. Bousselham also mentioned that Mr. Kearns, in his last meeting with Mahroug, had talked of EX-IM investments of $1.2 billion in Algeria in 1973.

Procter and Gamble Case

Regarding the Procter & Gamble (P & G) claim, Mr. Bousselham said that the GOA had never made a single lump sum settlement in previous nationalization cases and that it was extremely unlikely that it would set such a precedent in the P & G case. He felt sure that there must have been some misunderstanding if P & G had received the impression that they would get a single lump sum payment. He agreed with Mr. Newsom, however, that it was important to settle this final corporate claim quickly and said that he would do his best to work toward a mutually satisfactory solution.

In closing, Mr. Bousselham expressed great appreciation for the assistance of the USG and AFME in arranging for six Algerian Ph.D. candidates to come to the U.S. to complete their studies. He said that all six (who are now studying in the U.S.) are extremely impressive and that their presence here is an important asset in the improvement of US-Algerian relations.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL ALG-US. Confidential. Drafted by Lane and cleared by Newsom. The meeting took place in Newsom's office.

Ch. 3. LibyaCh. 3. Libya

36. Letter From the Ambassador to Libya (Newsom) to the Country Director for Northern African Affairs (Root), Tripoli, March 27, 1969

Tripoli, March 27, 1969

Newsom advised Root that he had successfully distanced the United States from previous U.S. commitments to assist the succession of the Crown Prince. Newsom went on to discuss the U.S. interest in maintaining a positive relationship with the new Prince.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967—69, POL LIBYA—US. Secret; Official; Informal. The referenced Airgram A—72, March 28 from Tripoli, is not printed. (Ibid., POL 15—1 LIBYA).

37. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the Special Assistant to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Lake) for the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, September 2, 1969

Washington, September 2, 1969

In this memorandum, Saunders advised Kissinger of a coup staged by a group of young military officers, who had proclaimed the Arab Republic of Libya. Saunders then offered a brief discussion of the political complexion of the new government, the Libyan monarchy's response to the coup, and possible U.S. strategies in dealing with the new government.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1239, Saunders Files, Libya, 1969. Secret. According to a September 2 exchange between Jon Howe and Harold Saunders, the message was sent to Kissinger in California. (Ibid., Box 738, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. I) Similar reports on Libya were contained in Bureau of Intelligence and Research Intelligence Note 625, September 1 (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1967—69, POL 23—9 LIBYA) and Intelligence Memorandum 2216/69, September 1. (Central Intelligence Agency, DI/OCI Files, Box 13, Job 79—T00829A)

38. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom) to the Acting Secretary of State (Richardson), Washington, September 4, 1969

Washington, September 4, 1969

Newsom summarized an African Inter-Departmental Group working paper on U.S. options in Libya. He recommended that Washington maintain diplomatic relations with the new regime and coordinate the timing of recognition with the British.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967—69, POL 23—9 Libya. Secret. Sent for action. Drafted by Robert Allen, Jr. (AF/N); cleared by Root and John Stevenson (L). The tabs are attached but not printed. Richardson approved the recommendation, and wrote, “These steps should be simultaneous, I think. ELR” On a September 5 memorandum from Newsom to Richardson, conveying word of London's intention to recognize the Libyan regime on September 6, Richardson approved a recommendation to follow suit. (Ibid.)

39. Intelligence Memorandum, Washington, September 16, 1969

Washington, September 16, 1969

This 9 page CIA paper, titled “Implications of the Libyan Coup: Some Initial Thoughts,” examined the nature of the new regime and the future of Libyan politics; the effect of this new government on western military facilities and petroleum interests; and outlined the larger consequences this coup would have on the larger Arab world.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1239, Saunders Files, Libya, 1969. Secret. Prepared in the Office of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency. It was discussed with representatives of the Office of Current Intelligence and the Office of Economic Research, who were in general agreement with its judgments. In the September 10 research memorandum RAF 18, Denney furnished Rogers with information on the leaders of the Libyan Revolutionary Command Council. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1967—69, POL 15 Libya) Another Central Intelligence Agency memorandum released in September, ER IM 69—125, assessed the importance of Libyan oil to the United States and its allies. (Central Intelligence Agency, OER Files, IM 69—125)

40. Telegram 158075 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, and Morocco, September 17, 1969, 2104Z.

September 17, 1969, 2104Z

In this 4 page telegram, the Department provided guidance to Embassies in pro-western, moderate Arab states which had voiced concern over the lack of American reaction to the Libyan coup.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 23-9 LIBYA. Secret. Drafted on September 12 by Root and Newsom; cleared by L, S/S and AF; and approved by Richardson. In telegram 5131 from Tunis, September 2, the Embassy reported the comments of Foreign Minister Bourguiba Jr., who, recalling the Mossadeq case, said he hoped we and UK could in effect ‘bring the King back.’ I pointed out some of problems involved in action such as this.” (Ibid.)

41. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, October 1, 1969

Washington, October 1, 1969

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 738, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for information.

42. Telegram 1134 From the Embassy Office in Benghazi to the Department of State and the Embassy in Libya, October 30, 1969, 1750Z.

October 30, 1969, 1750Z

Foreign Minister Saalih Mas'uud Buwaysiir presented Ambassador Joseph Palmer with a note calling for discussions to terminate the American presence at Wheelus.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, DEF 15 LIBYA—US. Secret; Immediate. It was repeated Priority to London and to USCINCEUR, CO 16th AF TORREJON,CINCUSAFE, and CO 7272 FTW Wheelus AB. A translation of the note was sent to the Department in telegram 1133 from Benghazi, October 30. (Ibid.) Due to the distribution of Libyan ministries in several cities, the U.S. Embassy also had offices in Benghazi and Baida. According to an October 10 memorandum from Acting Secretary of State Richardson to Nixon, the exfiltration cases were incidents in which U.S. employees at the Wheelus base smuggled two Libyans out of the country. (Ibid., POL LIBYA—US)

43. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, November 17, 1969

Washington, November 17, 1969

Saunders notified Kissinger that Secretary of State Rogers and Secretary of Defense Laird had cleared a note to the Libyans indicating that the United States was prepared to begin talks on withdrawal of U.S. military facilities, and hoped that training could meanwhile resume.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 738, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for information.

44. Memorandum From Robert Behr and Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, November 20, 1969

Washington, November 20, 1969

The memorandum summarized the attached NSC paper, titled “Possible Alternative Pressures on Present Libyan Regime.” The 9 page paper detailed U.S. economic interests in private oil investment; outlines possible strategies to employ in discussions with the new regime; and analyzes options both for and against those strategies.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H—71, WSAG Meeting, Libya and Lebanon, 11/24/69. Top Secret. Sent for information. Attached but not printed are the annexes to the NSC paper.

45. Minutes of the Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Washington, November 24, 1969, 3:03-5:18 p.m.

Washington, November 24, 1969, 3:03-5:18 p.m.

Over the course of this meeting, the group weighed different options presented in a contingency paper for negotiating with the new Libyan Government, focusing specifically on the issues of U.S. oil interests, the base at Wheelus, and possible covert intervention.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H—114, WSAG Meeting, Libya and Lebanon, 11/24/69. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Situation Room of the White House

46. Telegram 3684 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, December 11, 1969, 1010Z

December 11, 1969, 1010Z

RCC Chairman QADHAAFI, after surviving an attempted countercoup involving Minister of Defense al-Hawwaaz and Minister of the Interior AL-HAASI, hinted that the coup leaders had help from Washington and London.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 23-9 LIBYA. Secret; Immediate. It was repeated Priority to Algiers, Benghazi, London, Paris, Rabat, Tunis, CINCEUR, CINCUSAFE/LAS/GER, WHEELUS, OACSI/DA/WASHDC, and CO/EUCOM/FLDELEMENT/USAFAC/FRANKFURT. In telegram 206436 to Tripoli, December 12, the Department directed the Embassy to refute the allegation of involvement in the strongest possible terms. (Ibid.)

47. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, December 11, 1969

Washington, December 11, 1969

Saunders transmitted negotiating instructions on the Wheelus base prepared by State and Defense.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 738, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for action. A note on the memorandum indicates Haig approved it. The notes on the attached December 11 memorandum from Johnson to Kissinger reads: “Word received by phone that Mr. Packard concurs. H.H.S.”; “O.K. Haig for HAK 2/12/69”; and “Cleared cable with Jan Barbieri,S/S, 2100-2/12/69. SS.” The instructions were transmitted in telegram 206408 to Tripoli, December 12. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, DEF 15 LIBYA—US)

48. Telegram 3711 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, December 13, 1969, 1355Z.

December 13, 1969, 1355Z

Ambassador Joseph Palmer recommended a contingency statement in case the meetings of a U.S. official with one of the coup plotters should be exposed.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 23-9 LIBYA. Secret; Immediate. It was repeated immediate to Benghazi. In telegram 3622 from Tripoli, December 3, Palmer had recommended a negative reply to Minister of Defense HAWAAZ, who had requested American assistance in his struggle against other elements within the Libyan Government, so as “to preserve our future relations with whichever faction may come out on top of the possible power struggle here.” (Ibid.) In telegram 201909 to Tripoli and Benghazi, December 4, the Department concurred, adding “we would hope not to foreclose possibility future contact with HAWAAZ as may later be appropriately selected.” (Ibid.) [text not declassified] (Ibid.)

49. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson), Washington, December 23, 1969

Washington, December 23, 1969

Newsom advised Johnson to prepare to deflect domestic criticism for the U.S. agreement to withdraw from Wheelus on June 30 at a time when ties were growing between Libya and Egypt.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, DEF 15 LIBYA—US. Secret. Drafted by Blake. Sent for information. The text of the agreed minute, not printed, was sent to the Department in Airgram A—278, December 29. Intelligence Note 869, December 19, advised Rogers that, at QADHAAFI's invitation, two Egyptian army units had been deployed to Libya's two major cities. (Ibid., POL 23-9 LIBYA)

50. National Intelligence Estimate 36.5-69, Washington, December 30, 1969

Washington, December 30, 1969

The 8 page report examined the short-term prospects for Libya, emphasizing issues likely to affect U.S. interests, particularly western military installations, oil policies, Libyan arms negotiations with the Soviet Union, and Arab-Israeli “matters.”

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79—R01012A, Box 369. Secret; Controlled Dissemination. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, Defense, and NSA participated in the preparations of this estimate. The Director of CIA submitted this estimate with the concurrence of all members of the USIB with the exception of the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that it was outside their jurisdiction.

51. Telegram 169 From the Embassy in Libya to the Departments of State and Defense, January 26, 1970, 1346Z.

January 26, 1970, 1346Z

In this 6 page telegram, Ambassador Joseph Palmer recounted his January 25 conversation with Prime Minister Mu'ammar al-Qadhaafi, in which QADHAAFI aired his views on the future of the U.S. military programs in Libya and Palmer tried to clarify some points of contention.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to USCINCEUR, CINCUSAFE, 16TH AF TORREJON, WHEELUS AB, Benghazi, London, and Paris. The reftel is telegram 7024 to Tripoli, January 15. (Ibid.) In telegram 12659 to Tripoli, January 27, the Department instructed the Embassy to avoid the implication that Libya's request for ammunition would be received routinely or favorably. (Ibid.)

52. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, undated

Washington, undated

Kissinger outlined 6 tenets that would form the basis of the United States continuing relationship with the Libyan Air Force, based on the recommendations of Ambassador to Libya Joseph Palmer and the Departments of State and Defense. The memorandum recommended a shift in the relationship to plan for possible future instability in the region.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 738, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. I. Secret; Exdis. Sent for action. The President approved the recommendation. According to a covering sheet, the date of the memorandum was February 12. In telegram 25239 to Tripoli, February 19, the Department transmitted the outline for a new U.S. relationship with the Libyan Air Force. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 1 LIBYA—US)

53. Intelligence Memorandum 490/70, Washington, February 13, 1970

Washington, February 13, 1970

The 6 page report assessed the revolutionary government of Libya as it effected the staying power of the present regime and outlined the directions in which the leaders appeared to be moving.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DI/OCI Files, Job 79—T00830A, Box 2. Secret; Noforn. Prepared in the Office of Current Intelligence of the Central Intelligence Agency, and coordinated with the Office of Economic Research, the Office of National Estimates, the Office of Strategic Research, and the Clandestine Service.

54. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, March 20, 1970

March 20, 1970

Kissinger presented the President with the proposal for action to influence the Libyan Government to adopt policies consistent with U.S. objectives and minimize those policies inimical to them.

Source: National Security Council Files, Nixon Intelligence Files, Libya. Secret; Eyes Only. Sent for action. Tab A is not printed. Nixon approved the recommendation on March 23.

55. Telegram 724 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, April 13, 1970, 1428Z.

April 13, 1970, 1428Z

Ambassador Joseph Palmer reported that the Revolutionary Command Council was reviewing its basic foreign policy decisions with the United States. Based on U.S. policies on the Arab-Israeli dispute, one of the contending factions was arguing that the United States was a “lost cause” and should be written off.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL LIBYA—US. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. The LARAF commander pressed the Embassy for a decision on the F—5s in telegram 723 from Tripoli, April 13. (Ibid., DEF 12-5 Libya) Palmer's follow-up comments were sent to the Department in telegram 734 from Tripoli, April 14. (Ibid.)

56. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Deputy Director for Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency through the Deputy Director for Plans (Karamessines) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Helms), Washington, April 16, 1970

Washington, April 16, 1970

This memorandum outlined a discussion between the Special Assistant to the Deputy Director, Ambassador David Newsom, Deputy Assistant Secretary Rodger Davies, David Blee, and Archie Roosevelt concerning the issue of whether to uphold the U.S. contract to deliver a number of F—5 aircraft, which predated the September revolution, or defer delivery in the interests of the Option 1A operation. Ultimately, the group concluded it would be best to defer delivery.

Source: National Security Council Files, Nixon Intelligence Files, Libya. No classification. The attachment is not printed.

57. Telegram 70798 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Libya, May 9, 1970, 1748Z.

Libya, May 9, 1970, 1748Z

Secretary of State Rogers instructed Ambassador Joseph Palmer to inform the Libyan Government that while no decision had yet been made about the F—5 sale, the United States was prepared to accept five Libyan pilots for F—5 training.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL LIBYA—US. Secret. Drafted by Palmer; cleared by J, AF, AF/N, NEA, L, PM, DOD/ISA, SAFUSI, and Joint Staff; and approved by Rogers.

58. Intelligence Brief INRB 131 From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to Acting Secretary of State Richardson, Washington, May 27, 1970

Washington, May 27, 1970

While acknowledging that Libya might revoke the concessions of individual oil companies, the 3 page report concluded that the nationalization of the oil industry as a whole was unlikely.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, PET 6 LIBYA. Secret; Noforn; Limdis. Drafted by Bazil W. Brown, Jr. (INR/Africa); cleared by Harrop. For more on the oil negotiations in Libya, see Foreign Relations, 1969-72, volume XXXVI, Energy Crisis, 1969-1974.

59. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Packard), Washington, June 2, 1970

Washington, June 2, 1970

Johnson asked Packard to review the current instructions for terminating the U.S.-Libyan Economic Assistance agreement, which indicated that the United States had in fact overpaid Libya for the use of the Wheelus base.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AID (US) 4 LIBYA. Secret. Drafted by Suddarth and Elizabeth Verville (AF/N) and cleared by PM, L, AF/N, and H. Enclosures are not printed.

60. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Eliot) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 12, 1970

Washington, June 12, 1970

Eliot sent Kissinger an informal memorandum reporting that in an official ceremony on June 11, the Wheelus commander had turned over the base to the Libyan Air Force.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 738, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. I. Confidential. In telegram 1510, June 27, Ambassador Joseph Palmer took the Deputy Prime Minister to task for the criticism the Libyan Air Force Commander had leveled at Washington during the turnover ceremony, causing Palmer to boycott the remaining events. JALLUUD assured Palmer that he and other RCC members had had no prior knowledge of what Farjaani intended to say. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL LIBYA—US)

61. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Packard) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson), Washington, June 26, 1970

Washington, June 26, 1970

Packard recommended against Johnson's suggestion that the United States admit to owing further payments for Wheelus.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15 LIBYA—US. Secret. The attached letter is printed as Document 59.

62. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Moore) to Acting Secretary of State Johnson, Washington, July 2, 1970

Washington, July 2, 1970

Moore recommended that Ambassador Joseph Palmer be given authority to terminate the U.S.-Libyan agreements currently in force.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15-4 LIBYA—US. Secret. Sent for action. Drafted by Suddarth and Bray; and cleared by Blake and Salans. The attachments are not printed. The detailed instructions (Tab A) were sent to Tripoli in telegram 105547 on July 2. (Ibid., POL LIBYA—US) The formal notes of termination of outstanding U.S.-Libyan agreements were transmitted to Tripoli in telegram 106573, July 4. (Ibid.)

63. Intelligence Memorandum 531/70, Washington, July 31, 1970

Washington, July 31, 1970

This 6 page report examined arms supplies and suppliers to Libya since the 1969 revolution.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DI/OCI Files, Job 79—T00830A, Box 6. Secret; Noforn. Prepared in the Office of Current Intelligence of the Central Intelligence Agency, and coordinated with the offices of National Estimates, Strategic Research, and Economic Research, and with the Directorate of Plans.

64. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon, Washington, August 5, 1970

Washington, August 5, 1970

Rogers alerted the President to the implications of the introduction of Soviet weapons into Libya.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Secret.

65. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, August 12, 1970

Washington, August 12, 1970

Kissinger recommended that the President reject Secretary of State Rogers' suggestion for a meeting with Ambassador Joseph Palmer.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Secret. Sent for action. No action indicated, but a note on the covering memorandum indicated that Saunders contacted the Ambassador to express regrets. Tab A is not printed. Tab B is printed as Document 64.

66. Memorandum for the Record, Washington, August 19, 1970

August 19, 1970

This meeting discussed Libya and examined certain aspects of Option 1A.

Source: National Security Council Files, Nixon Intelligence Files, Libya. Secret; Eyes Only.

67. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Deputy Director for Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency (Karamessines), Washington, August 20, 1970

Washington, August 20, 1970

Johnson sent a memorandum presenting the Department's views on Option 1A following consultation with Ambassador Joseph Palmer.

Source: National Security Council Files, Nixon Intelligence Files, Libya. Secret.

68. Memorandum From Samuel Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, August 28, 1970

Washington, August 28, 1970

Hoskinson alerted Kissinger to a plot by Libyan exiles to release Idriss loyalists from prison.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Top Secret. Sent for information. The attached list of cables is not printed.

69. Memorandum From the Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Moore) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, December 31, 1970

Washington, December 31, 1970

Moore submitted to Rogers an action memorandum on the various views within the administration on F—5 sales to Libya.

Source: National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret. The paper was drafted by Blake, and cleared by PM/MAS, NEA, and H. In telegram 196791 to Tripoli, Tunis, and USCINCEUR, December 9, the Department explained that it saw no way to deliver the F—5s to Libya for later transfer to a third party. (Ibid.)

70. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Deputy Director for Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency (Critchfield) to the Director of Current Intelligence (Parmenter), Washington, February 23, 1971

Washington, February 23, 1971

Critchfield informed Parmenter that a critical point in relations with Libya might be approaching.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 79-01229A, Box 1, AA—1, AF DIV, 1971. Secret. The attachment is not printed. The memorandum has Critchfield's typed signature with an indication he signed the original.

71. Telegram 373 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, February 24, 1971, 1147Z.

February 24, 1971, 1147Z

Prime Minister Mu'ammar al-Qadhafi assured the Ambassador that there were no outstanding issues between Libya and the United States apart from the Arab-Israel dispute.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 LIBYA. Secret; Priority; Exdis. It was repeated to Benghazi. In the referenced telegram 4025 to Tripoli, January 9, the Department had advised that the “consensus is that fulfillment [of the F—5] contract difficult justify in terms current Libyan posture toward Middle East peace initiative, their present attitude toward US and US interests in Libya, and generally poor prospects for any marked improvement.” Paragraph 3 dealt with expulsions of American citizens from Libya and paragraph 4 with the petroleum negotiations. (Ibid., DEF 12-5 LIBYA) In telegram 185 from Tripoli, January 26, Palmer discussed the F—5s with MUFA Undersecretary KIKHYA. (Ibid.) In a subsequent comment, telegram 381 from Tripoli, February 24, Palmer wrote that there was “nothing new” in Qadhafi's emphasis on the U.S.-Israeli relationship, but that he was struck by the Libyan leader's commitment to non-alignment, his pragmatism, and the cordiality of his reception. (Ibid.)

72. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 18, 1971

Washington, March 18, 1971

Saunders recommended against the sale of F—5s to Libya, arguing that the Libyan Government would be unfriendly no matter what Washington did.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Secret. Sent for action. Although Richard Kennedy registered his dissent in an attached memorandum, Kissinger initialed his agreement on March 30.

73. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 27, 1971

Washington, March 27, 1971

Kissinger apprised Nixon of the current state of play on the oil negotiations with Libya.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Box CL 293, Memoranda to the President, December 1970—April 1971. Secret. Sent for information. A March 31 notes reads “The President has seen.”

74. National Intelligence Estimate 36.5-71, Washington, April 30, 1971

Washington, April 30, 1971

The paper drew conclusions about likely developments in Libyan policy, particularly in foreign affairs.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79—R01012A, Box 418. Secret. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, Defense, and NSA participated in the preparations of this estimate. The Director of CIA submitted this estimate with the concurrence of all members of the USIB with the exception of the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that it was outside their jurisdiction. Pages six and seven, not published, featured a map.

75. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Moore) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, May 8, 1971

Washington, May 8, 1971

Moore advised that the Secretary decline to sell Libya the remaining F—5s, but express the Department's willingness to provide support for those already delivered.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret. Sent for Action. Rogers initialed the option in the first paragraph “to delay further.” Drafted by Newsom and Blake; and cleared by NEA, PM, and L. The attachment is not printed.

76. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, May 17, 1971

Washington, May 17, 1971

Saunders updated Kissinger on the status of an internal plot against the Libyan regime.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. The attachment is not printed.

77. Memorandum, Washington, May 17, 1971

Washington, May 17, 1971

The CIA provided a status report on Libyan developments.

Source: National Security Council Files, Nixon Intelligence Files, Libya. Secret; Eyes Only. The May 24 covering memorandum from Hoskinson to Kissinger is not printed.

78. Airgram A—6 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Libya, June 16, 1971

June 16, 1971

The Department forwarded a Policy Planning Paper for Libya as approved by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for Africa.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 1 LIBYA—US. Secret;Noforn. Covering airgram was drafted by Edward W. Holmes (AF/NSC) and approved by Carter. The annexes are not printed.

79. Memorandum From Secretary Laird to Secretary Rogers, December 2, 1971

December 2, 1971

Laird recommended to Rogers that the United States allow a Spanish firm to sell F—5Bs to Libya.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret.

80. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Moore) to the Acting Secretary of State Irwin, Washington, December 7, 1971

Washington, December 7, 1971

Moore notified the Acting Secretary that Libya had nationalized a subsidiary of British Petroleum, which shared a concession with an American firm.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, PET 15-2 LIBYA. Confidential. Drafted by Clark and cleared by E/ORF/FSE, EUR/BMI, and AF/N. Intelligence Note RAFN—60, December 9, described the nationalization as part of a long-term Libyan plan for resolving financial claims against the United Kingdom, but added that the timing was determined by Iran's recent occupation of Persian Gulf islands, for which Tripoli blamed London. (Ibid., POL LIBYA—UK)

81. Letter From Secretary of State Rogers to Secretary of Defense Laird, Washington, December 15, 1971

Washington, December 15, 1971

Rogers disagreed with Laird's position on permitting a Spanish firm to sell F—5Bs to Libya.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret.

82. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Moore), the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Resources and Food Policy (Katz), and the Assistant Secretary for European Affairs (Hillenbrand)

18 December 1971

The memorandum advised Rogers of U.S. agreement to a British request for support in its dèmarches to major oil-consuming countries, urging them not to purchase oil from the former British Petroleum concession.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, PET 15-2 LIBYA. Secret. Drafted by Robert Pelletreau (AF/N) and Gordon Brown (E/ORF/FSE); and cleared by AF/N, AF, E/ORF/FSE,L, and EUR/BMI.

83. Letter From the Ambassador to Libya (Palmer) to the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom), Tripoli, December 22, 1971

Tripoli, December 22, 1971

Palmer conveyed his deepening concern at the U.S. postponement of a decision on military sales to Libya.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret; Limdis; Official—Informal. The tabs are not printed.

84. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom) to the Ambassador to Libya (Palmer), Washington, January 7, 1972

Washington, January 7, 1972

Newsom advised Palmer of the Secretary's belief that while a negative decision could provoke a reaction from Libya, the absence of a decision would not.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret; Official; Informal. The letter is an unsigned copy.

85. Memorandum From the Counsel to the President (Dean) to the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig), Washington, February 3, 1972

Washington, February 3, 1972

Dean warned Haig that the Libyan Government planned to loan three million dollars interest-free to the Nation of Islam.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Secret. The Libyan Government gave its grant to the Nation of Islam on May 8. (Ibid.)

86. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Eliot) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, February 8, 1972

Washington, February 8, 1972

Eliot notified Kissinger of the termination of U.S.-Libyan bilateral agreements dating from the previous regime.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Confidential.

87. Letter From Secretary of Defense Laird to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, March 1, 1972

Washington, March 1, 1972

Laird again presented arguments in favor of State's approval for the sale of aircraft to Libya.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files, FRC 75-0125, Box 14, Libya 000.1---1972. Secret.

88. Action Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs (Spiers) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, April 7, 1972

Washington, April 7, 1972

Since Rogers had decided again to hold the F—5 question in abeyance, Spiers prompted the Secretary to notify Laird and the Spanish Foreign Minister, who had requested approval of the sales to Libya.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret. Drafted by Chris C. Pappas, Jr. (PM/MAS); and cleared by PM/MAS, AF/N, NEA/PA, EUR/SPP, and AF. The attachments are not printed, but Rogers sent the letters to Laird and Minister of Foreign Affairs Gregorio Lopez Bravo on April 13. (Ibid.)

89. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom) to Acting Secretary of State Richardson, Washington, May 31, 1972

Washington, May 31, 1972

Newsom advised Richardson that the Libyan Government had requested a reduction of the size of the U.S. mission to fourteen from thirty-five.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 19-8 US—LIBYA. Confidential.

90. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State (Irwin) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, July 28, 1972

Washington, July 28, 1972

Irwin provided a memorandum for the Secretary on ways to manage relations with Libya that would protect American oil investments.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL LIBYA—US. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Newsom. According to a memorandum to Irwin from Robert Smith, the agreement between Egypt and Libya involved a plan for political unification of Egypt and Libya by September 1, 1973. (Ibid.)

91. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, August 9, 1972

Washington, August 9, 1972

Saunders asked Kissinger if the pressure from oil companies was sufficient to warrant the sale of the F—5s to Libya, which remained a major irritant in U.S.-Libyan relations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action.

92. Memorandum From Samuel M. Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, September 1, 1972

Washington, September 1, 1972

Hoskinson inquired whether Kissinger would like to override Rogers' view that there should be no change in U.S. arms policy towards Libya.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. Kissinger approved the recommendation. In an October 18 memorandum, Newsom asked whether, given Libya's interventionism in other countries and merger with Egypt, stricter controls should be imposed on the sale of U.S. spare parts. Irwin agreed. (Ibid.,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA)

93. Telegram 189100 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Libya, October 17, 1972, 2114Z

Libya, October 17, 1972, 2114Z

The Department conveyed a memorandum of conversation between the Secretary and the Libyan Foreign Minister, in which the former fended off demands for the contracted F—5s by inquiring about Libyan plans for the aircraft.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL LIBYA—US. Secret;Exdis. It was repeated to Cairo, Tel Aviv, and USUN. Drafted by CONNOR (USUN); cleared by AF; and approved by Michael Habib (S/S).

94. Telegram 1699 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, October 30, 1972, 1600Z.

October 30, 1972, 1600Z

The Ambassador and Qadhafi had a tour d'horizon conversation in which the Libyan leader sent a message to the President.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 LIBYA. Secret; Priority.

95. Telegram 1849 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, December 7, 1972, 1456Z

December 7, 1972, 1456Z

The telegram warned that the United States could expect overt discrimination from Libya due to its policy of support for Israel.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL LIBYA—US. Secret;Exdis. Repeated to Lagos. In telegram 199168, November 2, the Department instructed the Embassy not to broach the topic of the F—5s, but observed that Tripoli had neither been asked for, nor made, payments for the F—5s. (Ibid., DEF 12-5 LIBYA)

96. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Ross) to Armin H. Meyer of the Office of the Secretary, Washington, December 13, 1972

Washington, December 13, 1972

Ross acknowledged the links between Libyan leaders and terrorism, while passing along a report that noted Tripoli's doubts over the benefits of terrorist tactics.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8 LIBYA. Secret.

36. Letter From the Ambassador to Libya (Newsom) to the Country Director for Northern African Affairs (Root), Tripoli, March 27, 1969 36. Letter From the Ambassador to Libya (Newsom) to the Country Director for Northern African Affairs (Root), Tripoli, March 27, 19691

Tripoli, March 27, 1969

EMBASSY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Tripoli, Libya
OFFICIAL-INFORMAL

John F. Root, Esquire
Country Director for Northern African Affairs
Department of State
Washington, D.C. 20520

Dear John:

Embassy Airgram A-72 forwards a conversation of significance which I had with the Crown Prince on March 20.

It has, as you well know, been our objective to try to move away from the very precise earlier commitments to assist the Crown Prince at the time of his succession. Changes in the Libyan scene have made this kind of help less and less feasible and changes at home have decreased the likelihood that we would render special help of the kind contemplated. At the same time we have wished to avoid creating a feeling in the Crown Prince that we no longer support him for the succession.

Through various contacts we have been moving to emphasize that the Crown Prince and his followers must bear the major responsibility for a successful succession.

Following on the very helpful guidance on this matter in which you collaborated, I took the opportunity during an audience on March 20 to spell out our position directly to the Prince. The changes which sometimes take place in emphases and meaning when such messages are transmitted indirectly made it in my view desirable that our views be conveyed directly to the Prince. I came away with a feeling that he had read the message and that he now understands and accepts the fact that his accession to the throne depends upon internal rather than external factors.

Even though we need no longer consider our precise commitments of an earlier day, I feel that it remains important to us to keep in touch with the Prince through the channel which we have used now for many years. This gives us a further insight into his thinking and provides a link which could assist materially in the preservation of our once major interest in Libya once he accedes to the throne.

The conversation reported in the airgram and reports I have had of contacts with him by other diplomats suggest a very definite improvement in the Prince's awareness of his position and his problems. We also have the feeling that he is now for the first time seeking to widen the circle of his own supporters. The Moroccans and the Tunisians are both making special efforts both in Libya and in connection with his forthcoming visits to the Maghreb states. Morocco and Tunisia now for the first time since my arrival here have first class Ambassadors in Libya, who are making relations with the Crown Prince one of their special objectives. I think we can take some of the credit for this development since we have stressed to both governments on many occasions the importance of their representation in Libya.

Sincerely,
[signed] David D. Newsom
American Ambassador

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967—69, POL LIBYA—US. Secret; Official; Informal. The referenced Airgram A—72, March 28 from Tripoli, is not printed. (Ibid., POL 15—1 LIBYA).

37. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the Special Assistant to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Lake) for the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, September 2, 1969 37. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the Special Assistant to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Lake) for the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, September 2, 19691

Washington, September 2, 1969

FROM:HAL SAUNDERS

TO:

TONY LAKE FOR HENRY A. KISSINGER

The import of the coup in Libya will be clearer in another 24-48 hours, Following is to give you the best Washington appraisal as of the end of the day (Monday).

A group of young military officers has staged a coup, proclaimed the “Arab Republic of Libya” and set up a Revolutionary Command Council. The head of the council is the only individual publicly named so far as associated with the coup. He is a 34-year-old former officer who has apparently been brought out of “retirement,” Colonel Sa'ad al-Din Abu-Shuawayrib. He received his basic military education in the UAR Cadet College but has since attended US military schools, including Command and General Staff Officer Course in 1964-65. His bio in intelligence files describes him as pro-US, but of course no one should lean too heavily on that description in present circumstances.

The best we can say about the political complexion of the new government without knowing more about its composition is that its very few initial pronouncements show some moderation. For instance, representatives of the coup group have assured our charge that the coup was directed at the removal of internal corruption—of which there has been an increasing amount recently—and not at any foreign group, east or west. The new government has promised to protect foreign interests, including oil companies. The five-point statement proclaiming the new government said the regime would be socialist, would seek solidarity with the third world and would be based on the Koran. By current Arab standards, this is a mild statement, especially since it omits the vigorous statements on pursuing the struggle for Palestine that one would expect of my more radical group.

During the day, we have watched for signs of counter-action by forces seeking to rally behind the monarchy. None so far as we can tell have materialized. The King himself, 80, is in Turkey. The Crown Prince apparently went on the air, renounced his prerogatives as viceroy and urged support of the Revolutionary Command Council. Elements of the police and military which we thought might have resisted have one by one been reported as supporting the coup. The major element not heard from is a large group of civilian politicians who owed their bread and butter to the monarchy. We may learn more of how the politicians have split when the composition of any new cabinet becomes apparent, but in any case resistance now would seem to depend on support from within the army and possibilities for that have narrowed.

Since Americans do not seem to be in danger, the main contingencies we have to think about involve Wheelus Base. The Royal Libyan Air Force is based there and depends entirely on US logistical support. If there were any counter-coup, we would have to consider how to react to an Air Force request for support. We might also have to handle requests for asylum at the base. And eventually, the chronic pressures for us to give up the base may reassert themselves. None of these seem to be upon us tonight, so I will not take up your time discussing them. In short, we want to keep Wheelus insulated from this to the maximum extent possible.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1239, Saunders Files, Libya, 1969. Secret. According to a September 2 exchange between Jon Howe and Harold Saunders, the message was sent to Kissinger in California. (Ibid., Box 738, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. I) Similar reports on Libya were contained in Bureau of Intelligence and Research Intelligence Note 625, September 1 (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1967—69, POL 23—9 LIBYA) and Intelligence Memorandum 2216/69, September 1. (Central Intelligence Agency, DI/OCI Files, Box 13, Job 79—T00829A)

38. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom) to the Acting Secretary of State (Richardson), Washington, September 4, 1969 38. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom) to the Acting Secretary of State (Richardson), Washington, September 4, 19691

Washington, September 4, 1969

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WASHINGTON, DC 20520
September 4, 1969
ACTION MEMORANDUM

TO:

The Acting Secretary

THROUGH:

S/S

FROM: AF - David D. Newsom [DN initialed]

SUBJECT:

U. S. Policy in the Wake of the Libyan Coup

I attach a working paper on our options in Libya (Tab B) and a brief discussion of possible future problems in the country (Tab C). The paper was prepared for the meeting of the African Inter-Departmental Group on September 2. While it has not been formally cleared with the members present, the paper met with general initial approval and has benefited from subsequent detailed suggestions from participating agencies, including ISA, JCS and CIA.

Events are now moving rapidly in Libya. Former centers of royalist influence in eastern Cyrenaica have fallen to the new regime, and there is little likelihood of any further resistance.

Accordingly, with regard to the options that appear open to us, I have two recommendations on which we would welcome your decision: 1. That we decide to maintain diplomatic relations with the new Libyan regime as soon as it becomes clear to us that it is, in fact, in unchallenged control of the country. The scenario I propose would consist of three steps: a. We issue a statement (Tab A) responding affirmatively to the statement of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) that all nations maintaining diplomatic relations with Libya be considered to have recognized the new government;

b. we instruct our Charge in Tripoli, or alternatively our officer-in-charge in Benghazi, to present himself officially to the RCC, bearing a copy of our statement;

c. when we perceive the moment opportune we ask for confirmation of the agreement for our Ambassador.

Approve [Richardson approved] SEP 5 1969
Disapprove

2. That we coordinate the timing of the issuance of our statement with the British. They appear to be moving very rapidly towards recognition and could well announce it within the next few days.

Approve [Richardson approved] SEP 5 1969
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967—69, POL 23—9 Libya. Secret. Sent for action. Drafted by Robert Allen, Jr. (AF/N); cleared by Root and John Stevenson (L). The tabs are attached but not printed. Richardson approved the recommendation, and wrote, “These steps should be simultaneous, I think. ELR” On a September 5 memorandum from Newsom to Richardson, conveying word of London's intention to recognize the Libyan regime on September 6, Richardson approved a recommendation to follow suit. (Ibid.)

39. Intelligence Memorandum, Washington, September 16, 1969 39. Intelligence Memorandum, Washington, September 16, 19691

Washington, September 16, 1969

MEMORANDUM
OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES
Implications of the Libyan Coup: Some Initial Thoughts*
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
16 September 1969

The Nature of the New Regime

1. The identity of the rulers of the new Libyan government remains unclear and no authoritative statements of their objectives and priorities have been made. Nonetheless, they appear in control, and continue to show a posture of moderation and caution. Though avowing “socialism”, no Libyan leader has mouthed the extremist slogans typical of Arab radicals. To the contrary, such themes as the protection of foreign lives and property, the fulfillment of international obligations, and the elimination of corruption and favoritism at home have been stressed. “Social reform” has been emphasized far more than socialism in Libyan broadcasts. In private conversations with US officials, members of the ruling Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) have gone even further, and have given the impression of seeking very close relations with the United States.

2. Such statements may be deliberate dissimulation, designed to reduce any threat of foreign counterrevolutionary intervention. The RCC probably feared US/UK intervention; in such circumstances, conciliatory reassurances made good sense. The UK did put Idris in power and signed a mutual defense agreement with him. At the time of the coup, there were some 1,100 British troops near Tobruq, along with an MF base close by. In addition there was Wheelus, with some 5,000 American personnel, and the Sixth Fleet was not far away.

3. Whatever the case, the moderate posture of the Libyan regime is probably temporary, though there are no very good grounds for predicting just when or how this stance will change. We base the judgment that it will on the general tendency of Arab politics over the past two decades: other military-dominated revolutionary regimes have tended, almost without exception, to become more leftist and extreme with the passage of time. In Egypt's case this has come about under one leader. In Syria and Iraq, it was the result of successive military coups which brought ever more radical regimes to power.

4. Libya could follow either path, or both. It has already declared itself in the Arab revolutionary camp, and will quickly be receiving advice from its new brethren. While the RCC members—the ultimate power in Libya—remain shadow figures, we know that at least some civilian officials of their new government will be highly susceptible to this type of influence. So, in all probability, will be the RCC itself, not wanting its image tarnished by accusations that it is less than sincere or ardent.

The Future of Libyan Politics

5.Beyond this, the coup—as did the July 1958 one in Iraq—has probably created a precedent which will not be forgotten. Most observers inside and outside of Libya had long believed that a military takeover was unlikely in Idris' lifetime. The little army of 8,000 (with only 200-300 officers) was greatly outnumbered by the royalist police forces; it lacked that essential instrument of Arab revolution, the tank. The still powerful tribes in Cyrenaica were loyal to the King, who in fact was generally respected by most Libyans. The task of secretly planning and carrying out a coordinated takeover of the principal population centers separated by hundreds of miles of desert seemed insuperable.

6. But the RCC, with some armored cars, proved it could be done, and this lesson is not likely to be lost on other Libyans in the future. We do not know how many officers—apparently mostly captains and lieutenants—are in the RCC, but suspect the group is small enough to maintain secrecy and security and large enough to assure adequate direction and command a coup—perhaps 50 to 60 people. Nor do we know how cohesive this group is, or how susceptible its members might be to possible Algerian or Egyptian influence and intrigue. In the years ahead, the Libyan army will almost certainly be expanded (the old regime had already embarked on a program which would upgrade its equipment and nearly double its size). In the new and more heated political climate of Libya, small clandestine officer groups of Baathist, Arab Nationalists and the like will appear; over time, some may succeed in seizing power.

Western Military Facilities

7. The US and the UK will likely be in for some sticky times in the years ahead. An overriding theme of the new government, and of any conceivable successor, is an aggressive and militant anti-Israeli posture, and American support of Israel will cause serious problems. For the moment, the new government has said nothing about Wheelus and the British military facilities in Libya, or made any move against them. As it consolidates its hold on power and seeks to get more and more into the mainstream of Arab nationalism, it will probably do so. It might permit them to remain until the respective treaties expire: for example, it could, under the terms of the Base Rights Agreement, formally give notice to the US in December 1970 that it must be out of Wheelus within a year. But pressures, both internal and external, for earlier removal will be strong, and we would give Wheelus only a 50-50 chance of survival until late 1971—and virtually no chance at all of remaining after that. The British, already disliked as the patrons of the old regime, are unlikely to remain all the way to 1973, when their mutual defense pact expires.

Petroleum Policy

8. Relations with the oil companies will be a more complicated matter; in this field, such radical tendencies as the new regime may have are likely to be tempered by practical considerations. Idris' government had already initiated negotiations aimed at substantially raising Libya's share of oil revenues. These will of course continue, and Libyan demands may increase. The new regime may follow the course of either of the other two Arab radical oil producers, Iraq or Algeria. The former has left current operations pretty much alone, though it has prevented the US-UK-French owned Iraq Petroleum Company from expanding into new concession areas. The Algerians have been much tougher. Indeed at the time of the June 1967 Arab-Israeli war, they took the extreme step of putting all American companies (which controlled only about 10 percent of total output) under Algerian management and forbade the repatriation of any earnings, an arrangement still in effect. With the French companies, which produce the bulk of Algeria's petroleum, the government has been less harsh, but it has not hesitated to engage in harassment in the quest for more revenue and more output. The new Libyan government is likely to make similar demands on the US and UK companies which produce nearly all the Libyan oil. We doubt, however, that they will be treated as rigorously as American producers have been in Algeria, though such treatment cannot be ruled out, especially in the event of another major Arab-Israeli war.

9. There are some rather persuasive reasons why Libyan oil policy appears more likely to resemble that of Algeria. Like the latter, Libya holds some high cards; its oil comes from west of the Suez Canal and is of a very low sulphur content. Hence, shipping costs to Europe are lower, and so are those of refining; the process of removing sulphur to prevent air pollution is a fairly expensive one. Further, the sheer magnitude of Libyan output, now over three million barrels per day and rapidly climbing, will give the regime strength in dealing with the oil companies. Even the implied threat of a sudden cut-off of these supplies which meet about a quarter of Europe's demand would have disruptive effect—even though alternative but more expensive—sources of supply would be available. Thus the Libyan government is in a position to get progressively more demanding with the oil companies. How far and how fast it might go will, of course, depend on how far and how fast the present regime—or a successor—moves in a generally radical direction, though in the last analysis the Libyans will not wish to risk losing their oil revenues, on which they are almost completely dependent.

Consequences in the Arab World

10. The institution of the Khartoum subsidies, the maintenance of a united front against Israel, and the ending of Nasser's subversive efforts and hostile propaganda lulled the conservative or moderate Arab governments—including Libya—into a false sense of security. We believe that the governments of Kuwait and Saudi Arabia (and Morocco and Tunisia) may—to varying degrees—be more susceptible to overthrow than they were before the Libyan coup. There is evidence of substantial popular discontent in each country. Their regimes—like that of Idris—are viewed by many of their citizens as too friendly to the US, soft on Israel, corrupt, and unconcerned with the welfare of the ordinary citizen. The lesson that a handful of obscure junior army officers can successfully pull off a coup against a conservative regime in very difficult circumstances will not be lost in these countries.

11. If in the next year or two, one or more of these moderate regimes were overthrown, this would not mean that some new and more effective stage of Arab political unity, under Nasser or anybody else, would be in the offing. For the most part, Arab unity has been a myth, but there has been a fairly consistent unity amongst revolutionary Arab states on the subject of Israel. It should be remembered that, in the aftermath of the June war, the Arab radicals—Iraq and Algeria included —strongly urged using Arab oil as a means of pressuring the US to change its pro-Israeli policies. The refusal of Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Libya to join in killed that project. Libya might not be so reluctant again. Were new revolutionary governments to appear in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, this could mean very difficult times for American oil companies throughout the Arab world. In any event, the Libyan coup represents one more step in a process of polarization in the Middle East, which could see the Arabs all aligned on one side, confronting the US as well as Israel on the other.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1239, Saunders Files, Libya, 1969. Secret. Prepared in the Office of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency. It was discussed with representatives of the Office of Current Intelligence and the Office of Economic Research, who were in general agreement with its judgments. In the September 10 research memorandum RAF 18, Denney furnished Rogers with information on the leaders of the Libyan Revolutionary Command Council. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1967—69, POL 15 Libya) Another Central Intelligence Agency memorandum released in September, ER IM 69—125, assessed the importance of Libyan oil to the United States and its allies. (Central Intelligence Agency, OER Files, IM 69—125)

* This memorandum was prepared by the Office of National Estimates. It was discussed with representatives of the Office of Current Intelligence and the Office of Economic Research, who are in general agreement with its judgments.

40. Telegram 158075 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, and Morocco, September 17, 1969, 2104Z. 40. Telegram 158075 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, and Morocco, September 17, 1969, 2104Z.1

September 17, 1969, 2104Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State 158075
17 SEP 69

ACTION:

Amembassy BEIRUT

Amembassy JIDDA

Amembassy RABAT

INFO:

Amembassy LONDON

Amembassy PARIS

Amembassy TEHRAN

Amembassy TUNIS

Subject:

Reaction to Libyan Coup

1. Libyan coup has understandably created concern in pro-Western moderate Arab states and questions have once more been raised regarding credibility of US “commitments” to friends. While appreciating that discussion this issue can be delicate matter and runs risk either of generating requests for additional commitments or of discouraging friendly regime, Department nevertheless feels it is highly important our missions have matter in clear perspective. To extent it is useful, points this telegram may be used in discussions with host government.

2. USG has in various ways over past twenty years expressed its concern and interest in territorial integrity, stability and independence countries whose policies generally oriented in our direction. In certain countries, further, US has had installations of importance to it whose presence has implied a US interest.

3. States can to certain extent share responsibility in matters of external threat to one of them, but internal security depends in last analysis on government in power. In some cases US has made specific commitment to consult in event of external aggression but nowhere in Arab world have we made specific commitment to commit forces, to support specific regimes or to intervene in internal disorders. Making of such commitments by the US raises Constitutional questions, number of which are currently under study by Congress.

4. We are concerned, naturally, for survival of friendly regimes and would have an interest therefore in how they deal with internal problems which may threaten their stability and progress. To some extent we can be of help to government that is helping itself to ward off such threats in timely and constructive fashion, but in last analysis stability and security of regime depends overwhelmingly on its own actions. US strongly believes viability greatest where regimes maintain enlightened, vigilant attention to basic national social and economic needs. US has endeavored, while not ignoring direct security requirements, to emphasize these other needs in relations with its friends. Where regimes, either through growing distance from people, inattention, or toleration of corruption, make themselves vulnerable to sudden change, there is little US can do to save them from their own weakness.

5. In specific case of Libya, Deptel 149764 (being repeated to addressee posts) outlines limitations of US commitments. Conversations with key Libyan figures including King and Crown Prince over last few years have emphasized both that US most unlikely to intervene in internal disorders and that US would have grave doubts regarding viability regime imposed or reimposed by outside military intervention.

6. Intervention to support or preserve specific regime unable to help itself is serious and unpopular matter in modern context and may raise international legal questions. Even French, who have specific commitments with regard to certain African states, carry out their responsibilities with greatest discretion. US experience further has suggested that even when foreign government might be sympathetic to intervention, internal political factors within its own borders might seriously limit support it is able to give in this regard.

7. One further factor needs emphasizing. In dynamics of modern politics, slogans and categories can be misleading. Full evaluation of nature each country's problems necessary before reaching conclusions on implications of political change. Too rapid an assumption regarding nature or support of political change can seriously affect ability of interested neighbors (like Tunisia in case of Libya) to influence and determine full results and effects of such change.

END

ROGERS

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 23-9 LIBYA. Secret. Drafted on September 12 by Root and Newsom; cleared by L, S/S and AF; and approved by Richardson. In telegram 5131 from Tunis, September 2, the Embassy reported the comments of Foreign Minister Bourguiba Jr., who, recalling the Mossadeq case, said he hoped we and UK could in effect ‘bring the King back.’ I pointed out some of problems involved in action such as this.” (Ibid.)

41. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, October 1, 1969 41. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, October 1, 19691

Washington, October 1, 1969

[2 pages not declassified in time for publication]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 738, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for information.

42. Telegram 1134 From the Embassy Office in Benghazi to the Department of State and the Embassy in Libya, October 30, 1969, 1750Z. 42. Telegram 1134 From the Embassy Office in Benghazi to the Department of State and the Embassy in Libya, October 30, 1969, 1750Z.1

October 30, 1969, 1750Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY BENGHAZI 1134
OP 3017502 OCT 69 ZFF4

20

ACTION AF 18

INFO OCT-01, EUR-20, CIAE-00, DODE-00, NSAE-00, SSD-00, USE-00, CCO-00, PM-05, NSC-10, SS-20, RSC-01, L-03, H-02, PRS-01, P-03, INR-07, NEA-13, RSR-01,/105 W 045081

O P 3071750Z OCT 69 ZFF4

FM AMEMBASSY BENGHAZI

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 340

AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

INFO

AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY

USCINCEUR

CO 16TH AF TORREJON

CINCUSAFE

CO 7272 FTW WHEELUS AB

BENGHAZI 1134
CORRECTED COPY FOR ADDRESSEES

SUBJECT:

LARG NOTE RE TERMINATION WHEELUS AGREEMENT.

REF:

STATE. 183347

1. AMBASSADOR PALMER MET WITH LARG FORNMIN BUWAYSIIR IN BENGHAZI OCTOBER 30. AFTER ABOUT NINETY MINUTES DISCUSSION VARIOUS MATTERS RAISED BY AMBASSADOR AND BEING REPORTED SEPTELS, FORNMIN INTRODUCED BASE QUESTION STATING THAT HE GREATLY VALUED HIS RELATIONS WITH AMBASSADOR AND APPRECIATED HIS THOUGHTFULNESS AND WISDOM. FORNMIN SAID HE HOPED THEY WOULD ALWAYS WORK TOGETHER SUCCESSFULLY. ONE THING WHICH NOW TROUBLED LIBYAN-AMERICAN RELATIONS WAS PRESENCE OF OUR MILITARY BASE. MILITARY BASES DO NOT HELP CREATE GOOD RELATIONS BETWEEN COUNTRIES AND US HAD MANY GOOD FRIENDS ON WHOSE TERRITORIES IT DID NOT HAVE SUCH INSTALLATIONS. IN CASE OF LIBYA, IT WAS PARTICULARLY NECESSARY, FOLLOWING REVOLUTION, THAT THE AMERICAN BASE BE ELIMINATED, SINCE THE BASE HAD ALREADY CAUSED PROBLEMS BETWEEN LIBYA AND THE US SUCH AS TWO EXFILTRATION CASES.

2. FORNMIN THEN PRESENTED NOTE (INFORMAL TRANSLATION SENT BENGHAZI 1133) TO AMBASSADOR, CALLING ON “USG AND AMERICAN PEOPLE” TO “ENTER INTO URGENT AND FRIENDLY DISCUSSIONS WITH LARG AIMED AT URGENT EVACUATION FROM ALL LIBYAN TERRITORIES. MINISTER ADDED THAT HE HAD PRESENTED SIMILAR NOTE TO BRITISH AMBASSADOR YESTERDAY AND SAID HE HOPED THAT THE AMBASSADOR WOULD APPRECIATE ITS IMPORTANCE AND URGENCY. AMBASSADOR RESERVED POSITION RE SUBSTANCE OF NOTE, INCLUDING FOREGOING POINTS, BUT AGREED TRANSMIT IT PROMPTLY TO WASHINGTON FOR STUDY. HE ADDED THAT WE WOULD CERTAINLY GIVE NOTE OUR EARLIEST ATTENTION BUT HE WAS SURE MINISTER WOULD UNDERSTAND THAT THIS WAS A COMPLICATED AND VERY IMPORTANT SUBJECT. HE URGED MINISTER TO SEE THAT PRESS TREATMENT OF THIS SUBJECT IN LIBYA WAS KEPT IN LOW KEY AND DID NOT ADD TO INHERENT DIFFICULTIES OF PROBLEM. HE REMINDED MINISTER THAT HE HAD TOLD MIN AT THE BEGINNING OF THEIR MEETING THAT HE WAS RETURNING TO WASHINGTON FOR CONSULTATIONS AND THAT THIS NOTE WOULD OBVIOUSLY BE CLOSELY STUDIED AT THAT TIME. MINISTER SAID THAT HE UNDERSTOOD MATTER WAS IMPORTANT BUT HE FAILED SEE HOW IT WAS SO COMPLICATED. RE PUBLICITY, MINISTER SAID HE DID NOT INTEND RELEASE TEXT OF NOTE BUT TO HANDLE IN SAME LIMITED TERMS AS WITH BRITISH NOTE YESTERDAY.

3. AMBASSADOR THEN SOUGHT CLARIFY TERMINATION PROVISIONS OF AGREEMENT. MINISTER CLEARLY UNDERSTOOD CORRECT POSITON, MAKING CLEAR AT SAME TIME THAT WHAT LARG SEEKS IS EARLIER AGREED VOLUNTARY TERMINATION.

4. AMBASSADOR PALMER APPROVED IN DRAFT.

PALMER

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, DEF 15 LIBYA—US. Secret; Immediate. It was repeated Priority to London and to USCINCEUR, CO 16th AF TORREJON,CINCUSAFE, and CO 7272 FTW Wheelus AB. A translation of the note was sent to the Department in telegram 1133 from Benghazi, October 30. (Ibid.) Due to the distribution of Libyan ministries in several cities, the U.S. Embassy also had offices in Benghazi and Baida. According to an October 10 memorandum from Acting Secretary of State Richardson to Nixon, the exfiltration cases were incidents in which U.S. employees at the Wheelus base smuggled two Libyans out of the country. (Ibid., POL LIBYA—US)

43. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, November 17, 1969 43. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, November 17, 19691

Washington, November 17, 1969

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
INFORMATION
NOVEMBER 17, 1969

MEMORANDUM FORDR. KISSINGER

FROM: HAROLD H. SAUNDERS [Hal signed]

SUBJECT:

Instructions on Wheelus Base

You should be aware of how the instructions to Ambassador Palmer on his reply to the Libyan note about Wheelus are being handled.

Secretaries Rogers and Laird have cleared a note to the Libyans and instructions to Palmer incorporating the following points: - The US is prepared to begin talks about December 15 on withdrawal of US military facilities from Libya.

- The US trusts training can resume in the interim.

- If asked, Palmer is authorized to say that the talks could cover the possibility of our evacuating the base before termination of the agreement (December 1972).

They decided that they did not need to clear this position with the President. Having lost my argument with Newsom that it made sense to check this with the President in view of his interest in our general posture, I asked that they send over an information memo explaining their position.

In substance, I do not see much problem in the position that they have taken, In fact, Palmer will go in with this line, receive a curt response and be back with a recommendation to drop the effort to resume training and perhaps to begin talks before December 15. The substantive issue is whether we have a fight with the Libyans over this or whether we bow to the inevitable gracefully.

You are the judge of whether the bureaucratic principle involved here is a matter of concern. The Secretaries have in effect assumed that we are out of the base and that the only questions to be decided now are the tactics of negotiating an orderly withdrawal. They have decided that they do not need to bother the President with these operational questions. I do not quarrel with the judgment about the base; the only question is whether you feel the President is sufficiently reconciled to the situation that he will not be taken aback by the Secretaries decision.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 738, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for information.

44. Memorandum From Robert Behr and Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, November 20, 1969 44. Memorandum From Robert Behr and Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, November 20, 19691

Washington, November 20, 1969

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM FORDR. KISSINGER

FROM:Robert M. Behr [RMB initialed]

Harold H. Saunders [HHS initialed]

SUBJECT:

Paper on Possible Alternative Pressures on the Present Libyan Regime—Summary and Critique

The question the President asked was whether there is any way we could create penalties that might deter the Libyan government from its leftward course.

The paper covers this ground:

1. It characterizes (page 1) the new Libyan government as insecure, inexperienced, zenophobic, perhaps divided but as yet without visible opposition.

2. It details US economic interests (page 1 and Annex A) in terms of the $5 billion (replacement value) private oil investment, $500 million in annual profits to US corporations and 25% of Western Europe's oil consumption which could not all be replaced from other sources until 1971. It concludes that Western Europe is too dependent on Libyan crude to refuse to buy. Only 8% of Libyan production comes to the US.

3. It describes (bottom of p. 2) our choice in developing a strategy toward the new Libyan government as between: a. “policy of confrontation” and

b. “a policy which would involve some give on our part with a view to developing longer-term relationships with the new and still insecure regime.” [State prefers this.]

4. It examines—and this is the bulk of the paper (pp. 3-9)—a collection of possible alternative pressures. [The paper concludes that most are unsatisfactory because the leverage is not predominantly on the US side.]

Summary of the Alternatives: We recommend that you scan pages 3-9 but for the sake of simplifying these options fall into the following categories:

1. Presence of US-UK bases. These options boil down to a series of delaying tactics and, hopefully, some NATO European (Turkey, West Germany) pressures on Libya to honor its base agreements. They culminate with the US requesting the support of European friends in breaking diplomatic relations with Libya if the regime refuses. a. The argument for this approach is to see whether such pressures would widen splits within the regime.

b. The arguments against are that the regime in its present mood is unlikely to respond to this kind of pressure—especially NATO pressure—and that it is doubtful that West Germany and others would risk their economic interests to support us.

2. Economic pressures range through requesting US companies to curtail their offtake, advising US technicians to leave, cutting off US oil imports from Libya, restricting additional US investment, and freezing Libyan reserves in the US. There are specific arguments on each one of these in the paper (pp. 4-6) but in general they boil down to these: a. The argument for is that oil income is the Libyan government's main source of income. Any move that effectively cut into this would cause Libyan concern, although Libya now has more income than it can use so it has some cushion.

b. The argument against is essentially that US companies would suffer more than the Libyan government. European companies are ready to replace American in marketing Libyan oil. The Libyan government could cause some disruption in foreign exchange markets by shifting its reserves suddenly.

3. Military actions range through a Sixth Fleet show of force off the Libyan coast and movement of troops (hopefully in concert with the UK) to hold training areas [text not declassified] a. The argument for would be to make the regime uncertain about our intentions toward it [text not declassified]

b. The argument against is that we would have to prepare for longer term occupation if we intended a show of force beyond mere evacuation of Americans. This would provoke a sharp reaction in the Arab world and, within Libya, would not protect the farflung installations of US oil companies.

4. [text not declassified] a. [text not declassified]

b. [text not declassified]

Comment:

1. It seems to us that the base-related and [text not declassified]political pressures would probably not work, and the leverage is on the wrong side for the economic pressures.

2. A landing of forces at Wheelus seems an option worth considering, but the longer they stayed the less able they would be to maintain the cover of evacuating Americans and the more vulnerable private oil installations would become.

3. We suggest an NSC briefing covering these points: a. The character of the Libyan regime.

b. The US policy choice—confront or play along.

c. The options available in a policy of confrontation and their risks.

d. What we would have to do if we play along and the risks.

4. Dave Newsom seems the logical one to do the briefing. He knows Libya. He is the responsible Assistant Secretary. He is a good briefer.

Subject:

Possible Alternative Pressures on Present Libyan Regime

A. Present Situation:

A small group of young Army officers (the RCC) has overthrown the Libyan monarchy. The political inclinations of this group are still unclear, and possibly varied. While the group has installed a civilian cabinet which includes two key members who violently disagree with our Middle East policy, it is still too early to state that either the RCC or the civilian government is fundamentally anti-U.S. For the moment it appears that latent Libyan xenophobia, which has spilled over into Libyan-U.S. relations in recent weeks, also characterizes the new regime's attitudes toward all foreigners.

Libyan policy emphasizes Libyan nationalism in internal matters while identifying itself closely with radical Arab positions internationally. The new government has threatened an important U.S. interest by renewing the demands, posed twice under the monarchy but reversed by the King, for the removal of the U.S. and British bases and facilities.

While there is no discernible opposition, the regime shows signs of insecurity and inexperience. It is particularly concerned about the eastern region, Cyrenaica, the power base of the Senussi monarchy, and rural areas of Tripolitania. Unless the Army should split, the national police, now effectively neutralized by the Army, represents the only possible counterforce. The former King has voluntarily moved to Egypt this month; the Crown Prince is in jail. Other possible contenders to the throne remain free but under surveillance in Benghazi.

The other major U.S. interest, the $5 billion (replacement value) in oil investment, remains untouched for the moment. The regime has pledged respect for the oil agreements and has so far demonstrated this except in one case in which a company was closely tied to associates of the former King. We see no immediate threat to these interests, although such could result if the regime is threatened, or becomes increasingly unstable, or if there were a real confrontation over Wheelus, or in the event of renewed hostilities in the Middle East. While only 8 percent of Libya's 3 million bbls/day production comes to the U.S., 90 percent is produced by twenty-eight American companies. Their activity netted the U.S. balance of payments $680 million in 1968. Sales are principally to West Germany, the U.K., Italy and Spain; Europe is now dependent on Libya for 25 percent (3 million bbls/day of short-haul oil) of its oil requirements; if Libyan oil were cut off, the shortfall could not be made up within less than one year because of production and transportation problems.

B. Present U.S. Strategy:

Our present strategy is to seek to establish satisfactory relations with the new regime. The return to our balance of payments and the security of U.S. investments in oil are considered our primary interests. We seek to retain our military facilities, but not at the expense of threatening our economic return. We also wish to protect European dependence on Libyan oil; it is literally the only “irreplaceable” oil in the world, from the point of view both of quality and geographic location.

The Libyans have asked that we withdraw from Wheelus before December 24, 1971, the earliest date on which the present agreement could be allowed to expire. We plan an early response to the Libyan request in which we will agree to the principle of early withdrawal and propose detailed discussions. While there is no doubt that the removal of the base is, as it always has been, a popular local issue, at least some military officers in the RCC may be more interested in retaining our help in the creation of a Libyan air force and in an orderly transition. Their freedom of action may be limited by the intense popular feeling against our stand on the Arab-Israel issue. A change in the status of the base seems inevitable; our ability to secure an extension of the essential training facilities at Wheelus is now unclear. We have as yet, however, found no fully satisfactory alternative site(s) for this training. The British, too, are prepared to accept a change in the status of their facilities. They hope to remain the prime military supplier to the Libyans and to retain some training rights, however. The British have the advantage of less identification with Israel.

In developing our short-term strategy vis-à-vis the new Libyan government, we have a choice between a policy which is essentially that of confrontation and a policy which would involve some give on our part with a view to developing longer-term relationships with the new and still insecure regime. In general, we opt for the latter.

C. Alternative Pressures:

In response to the request of the WSAG the following possible alternative pressures on or against the regime are set forth. They are not mutually exclusive; they could be applied single or in combination. Because of the generally increased risk each would pose to our economic interests in Libya, because almost any one of them would place our broader interests in jeopardy throughout the Arab world, and because some of them would threaten Europe's dependence on Libyan oil, none of the alternatives is recommended at this time. Annexes exploring in greater detail the practical implications of economic pressures, military actions, and covert activities are attached.

1. Possible Immediate Pressures: a. Delay a reply to the note on Wheelus or reply in the negative. PRO: Could create uncertainty in RCC and cabinet regarding our intentions; might effect split among them. Night delay further action on their part because of fear of our real designs.

CON: More likely, that delay would lead regime to open campaign in streets against U.S. and base. Cairo and probably the USSR would support campaign and attack U.S. position. Street campaign could pose serious threat to safety of U.S. community, investment, base and Embassy; this, in turn, would necessitate some form of protection of each.

b. Enlist NATO countries to express concern over premature departure from U.S. and U.K. bases.

PRO: Certain NATO countries such as Turkey and West Germany have more leverage than we in Libya. Their expressed concern over future security of NATO area and Libya without bases might have an impact on RCC. Fact that U.S. and U.K. not alone in this concern might slow down demands for withdrawal.

CON: Idea of NATO pressure has always produced strong adverse reaction in Libya. Present Libyan PM led fight in 1967 to cut off oil shipments to West Germany. He could do so again. It is doubtful that West Germany and others would risk strategic economic interests to support us.

c. Insist that Libyans honor their international agreements as the have assured all concerned they would; if they refuse, break diplomatic relations in reaction to clear contravention of their earlier assurances. Seek support of European friends in doing so. PRO: If successful, this might cause regime to re-think pressures on us for an early withdrawal. RCC has been conscious of its international image. [text not declassified]

CON: Such action would rob us of access to the new regime at a critical time. It would undoubtedly result in further agitation against U.S. citizens and installations unless the military regime was sufficiently concerned about public disorders of any kind to prevent them. It would probably be welcomed by the more extreme elements in the country.

2. Pressures on Libyan Economy: a. Request the American companies to curtail their oil offtake from Libya.

PRO: Assuming legal means could be found to induce voluntary cooperation by the companies concerned, this would strike at Libya's main resource and all-but-exclusive source of public revenues and foreign exchange.

CON: The large number of U.S. companies involved would make voluntary compliance difficult. Since many are small and without alternative sources to meet their European contract commitments, and since the major producers are non-vertically integrated, they have less flexibility than elsewhere in the Arab world. At present neither the concessions nor the Libyan government associates the base and the oil issues. Such an association could lead to greater threat of nationalization. Libya would probably retaliate by cancelling concessions. Physical attacks on Americans and American property could not be ruled out. It would be likely to harden, not soften, the regime's position on the base. Furthermore, the Libyan government itself has been concerned about the spectacular growth in offtake; it might prefer to slow the depletion of a wasting and limited (twenty years at present rate of production) asset.

b. Advise U.S. technicians to leave because of unsettled conditions.

PRO: If properly timed and plausible, this could have an impact on Libyan regime. Libyan oil is largely dependent on U.S., technology. In 1967 the Libyans went to great lengths to retain and protect U.S. technicians.

CON: If perceived as a political act, such a move could backfire. The Libyans could readily seek and obtain Eastern Bloc and other nationals to operate U.S. properties—if they did not also seize the properties. It is doubtful that, in such circumstances, this would moderate the regime. It would unquestionably lead to great difficulties for U.S. firms operating in Libya.

[The following alternatives might not be legally possible except under the Trading with the Enemy Act. They are listed for completeness and in the event that they should be further explored.]

c. Cut off oil imports from Libya.

PRO: This would demonstrate U.S. displeasure without as great a risk of serious consequences as “a.”

CON: Since only 8 percent of Libyan oil comes to the U.S., the economic effect would be minimal. Such action would provide a basis for anti-American agitation without at the same time encouraging the regime to greater moderation.

d. Place additional restrictions on U.S. investment in Libya.

PRO: This might have some effect on the expansion of U.S. investment in Libya and hence induce greater moderation.

CON: It is doubtful that this would have sufficient impact to make the regime substantially more tractable. U.S. companies have already shown some hesitancy to expand investment because of the uncertain political situation; this has had a beneficial effect on the regime's attitude. If such hesitancy were given an official cast, however, the effect could be the opposite. Furthermore, most oil investment in Libya has been financed on the Eurodollar market.

e. Threaten to freeze Libyan reserves in the U.S.

PRO: Libya keeps $150 million in short-term securities and banknotes in the U.S. A quiet threat to freeze these if legally possible would have an impact and might make the regime more tractable.

CON: Libya would probably retaliate against U.S. interests by seizing properties. The risk of such an action would seem too great to justify its use solely in retaliation to the demand for base evacuation. Furthermore, Libya holds so substantial a proportion of its exchange reserves in dollar form only at our request and to meet our balance of payments problems; under the circumstances such action would be an unfortunate signal to other countries which have been responsive to similar requests. The Libyan government now maintains its foreign exchange reserves ($539 million in 1968) almost entirely in gold, dollars and sterling. Its potential for disrupting foreign exchange markets by sudden switching is not entirely negligible.

3. Military Action: a. Use units of the Sixth Fleet to make a show of force off the Libyan coast.

PRO: This might demonstrate to the Libyans our displeasure at recent events. It would serve to underscore the importance we attach to our interests in Libya.

CON: A show of force, to be effective, would have to be followed by other actions; use of the Sixth Fleet in this way at the present time would have serious political consequences elsewhere in the Middle East; in retaliation the Libyans might invite the Soviet Mediterranean Fleet to call at Libyan ports.

b. In concert with the British move sufficient troops into facilities and training areas to hold these areas on grounds that we need to protect lives and property. We would at the same time make pledge of noninterference so long as U.S. lives and properties were not disturbed.

PRO: We could do this under present agreements which permit us freedom of movement of troops into our agreed areas. Placing of troops would enable us to move them out to protect lives and installations elsewhere in the country. It would make the regime uncertain regarding our subsequent intentions and secure us full use of our facilities. Given sufficient force and airlift it could provide the means for preventing mob action against our people and installations, particularly away from urban areas. It would give heart to our friends such as Tunisia and Morocco.

CON: British agreement to such a scheme would be doubtful. We would have difficulty in getting overflight rights from Europe (and possibly even from Tunisia and Morocco) for a massive troop lift. It would undoubtedly mean long-term occupation by combat forces of these facilities. We would risk serious criticism from most of the rest of the world and be giving away a substantial propaganda weapon. Even with forces in our facilities we could not guarantee the safety of all our citizens and investments. We would be undertaking drastic action for short-term gain, but incurring serious longer-term costs. Finally, and under the best of circumstances, we could not legally maintain troops at the facilities beyond 1971.

c. If the British were not prepared to cooperate, a unilateral U.S. landing at Wheelus, El Uotia (the range south of Tripoli) and Matratin (U.S. Coast Guard station near the major oil fields).

PRO: This would be a feasible operation, with the same advantages as “b” above.

CON: It would leave U.S. citizens and investments more exposed in eastern Libya. It would leave us politically exposed. Lack of British cooperation would further complicate overflight problems.

4. [text not declassified] a. [text not declassified]

[Pages 11-12 not declassified]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H—71, WSAG Meeting, Libya and Lebanon, 11/24/69. Top Secret. Sent for information. Attached but not printed are the annexes to the NSC paper.

45. Minutes of the Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Washington, November 24, 1969, 3:03-5:18 p.m. 45. Minutes of the Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Washington, November 24, 1969, 3:03-5:18 p.m.1

Washington, November 24, 1969, 3:03-5:18 p.m.

WASHINGTON SPECIAL ACTIONS GROUP (WSAG) MEETING
November 24, 1969
Time and Place: 3:03 PM - 5:18 PM
White House Situation Room

Subject:

Libya and Lebanon

Participants:

Henry A. Kissinger, Chairman NSC Staff - Harold H. Saunders

Col. Robert M. Behr

State - U. Alexis Johnson Keith Guthrie

David Newsom (Libya only)

Rodger Davies

Defense - G. Warren Nutter

CIA - Thomas H. Karamessines

JCS - Vice Admiral Nels C. Johnson

SUMMARY OF DECISIONS

1. Libya

a. The following revisions are to be made in the Libya contingency paper: (1) Mention is to be made of the capabilities of the U.S. to influence the Libyan Air Force and our plans to use this leverage in talks with Libya about the future of Wheelus Field.

(2) A detailed scenario for [text not declassified] influencing the Libyan revolutionary government is to be added.

(3) A summary of the plan for a military supported evacuation of U.S. citizens from Libya is to be appended.

(4) Show of force (Option 3a) is to be deleted as a possible military action.

b. With the above revisions, the Libya contingency plan constitutes a fair statement of U.S. options in the present and perhaps the immediately foreseeable circumstances.

c. A short briefing on Libya will be included on the agenda of the NSC meeting on the Middle East scheduled for early December. The briefing should review the conclusions of the contingency study and cover the present situation in Libya, including a brief summary of our strategy in the upcoming negotiations on Wheelus Field.

[Here follows material unrelated to Libya.]

I. LIBYA

Mr. Kissinger opened the discussion by explaining the origin of the Libya paper. The President had expressed concern over the direction Libya might be taking and wanted to consider what the U.S. could do to reverse the trend or to indicate to the Revolutionary Government that we are not going to be entirely quiescent. The President had become interested as a result of his talks with moderate Arab leaders and with the Shah, who had suggested transferring the Libyan oil quota to Iran.

Under Secretary Johnson noted that the U.S. imports so little Libyan oil that loss of the U.S. market would be of small concern to Libya. Mr. Newsom added that existing regulations made it very difficult to reallocate oil quotas.

Mr. Newsom explained the assumptions underlying the Libya paper. The major U.S. interest in Libya was considered to be oil, both because of its effect on our balance of payments and because of European dependence on Libyan oil supplies. The key issue was how to protect our oil interests in the context of Libyan demands for withdrawal from Wheelus Air Base and our desire to reverse the trend toward radicalism in Libya if at all possible. The general conclusion was that U.S. options were extremely limited.

Mr. Newsom said the immediate problem is the Libyan demand that we leave Wheelus. We are to begin talks with the Libyans on December 15. While we do not completely rule out a possible change in the Libyan political climate, we do not believe that the U.S. can take action to foster a political change without running a serious risk of strengthening the weak revolutionary regime. Under these circumstances our objective is to maintain satisfactory relations with the Revolutionary Government but to hold open our other options.

Mr. Kissinger summarized the basic approach of the paper as assuming that Libya is not yet irreconcilably hostile to the U.S. but that many actions which the U.S. might take would turn the Revolutionary Government against us.

Mr. Kissinger asked what would happen if the Revolutionary Government does become irreconcilably hostile. Mr. Newsom replied that the Libyans might nationalize U.S. oil properties. However, even were that to happen, the U.S. would have little leverage. A Hickenlooper situation would not arise. Mr. Kissinger asked if any of the measures analyzed in the Libya paper might be utilized in the event oil nationalization takes place. Newsom suggested that three such actions might be taken: (1) Withdrawal of U.S. oil technicians, (2) transfer of the oil quota, and (3) freezing of Libyan assets in the U.S. In addition, one other possibility not mentioned in the paper would be to curtail facilities for transporting Libyan oil to European markets. However, there were few U.S. owned or registered vessels in this trade. Under Secretary Johnson suggested that U.S. companies might, however, cooperate with a boycott of Libyan oil although if a boycott were undertaken we would be faced with the problem of finding alternative oil supplies for Europe.

Under Secretary Johnson noted the importance of examining the consequences of loss of Libyan oil to Europe. Mr. Newsom added that the German situation was critical because 45 percent of Libyan oil went to West Germany. One oil expert had described Libya as the only irreplaceable source of petroleum. This was because of the difficulty of arranging alternate sources of supply. In addition, European refineries were geared to Libyan oil and would require adjustments in order to utilize petroleum from other sources.

Mr. Newsom suggested the possibility of consulting the West Germans to determine if they have considered alternative supplies. In response to a question from Mr. Kissinger, Under Secretary Johnson said the matter could probably be raised with the Germans without danger of a leak but he wondered if it were necessary to talk to the Germans at this time.

Mr. Kissinger said that he considered the paper a fair statement of the options available in the present and perhaps the immediately foreseeable circumstances. However, it might be worth considering what the U.S. should do if the Revolutionary regime turns hostile. It would be useful to have a definition of “hostile” and to be able to present to the President the steps which we might take under such circumstances.

Mr. Newsom pointed out that in the event the Libyans turned hostile, another possible danger, in addition to oil nationalization, would be a campaign of violence against the American community in Libya. Many of the Americans are located in the oil field areas. The popular mood in Libya, under the influence of Nasserist propaganda, is growing less friendly. If the American community were threatened, the U.S. might have to undertake a military supported evacuation.

Mr. Kissinger asked if there was a plan for such an evacuation, and Mr. Newsom replied that we have a plan which was tested once, in 1967, when we evacuated American dependents.

Mr. Kissinger said that the analysis of possible military actions should be amplified to include the possibility of military evacuation. He asked about the strategy to be followed in the event of evacuation. Mr. Newsom explained that it was planned to have U.S. forces enter through Wheelus.

Mr. Kissinger then raised the question of the military actions discussed in the present Libya paper. He asked if anyone believed that the U.S. could take any of these actions. He questioned the credibility of a show of force, noting that this technique was effective when used by the British in the 19th Century because it was known that further action would be taken in the event the show of force did not get results.

Mr. Newsom thought there was little likelihood of being able to take military action in Libya. Insofar as British cooperation was concerned, it was clear that the British had little interest in getting involved. Mr. Kissinger then instructed that Military Option A (Show of Force) be dropped from the plan.

Mr. Kissinger asked about the option for introducing additional forces into Wheelus. Mr. Newsom stated that this was not feasible, and Mr. Nutter agreed.

Mr. Kissinger asked if we should consider sending ground forces to Libya in the event the Libyan regime turned hostile. Mr. Karamessines and Admiral Johnson replied that this depended upon the purpose. Mr. Kissinger explained that in the case of evacuation there was general agreement that in extreme circumstances we would have to employ military force. However, in situations other than evacuation, the use of military forces appeared dubious. Mr. Nutter noted that employment of forces in Libya could not be separated from the general problem of utilizing U.S. troops in the Middle East.

Referring to a recent intelligence report concerning a Libyan approach to the French for 300 planes, Mr. Karamessines asked about the possibility of talking to the French and enlisting their cooperation in restricting delivery of the airplanes in the event of an impending or actual nationalization. [text not declassified] Admiral Johnson noted that the Libyans had also approached West Germany.

Under Secretary Johnson asked what our response might be if the Libyans came to us for military assistance. Would we be willing to pay something in the way of military aid in order to maintain a position at Wheelus? We might well be faced with this question when talks about the base begin on December 15.

Mr. Newsom commented that there were some hints that the Libyans may wish to retain a relationship with the U.S. based upon supply of military equipment and training but that they would not want to continue the base relationship. The question was whether it was worth maintaining the kind of presence that would be possible by providing military assistance and training. Mr. Kissinger asked about our present assistance programs and Mr. Newsom explained that the U.S. provided training and second echelon maintenance to the Libyan Air Force. In addition, the Lockheed Company has a contract for assisting the Libyan Air Force. The U.S. is selling Libya some F-5's, which are to be delivered in 1970.

Mr. Kissinger suggested that as long as the Libyan question was coming before the NSC it might be well to wrap up the Wheelus question at that time. The principal issue was whether we wanted to go to the bitter end in seeking to retain the present base agreement. We would need to determine how much we would be willing to pay to retain the base or some sort of military presence in Libya.

Mr. Kissinger asked if we should insist on the letter of our agreement. Newsom explained that in accordance with the agreement each party could, beginning on December 24, 1970, terminate the agreement with one year's notice. The Libyan mood is clear. They will not permit resumption of training activities at the base and want the U.S. to withdraw. It appears that the best we can get is one more year for the U.S. presence at Wheelus but with training activities suspended. Under Secretary Johnson added that under these circumstances we would be getting about one year less than provided in the agreement.

Mr. Kissinger asked whether we should insist on our rights under the agreement. He also asked if the Libyans had the right to suspend training at the base. Mr. Newsom said that there was no right to suspend training but that we have acquiesced in the Libyan request, since the consequences of opposing it seemed even more undesirable.

Mr. Nutter characterized U.S. policy to date as avoiding a confrontation with the Libyans in order not to risk losing U.S. oil properties. He asked what would happen when we had yielded to the Libyans on the base and other military matters and they then proceeded to nationalize the oil properties. He suggested that we might perhaps adopt a somewhat tougher negotiating stance although he did not want to suggest that we hold to the base agreement to the bitter end. It would seem, however, that if we were too nice to the Libyans, we might only entrench the revolutionary regime more firmly.

Admiral Johnson noted that unarmed aircraft are still operating in and out of Wheelus.

Mr. Newsom said that we had assumed for a long time that when the King left the scene, pressures on us to withdraw from Wheelus would arise. In fact, moves for U.S. withdrawal had come up twice in the past, and we had managed to retain the base only by burying the issue after months of negotiations. It seemed hard to conceive that a future Libyan Government would permit resumption of training or would allow the agreement to run its course. Another problem was the fact that the U.S. aircraft stationed at Wheelus were Phantoms, which are embarrassing to the Government of Libya because this type of aircraft is associated with U.S. assistance to Israel.

Mr. Newsom continued that if the political orientation of the Libyan Government should shift, we might be able to continue limited training at Wheelus. Our present strategy, looking to the talks scheduled to begin December 15, is to lay the alternatives before the Libyans, state our willingness to withdraw and point out the complexities that would arise with regard to maintaining the Libyan Air Force after a U.S. departure. Mr. Nutter again observed that the Libyan problem could not be separated from our overall problem in the Middle East.

Mr. Kissinger said that the Libyan problem would be discussed at a NSC meeting covering the whole Middle East situation. A few minutes would be allowed at the start of the meeting for a briefing to familiarize the principals with our present position with regard to Libya. Mr. Newsom noted that he would be out of the country at the time of the NSC meeting, and Mr. Kissinger and Under Secretary Johnson agreed that Johnson would arrange for a suitable person to brief the NSC on Libya. Mr. Kissinger directed that the briefing include a discussion of the problems we face with regard to Wheelus. It should outline the present situation and describe what we propose to do in response to Libyan pressures for withdrawal.

[text not declassified]

Mr. Kissinger stated that the conclusion from the Libyan paper appeared to be that we can do nothing. He suggested that such a finding might create a certain restiveness if presented to the President.

Admiral Johnson said that he agreed and that because of his concern that we ought not to be completely negative, he had asked his staff to prepare a paper on possible actions that might be taken. He distributed copies of the paper to members of the group [text not declassified]

Under Secretary Johnson said that we were planning to use our leverage with the Air Force in the forthcoming negotiations about Wheelus. Admiral Johnson replied that the most immediate U.S. problem was the status of Wheelus. Mr. Newsom commented that there had been no attempt to focus on the Wheelus problem in the contingency paper because it was generally agreed that the base was secondary to our oil interests.

Admiral Johnson reiterated that he believed there were some small actions that we might take. [text not declassified]

Admiral Johnson thought that everything was not as black and white as the contingency paper suggested. Mr. Newsom said that officials at Wheelus were trying to keep in touch with Libyan Air Force officers and to get them to explain to the Army the possible problems that might arise if the U.S. withdrew from Wheelus. He cautioned, however, against overreliance on our leverage with the Libyan military and characterized the revolutionary government as having two tendencies — pro Libyan and pro Arab. There followed a brief discussion about the relative obscurity of the leaders of the revolutionary government and the circumstances that permitted them to take power when they did.

Mr. Kissinger then asked Admiral Johnson if his proposal was in effect to expand the discussion of Option 4.d., [text not declassified] Admiral Johnson agreed and said that he thought the paper should also note other small actions, such as those being used in the Wheelus negotiations, which we can take to protect our interests in Libya. In response to Mr. Kissinger's question, the members of the group said they had no objection to making these changes in the paper. Mr. Kissinger said that the President would probably wish to know about some of these actions and that he was averse to giving the President a paper in which every possible action was described as not feasible.

Mr. Nutter observed that the Administration seemed resigned to the fact that we would lose Wheelus sooner or later. Thus, the main question was to determine under what conditions and with what kind of a posture the U.S. would withdraw. If the U.S. were too tough, a bad situation might develop in Libya. On the other hand, if we were too compliant, the consequences might also be bad. He wondered if appeasement would be effective in saving the oil properties and observed that the Libyans needed to have some motive for wanting to have a U.S. presence in their country.

Mr. Newsom observed that we had retained the base heretofore in large measure because the King thought that it might offer a form of protection to him and to his family. Because of the general situation in the Middle East, the U.S. is not liked in Libya. Our real choice is between attempting to reverse the anti-U.S. conditioning of the Libyan populace or seeking with all deliberate speed to negotiate our differences in such a manner as to leave our options open — but to avoid a confrontation.

Mr. Kissinger cautioned against proposing to the President anything which the members of the WSAG did not believe was feasible. He considered that the WSAG had made a good assessment of the Libyan problem and that the paper did notjequire change except for the marginal matters discussed earlier, [text not declassified]

Mr. Newsom noted that a working group was preparing instructions to Ambassador Palmer for the forthcoming Wheelus talks. Mr. Kissinger said that the instructions should be cleared with the President.

Concluding the discussion on Libya, Mr. Kissinger reiterated that an oral briefing on the Libya paper, including a short reference to the Wheelus negotiations, should be included on the agenda for the upcoming NSC meeting on the Middle East.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to Libya.]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H—114, WSAG Meeting, Libya and Lebanon, 11/24/69. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Situation Room of the White House

46. Telegram 3684 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, December 11, 1969, 1010Z 46. Telegram 3684 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, December 11, 1969, 1010Z1

December 11, 1969, 1010Z

TELEGRAM
Department of state
AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 3684
O P 111010Z DEC 69

52/18

ACTION AF-18

INFO OCT-01 EUR-20 CIAE-00 NSAE-00 NSCE-00 SSO-00 USIE-00 AID-28 CCO-00 FBO-01 PM-05 H-02 INR-07 L-03 NIC-01 NSC-10 O-03 OC-06 DC-06 DPR-02 P-03 PER-02 RSC-01 PRS-01 SCA-01 SS-20 SY-03 SCS-04 PC-04 RSR-01/147 W 029744

O P 111010Z DEC 69

FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5590

INFO

AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY

AMEMBASSY BENGHAZI

AMEMBASSY LONDON

AMEMBASSY PARIS

AMEMBASSY RABAT

AMEMBASSY TUNIS

CINCEUR

CINCUSAFE/LAS/GER 7272FTW/WHEELUS

OACSI/DA/WASHDC

CO/EUCOM/FLDELEMENT/USAFAC/FRANKFURT

CORRECTED COPY (PARA 2, LINE THREE)

SUBJECT:

ABORTIVE COUP AGAINST NEW LIBYAN MILITARY REGIME

1. AT APPROXIMATELY 1815 HOURS DECEMBER 10, LAR RADIO BROADCAST VAGUE ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE “REACTIONARIES AND OPPORTUNISTS ACTING FOR IMPERIALISM” FAILED IN “ABORTIVE PLOT.” STATEMENT NOTED THAT ATTEMPT CAME AT TIME WHEN LARG IS PURGING LIBYA OF FOREIGN BASES AND REFERRED TO “HIDDEN FOREIGN HANDS”. ALERTNESS OF FREE OFFICERS CREDITED WITH FOILING ATTEMPT BY TRAITORS SERVING THEIR OWN PERSONAL INTERESTS.

2. TELEGRAMS CONDEMNING ATTEMPTED COUP AND EXPRESSING SUPPORT FOR RCC BEGAN TO BE BROADCAST SOON AFTER ORIGINAL ANNOUNCEMENT. FOR MOST PART, SENDERS OF TELEGRAMS WERE UNKNOWN REPEAT UNKNOWN INDIVIDUALS FROM ALL PARTS OF LIBYA.

3. BETWEEN 2030 AND 2130 HOURS MAAG TOURNE CITY OF TRIPOLI AND FOUND NO SIGNS OF ANXIETY. ALL POLICE WERE IN NORMAL POSTS AND NO ARMY PERSONNEL WERE IN SIGHT. LOCAL MEDIA WERE COVERING SUPPORT DEMONSTRATION AT RADIO STATION WHICH FEATURED HUGE PICTURE OF RCC PRESIDENT MU'AMMMIR AL-QADHAAFI.

4. LAR RADIO ANNOUNCED AT 2200 HOURS THAT MOD 'AADIM AL-HAWWAAZ AND MOI MUUSA AHMAD AL-HAASI WERE ONLY CABINET MINISTERS INVOLVED IN ATTEMPTED COUP.

5. LAR RADIO READ LONG RAMBLING INTERVIEW BY QADHAAFI AT 0100 AND 0730 DECEMBER 11. INTERVIEW FEATURED BROAD HINTS THAT FOREIGN INTERESTS, IMPLICITLY US AND UK, HAD ROLE IN ATTEMPTED COUP. “EVIDENCE” ADDUCED RE US/UK INVOLVEMENT VERY SKIMPY. QADHAAFI, FOR EXAMPLE, NOTED TIMING OF ATTEMPT CORRESPONDED WITH BEGINNING OF BASE NEGOTIATIONS. INTERVIEW ALSO REFERRED TO TMC/ICAS CASE FOR WHICH HAWWAAZ HAD BEEN RESPONSIBLE LARG OFFICIAL. QADHAAFI NOTED THAT DUE TO INTEREST OF AMERICAN AMBASSADOR HE HAD PRESSED HAWWAAZ FOR FINAL RESOLUTION OF CASE BUT THAT HAWAAZ HAD PREVARICATED. QADHAAFI SUGGESTED THAT RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN HAWWAAZ AND TWO AMERICAN COMPANIES WAS SUSPICIOUS, AND ASKED WHETHER THIS CASE HAD RELATIONSHIP TO COUP ATTEMPT. HE THEN PROMISED TO SUPPLY ANSWER.

6. QADHAAFI INTERVIEW ALSO MADE CLEAR THAT HAWWAAZ AND AL-HAASI WERE UNDER ARREST WITH MORE ARRESTS TO COME FROM AMONG HIGH-RANKING OFFICERS IN WHOM RCC HAD PLACED CONFIDENCE BUT WHO CONTINUED TO LOOK DOWN ON LOWER RANKING FREE OFFICERS. COURT MARTIAL WILL BE HELD TO TRY PERPETRATORS, ALL OF WHOM ARE MILITARY REPEAT MILITARY. INTERVIEW INDICATED FURTHER THAT HAWWAAZ HAD BEEN PREVENTED FROM COMMITTING SUICIDE AFTER HIS ARREST.

7. EMBASSY AND MAAG OFFICERS WHO TOURED CITY BETWEEN 0730 AND 0815 DECEMBER 11 SAW NOTHING UNUSUAL. TRAFFIC NORMALLY LIGHT ON SECOND DAY OF 'ID AL-FITR. AT 0830, HOWEVER, HEAVILY ARMED DETACHMENTS OF TROOPS WERE POSTED AROUND AMERICAN, BRITISH, ITALIAN, AND LEBANESE EMBASSIES. FIFTEEN TROOPS AT AMERICAN EMBASSY UNDER COMMAND LIEUTENANT. AT 1000 ONE SALADIN AND FOUR FERRET ARMORED CARS TOOK UP POSITIONS IN VICINITY US EMBASSY. ONE SALADIN AND THREE FERRETS WERE LATER POSTED AT BRITISH CHANCERY, AND THREE FERRETS WERE LATER POSTED AT BRITISH CHANCERY. BUT REMAINDER OF DOWNTOWN AREA OF TRIPOLI CONTINUES HAVE FESTIVE AND RELAXED HOLIDAY AIR. WHETHER RCC IS ORGANIZING “SPONTANEOUS” DEMONSTRATION AGAINST US AND UK CHANCERIES OR WHETHER IT HAS LEARNED LESSON OF BALFOUR DAY IS NOT YET CLEAR.

8. BRITISH EMBOFFS INDICATE THAT HAWWAAZ WAS STILL ACTING EA MOD AT NOON ON DECEMBER 7, BUT THAT HIS DESK WAS MANNED BY ARMY MAJOR EVENING DECEMBER 9 WHO WAS INTRODUCED TO WAKEFIELD AT MINISTER DEFENSE. (BRITISH IDENTIFIED MAJOR AS MEMBER MOD'S ARMS NEGOTIATING COMMITTEE RESPONSIBLE FOR EQUIPMENT; NAME BELIEVED TO BE BIL GASSEM.) AS REPORTED BY BENGHAZI 1313, HAWWAAZ WAS ARRESTED ON DECEMBER 7 OR 8.

9. COMMENT: SO FAR, ALLUSIONS TO AMERICAN INVOLVEMENT IN ABORTIVE PLOT ARE TOO VAGUE TO JUSTIFY OFFICIAL REACTION. IF, HOWEVER, ALLEGATIONS BECOME ANY STRONGER OR MORE PRECISE EMBASSY PLANS MAKE ORAL PROTEST TO FOREIGN MINISTER. AT MOMENT, EMBASSY AT LEAST APPEARS, PERHAPS SOMEWHAT PRECARIOUSLY, BE ON RIGHT SIDE JUDGING FROM QADHAAFI INTERVIEW COMMENT RE TMC/ICAS CASE. MEANWHILE MEASURES TAKEN BY LARG TO INSURE SECURITY CHANCERY APPEARS ADEQUATE. WE HAVE ALSO REMAINED FOREIGN MINISTRY BY TELEPHONE OF LARG'S RESPONSIBILITIES INSURE SECURITY CHANCERY AND RESIDENCE.

GP-4

PALMER

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 23-9 LIBYA. Secret; Immediate. It was repeated Priority to Algiers, Benghazi, London, Paris, Rabat, Tunis, CINCEUR, CINCUSAFE/LAS/GER, WHEELUS, OACSI/DA/WASHDC, and CO/EUCOM/FLDELEMENT/USAFAC/FRANKFURT. In telegram 206436 to Tripoli, December 12, the Department directed the Embassy to refute the allegation of involvement in the strongest possible terms. (Ibid.)

47. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, December 11, 1969 47. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, December 11, 19691

Washington, December 11, 1969

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION
December 11, 1969

MEMORANDUM FORDR. KISSINGER

FROM: Harold H. Saunders [Hal signed]

SUBJECT:

Negotiating Instructions on Wheelus Base

I gather you told Alexis Johnson that you wanted to clear the negotiating instructions on Wheelus.

As you know, State and Defense tried for a week to get us to break the negotiating deadlock between them. We stood aside, and they have now come to terms with each other.

Ambassador Johnson has sent the resulting cable under the attached note (Tab A). I have described it in a possible information memo to the President. He has asked for clearance by Friday, December 12.

I have written the attached memo to the President for his information. It does not seem to me that negotiating tactics on something like this are a subject he should be bothered with.

On the tactics themselves, I believe we should now let State and Defense continue to haggle this out and just go along with their compromise.

Recommendations:

1. That you acquiesce in the attached telegram (Tab A). [Kissinger wrote OK]

2. That you send the information memo at Tab B to the President if you feel he is interested.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WASHINGTON
December 11, 1969

MEMORANDUM FOR

DR. HENRY KISSINGER
THE WHITE HOUSE

Subject:

Wheelus Base Negotiations

Enclosed are proposed instructions for Ambassador Palmer for the negotiations on Wheelus Base which are scheduled to commence on Monday. Broad outlines of this approach have been approved by Secretary Rogers, and the instructions themselves have been discussed with DOD. I am sending a copy to Dave Packard, who may want to make some comment to you prior to presentation of the draft to the President. If so, he should be in touch with you this morning.

In view of the time element, it would be helpful if these instructions could be despatched not later than Friday afternoon.

[signed] U. Alexis Johnson

Enclosure

As herein stated

ACTION:

Amembassy TRIPOLI

INFO:

Amembassy LONDON

CINCEUR

CINCUSAFE

CDR 16TH AF TORREJON

CO 7272 FTW WHEELUS

JOINT STATE/DEFENSE MESSAGE

SUBJ:

Wheelus Negotiations Strategy

1. General Considerations. Libyan political situation unstable and susceptible of change in directions we cannot anticipate on basis present information. We wish to avoid actions which would strengthen hand of such elements of RCC as may be pro-UAR or to give RCC valuable political issue just prior Arab Summit or mini-Summit to follow in Tripoli. We also wish to avoid impression of quick submission to LARG demands for withdrawal from agreed areas which might affect our base structure elsewhere. We will require from LARG the conditions precedent to an orderly withdrawal. At this point we see little possibility resumption interim training but wish hold out possibility of resuming WTD training on reduced scale in post-withdrawal arrangement which would include continuing relationship LARAF. Finally, we will be negotiating LARG demands for our withdrawal in the context of preserving other major interests in Libya.

2. Strategy. Initial Libyan position will be to require from us a firm date for our withdrawal as a condition for discussion of any other subjects. We hope, however, at some point focus LARG attention on ongoing utility of Wheelus to Libyan military.

3. In this context, we believe Ambassador's opening statement should be keyed to explaining serious problems both sides will face in precipitous withdrawal. We desire also emphasize fact base relationship has benefits Libya as well which we hope will be considered in context negotiations. He may affirm that we have begun to phase down at base (e.g., withdrawal of critical WRM) and that we will be continuing this process (e.g., Harvest Eagle, Sites 4 & 6, etc.). He should remind LARG negotiators that present Agreement provides for one-yeare period of notice of intent to terminate its provisions; that this period set advisedly in light complexities of phasing down complex installation; that assuming satisfactory agreement can be reached and carried out on withdrawal arrangements we undertake to complete withdrawal process within that time frame.

4. If, as we anticipate, LARG negotiators state that this is not acceptable, Ambassador should stress that orderly withdrawal from base depends on full cooperation both sides including LARG willingness to cooperate on customs, immigration, base security, introduction of TDY personnel and general freedom from harassment or abuse. We desire stress insofar as possible complexity problems to be faced. For example we will require LARG agreement to assume existing real estate leases in toto and to accept responsibility for any claims arising therefrom. Without full examination these issues we cannot be more specific about time frame within which withdrawal would be physically possible. Accordingly, we should insist on creation subcommittees which would set parameters for LARG cooperation. You may suggest that it should not take long for subcommittees to define cooperation we require and propose that they be directed to report back to principal negotiators within one week (or any other agreed period). You may indicate that if their reports meet our requirements, we would thereafter be willing to set a planning date for our final withdrawal. In this regard, we will not rpt not entertain probable LARG suggestion (made to British) that we withdraw military personnel immediately and leave to LARG the processing of civilians, dependents and “equipment.”

5. If LARG raises subject of equipment on base and indicates desire for some or all thereof, Ambassador should indicate that we are not rpt not now prepared to discuss this subject; that important items will be required to equip training facilities we must establish elsewhere; that there are strict legal requirements for disposal of USG property, including requirement to survey it in light needs other USG agencies. Surveys will require time, without which we will be required to withdraw all non-permanent constructions for subsequent survey and disposal.

6. We would hope that after initial, expected rhetoric and some bargaining on subject of specific date during first few sessions, implications precipitous withdrawal for its interests would become clearer to LARG. At that point we can indicate our willingness to enter into discussions of property we will be able to dispose of to LARG if time is available to us to meet our own legal requirements. In this context we should sound LARG intentions re future uses to which base will be put by LARG. We will then face a decision as to training and other assistance they may wish from us and/or others. If our decision is affirmative, we would hope to lead LARG on into examination of relationship between USAF presence and our ability to provide training and other services LARG may require. It is in this context that we should raise subject of post-withdrawal training arrangement.

7. [text not declassfied]

8. US Requirements. To maintain maximum control of agreed areas we will require, and should insist on, continued validity of present Agreement until all personnel and operations thereunder have been withdrawn or ceased. This will, for example, entail substantial relaxation of present LARG customs controls. More importantly from point of view of preventing potentially serious incidents, it will entail reversion of base security (including both gates) to effective US contol; indeed, we should make maximum effort to this end, even though it may mean denying entry to base of non-official Americans (other than school children) or exit from base of all personnel who are not on official duty strictly defined.

8. Negotiating team DOD and Air Force sending representatives join you in discussions December 15. Further details will follow.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 738, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for action. A note on the memorandum indicates Haig approved it. The notes on the attached December 11 memorandum from Johnson to Kissinger reads: “Word received by phone that Mr. Packard concurs. H.H.S.”; “O.K. Haig for HAK 2/12/69”; and “Cleared cable with Jan Barbieri,S/S, 2100-2/12/69. SS.” The instructions were transmitted in telegram 206408 to Tripoli, December 12. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, DEF 15 LIBYA—US)

48. Telegram 3711 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, December 13, 1969, 1355Z. 48. Telegram 3711 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, December 13, 1969, 1355Z.1

December 13, 1969, 1355Z

Department of State
Telegram
0131355Z DEC 69

47

ACTION SS-45

INFO OCT-01 SSO-00 NSCE-00 CCO-00/046 W 034599

0 131355Z DEC 69

FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5610

INFO

AMEMBASSY BENGHAZI IMMEDIATE

TRIPOLI 3711

SUBJECT:

CONTINGENCY STATEMENT RE HAWWAAZ APPROACH TO USG FOR ASSISTANCE

REFERENCE:

BENGHAZI 1296; STATE 206436

1. DURING HIS RECENT TV INTERVIEW, QADHAAFI HAS STATED THAT (A) HAWWAAZ HAD ADMITTED HIS ROLE IN PLOTTING; (B) RCC PLANNING THOROUGH INVESTIGATION WHOLE AFFAIR, AND (C) SECURITY PERSONNEL HAD UNCOVERED EXTENT COUNTER COUP ATTEMPT AND IDENTITY PLOTTERS BY KEEPING CAREFUL WATCH ON ALL VISITORS TO DEFENSE MINISTRY. IT SEEMS CERTAIN THEREFORE THAT LANE'S TWO MEETINGS WITH HAWWAAZ DECEMBER 2 AND 4 COULD NOT HAVE GONE UNNOTICED.

2. WHILE LANE/HAWWAAZ ENCOUNTERS MAY COME OUT IN NEXT FEW DAYS DURING ANOTHER QADHAFI STREAM-OF-CONSCIOUSNESS TYPE TV OR PRESS INTERVIEW, IT IS MORE LIKELY THAT THIS CHOICE BIT WILL BE RESERVED FOR REVELATION AT PROMISED TRIALS.

3. EMBASSY SUGGESTS FOLLOWING CONTINGENCY STATEMENT BE APPROVED FOR POSSIBLE ISSUANCE BY PAO TRIPOLI AND/OR BY DEPARTMENT SPOKESMAN IF AND WHEN SINISTER PUBLIC INTERPRETATION IS PLACED ON EXCHANGE BETWEEN LANE AND HAWWAAZ. IF MEETINGS OR EXCHANGE ARE MERELY ALLUDED TO, DECISION WHETHER TO RESPOND AT ALL AND HOW WILL HAVE TO BE MADE IN LIGHT SPECIFIC FORM OF ALLUSION.

4. CONTINGENCY STATEMENT: “AT END OF ROUTINE MEETING ON NORMAL EMBASSY/MINISTRY DEFENSE BUSINESS DECEMBER 2, LTC AADIM AL-HAWWAAZ, FORMER MINISTER DEFENSE, INFORMED AN OFFICER OF THE EMBASSY BRANCH OFFICE IN BENGHAZI THAT HE WAS CONCERNED ABOUT CERTAIN INDIVIDUALS WHO, IN HIS OPINION, WERE WORKING AGAINST BEST INTERESTS OF LIBYA, AND STATED THAT HE NEEDED MATERIAL AID TO COUNTER THESE INDIVIDUALS. HE THEN ASKED IF USG WOULD BE PREPARED TO GIVE HIM SUBSTANTIAL SUM OF MONEY TO FINANCE THIS EFFORT.

“EMBOFF GAVE HAWWAAZ NO ENCOURAGEMENT WHATSOEVER AND REPORTED HIS DISCUSSION TO HIS SUPERIORS.

“ON DECEMBER 4, THE EMBOFF, ACTING ON INSTRUCTIONS, MET LTC HAWWAAZ AND MADE CLEAR TO HIM THE NEGATIVE POSITION OF USG. IN PARTICULAR, THE OFFICER EMPHASIZED THAT 'US HAS ALWAYS REFRAINED SCRUPULOUSLY FROM ANY INTERFERENCE IN INTERNAL LIBYAN AFFAIRS. US BELIEVES STRONGLY THAT THIS POLICY IS IN BEST INTERESTS NOT ONLY OF US BUT ALSO OF LIBYA. ACCORDINGLY, US CANNOT AND WILL NOT PROVIDE ANY ASSISTANCE — MORAL, FINANCIAL, OR ANY OTHER KIND — TO YOU OR TO ANY OTHER LIBYAN CITIZEN IN SUCH A MATTER.' USG HAS HAD NO FURTHER CONTACT DIRECT OR INDIRECT WITH LTC HAWWAAZ.”

5. EMBASSY WOULD APPRECIATE DEPARTMENT'S GUIDANCE. GP-3.

PALMER

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 23-9 LIBYA. Secret; Immediate. It was repeated immediate to Benghazi. In telegram 3622 from Tripoli, December 3, Palmer had recommended a negative reply to Minister of Defense HAWAAZ, who had requested American assistance in his struggle against other elements within the Libyan Government, so as “to preserve our future relations with whichever faction may come out on top of the possible power struggle here.” (Ibid.) In telegram 201909 to Tripoli and Benghazi, December 4, the Department concurred, adding “we would hope not to foreclose possibility future contact with HAWAAZ as may later be appropriately selected.” (Ibid.) [text not declassified] (Ibid.)

49. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson), Washington, December 23, 1969 49. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson), Washington, December 23, 19691

Washington, December 23, 1969

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
ASSISTANT SECRETARY
MEMORANDUM
DECEMBER 23, 1969

TO:

J - Under Secretary Johnson

THROUGH:

S/S

FROM: AF -David D. Newsom [DN initialed]

SUBJECT:

Conclusion of Agreement Regarding Wheelus

Our Embassy in Tripoli reports that agreement has been reached with the Libyans on a US withdrawal date from Wheelus (June 30, 1970) and on the arrangements designed to assure that the American withdrawal is dignified. Although the Libyans have proved to be hard bargainers, the atmosphere of the talks has remained cordial. An agreed minute is expected to be signed at 8:00 p.m., Tripoli time (1:00 p.m., our time) December 23.

Signing of the minute may coincide with the arrival of Nasser in Tripoli as a guest of the LARG. The Nasser visit, which is expected to last for two days, may also result in an announcement of closer Libyan-Egyptian political or military cooperation, perhaps extending to Sudan. Nasser's presence may also surface the fact that Egyptian troops, approximately 1,000, have been in Libya for about a week.

This combination of events may provoke domestic criticism of the Department for having agreed to negotiate for a US withdrawal from Wheelus at this particular time. If such criticism arises, the following replies may reasonably be made: (1) The continued US presence at Wheelus, long after the conclusion of World War II, has been an increasing source of irritation in US-Libyan relations for several years. The new regime's request for a US withdrawal undoubtedly reflects significant Libyan popular feeling.

(2) The US wishes to establish with the new Libyan regime a basis for longer-term friendly relationships. A refusal to negotiate on the LARG's request that we withdraw would frustrate attainment of that objective.

(3) We saw no political advantage in delaying a negotiation on this problem; so far as we can determine, the present regime is the one with which we will have to deal over the foreseeable future. The British, who also agreed to negotiate on their Base, and to withdraw by March 31, 1970, are of the same opinion.

(4) The British decision to withdraw by March 31, 1970, obviously made more difficult any US “hold-out” on Wheelus.

Because we recognize the legitimate concerns regarding the use to which the Base might be put once we withdraw, we are asking Ambassador Palmer to express these concerns to Captain Jaluud, the RCC member who leads the Libyan negotiating team. Hopefully, Jaluud will indicate to the Ambassador that the Base will not be transferred to the control of any third country after the US forces leave.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, DEF 15 LIBYA—US. Secret. Drafted by Blake. Sent for information. The text of the agreed minute, not printed, was sent to the Department in Airgram A—278, December 29. Intelligence Note 869, December 19, advised Rogers that, at QADHAAFI's invitation, two Egyptian army units had been deployed to Libya's two major cities. (Ibid., POL 23-9 LIBYA)

50. National Intelligence Estimate 36.5-69, Washington, December 30, 1969 50. National Intelligence Estimate 36.5-69, Washington, December 30, 19691

Washington, December 30, 1969

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 36.5-69
30 December 1969

Short-Term Prospects For Libya
Submitted by R. C. Cushman [signed]
DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleaf
Authenticated: [signed]
James S. Lay, Jr.
Executive Secretary, USIB

NOTE

This estimate assesses likely developments in Libyan policy, particularly with regard to issues affecting US interests. Most of the judgments are intended to apply only to the next six months or so, although a few longer term trends also are indicated.

CONCLUSIONS

A. The young captains and lieutenants who took over Libya four months ago want foreign military installations removed from Libya as soon as possible. Evacuation of the bases in a manner satisfactory to the Libyans will not guarantee good relations between Libya and the US, but any other outcome would seriously prejudice US interests. The members of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) are also clearly determined to identify with the militant Arab line toward Israel. In these two desires, they reflect the prevailing mood in Libya itself, and any successor regime probably would follow similar policies.

B. Beyond this, we know little concerning the policies of the RCC, and there seem to be potential sources of dissension within the group. Unsure of its own hold on power and lacking clear domestic policy objectives, it will be disposed to look for advice to other Arab countries—especially Egypt, with which the RCC leaders are developing close ties.

C. Oil operations in Libya netted the US balance of payments over $800 million in 1968; for 1969, that figure probably will approximate $750 million. Libya received $952 million in oil revenues in 1968 and will receive about $1.3 billion in 1969. The RCC will press vigorously, and successfully, to increase its income from oil. Nationalization of oil production does not seem likely, but it cannot be entirely ruled out, in dealing with the oil companies, Libya holds a number of high cards.

D. The RCC probably will contribute financially to the Arab cause even more heavily than did the monarchy. It also may station token contingents of troops in Egypt and perhaps Jordan. If Egypt so desired, the RCC probably would agree to make Libyan airfields available to Egyptian aircraft. Over the longer run, it is possible that Soviet-manned reconnaissance aircraft in some guise might be permitted access to facilities in Libya.1 Properly requested and conducted over flights and port visits by the Soviets would almost certainly be permitted; we doubt, however, that the Libyans would give the USSR access to military installations in Libya on anything like extraterritorial terms.

DISCUSSION

I. INTRODUCTION

1. The United Kingdom of Libya lasted almost 18 years. In this period, it passed from being one of the poorest nations in the world, heavily dependent on subsidies from the US and UK, to the role of a major, wealthy oil producer. The policies of the monarchy were established almost entirely by King Idris. Recognizing the value of British support since the days when the British freed Libya from Italian domination and the importance of the US aid that kept the Kingdom solvent in its early years, Idris was willing and able to stand fast against the growing tide of Libyan enthusiasm for the Arab cause against Israel and to risk the opprobrium associated with foreign military installations on Libyan soil. In September 1969, however, the royal regime was suddenly overthrown by a group of young army officers directed by a Revolutionary Command Council (RCC).

II. THE NATURE AND STABILITY OF THE NEW REGIME

2. The real power in the new regime resides in the RCC. The RCC has not given any meaningful responsibility to the civilian ministers it has appointed, and there is very little trust or sympathy between the military and civilian components of the government. The RCC members lack both the expertise and the machinery for making and implementing decisions in an orderly way—a circumstance which is likely to become more obvious and troublesome with time. Available information indicates that the RCC is a collegial group of about a dozen members, virtually all between the ages of 25 and 30. Most of them attended the Libyan Royal Military Academy together, graduating in 1965 and 1966, and most have attended military courses in the US and/or the UK. Information on the internal functioning of the RCC and of relative standing within the group is extremely scanty. Its president, Colonel Muammar Qadhaafi, apparently is at present the most powerful individual although not the sole source of authority. The leaders appear to have the active support of a larger group of adherents, numbering 50 to 100 officers (10-20 percent of the total officer strength of the Libyan Armed Forces).

3. The RCC has not so far been challenged from outside its own ranks. There is considerable grousing and criticism, and those who have lost power and status as a result of the coup undoubtedly are unhappy. However, most of the prominent personalities of the old regime are in exile or under detention. Most of those who have thus far escaped the RCCs ire are likely to remain quiescent. There have been some reports of efforts by old regime figures to promote resistance activities among the broadly pro-royalist Cyrenaican tribes, but it appears unlikely that these elements will pose a serious challenge to the new regime in the near future. Since the RCC disarmed or otherwise neutralized all security forces outside the regular army, the potential for active opposition from these quarters also appears low for some time to come.

4. While individual members may hold particular philosophies, the RCC does not yet appear to have a clear and agreed program beyond the negative one of expunging what its members consider offensive features of the previous regime. Domestically, they seem bent on eradicating corruption and social inequities. In external matters, they are determined to eliminate the Western military presence symbolized primarily by the UK bases at Tobruk and El Adem and the US base at Wheelus. The RCC's actions so far have underlined both the Libyan and the Arab character of the revolution. The regime speeded up the Libyanization of foreign-owned banks which had begun under the monarchy. It introduced partial prohibition, presumably out of deference to Islamic fundamentalism. It removed foreign-language signs and deleted English language courses from the school curriculum. It carried out widespread arrests of politicians, businessmen, and senior military personnel associated with the old regime, and preparations for a series of show trials are underway.

5. At the start, the RCC was clearly fearful of military intervention by the UK and the US in behalf of Idris. As soon as it felt that this immediate threat had passed, the regime announced that it wanted foreign military installations removed from Libyan soil as quickly as possible. Nevertheless, the RCC remains apprehensive of direct Western intervention, and it is clearly worried about potential domestic challenge. These concerns, combined with a desire to solidify Libyan ties with the Arab community, lie behind some recent Libyan moves on the Arab stage. Shortly after the revolution, the RCC brought in about 150 Egyptian civilian advisors and an equal number of military ones; they are particularly noticeable in the security and information fields. In mid-December, two battalions of Egyptian troops were brought to Libya.

6. The RCC has also endorsed proposals for closer association among Sudan, Egypt, and Libya and has sometimes referred to itself as the Committee of Free Unionist Officers. There is a considerable bond between Libya and Egypt, based on longstanding social, cultural, and educational links. Moreover, any group of revolutionary young Arab officers cannot help but look upon Nasser as a successful model. Nevertheless, we are inclined to believe that the emphasis in any association will be on military and economic cooperation well short of complete union. Nasser, for his part, would find even a very loose association a useful means of exerting influence over the inexperienced RCC members.

7. There are many in Libya, however, who neither like nor trust Egyptians. Many Libyans fear that the RCC intends steps which would put Libya's 1.8 million people and huge oil revenues under Cairo's control. Indeed, the first split in the RCC occurred ostensibly because Defense Minister HAWAAZ opposed QADHAAFI's moves toward Egypt, and the subsequent arrival of Egyptian troops in Libya offer grounds for future opposition to the QADHAAFI regime. We cannot say, given present skimpy evidence, whether the RCC and its supporters will be able to overcome future divisiveness within their own ranks. Such matters as relations with Egypt, personal ambition, and opportunities for corruption offer ample grounds for future splits.

8. If the RCC hangs together, it is likely to be able to maintain power for some time. Any challenge from outside will be slow to develop, and the military holds the power in the country. Under RCC rule, a general breakdown of internal stability that would threaten foreign citizens and foreign-owned property is not likely, although occasional localized disruptions are possible. If a part of the present RCC were to seize control or if another group of officers should move in, the odds are that a successor government would pursue domestic and Arab policies not greatly dissimilar to those of the present regime.

III. MAJOR POLICY ISSUES

8. Many of the important issues facing the inexperienced young RCC members involve Western interests; in view of the strong urge the regime has for national independence and sovereignty, this foreign involvement will be a major factor in decision making. The most obvious manifestations of foreign influence, of course, are the military installations; on this issue, the RCC has already been able to reach a firm, and we believe irrevocable, decision. Oil concession agreements, foreign involvement in corruption charges against old regime figures, arms procurement, Libya's role in the Arab-Israeli quarrel, and economic management are far more complex questions. For the RCC members, the proper handling of these issues is vital to their own ability to maintain order and continue themselves in power. The RCC approach is, moreover, the key to the continued existence of a Western-owned oil industry and to the safety of Westerners in Libya.

A. Western Military Installations

10. The RCC will be closely monitoring the adherence of the US and UK to agreed schedules for the removal of forces from Libya. This will be extremely important to the future of the RCC itself as well as to the course of Libyan relations with both countries. US control over Wheelus Air Base, the British garrison at Tobruk, and British control over El Adem Air Base are anathema to the RCC for a number of reasons. The 6,000 US and British military personnel in the country at the time of the revolution were seen by the RCC as a potential threat to Libya, whose armed forces numbered only about 8,000. The bases are a highly visible reminder of Libyan dependence on foreign tutelage and a negation of Libyan and Arab nationalism. Moreover, evacuation is a clear and simple goal, while the task of governing the country is proving to be complicated and difficult.

11. Domestic criticism at the absence of bold new initiatives toward the reforms the RCC has promised has already appeared. In such circumstances, evacuation of the bases and distraction of the public by corruption trials are very important to the regime, which will need some political triumphs in the months ahead. Evacuation of the bases in a manner satisfactory to the Libyans will not guarantee good relations with the US, but any other outcome would seriously prejudice US interests.

B. Oil Policy

12. Upon its accession to power, the RCC announced that it would honor all existing international commitments-specifically including oil concessions. It also pledged to punish all those guilty of flagrant corruption under the monarchy. The two promises are not wholly compatible, since many existing oil concessions—as well as other commercial agreements—were obtained by influence-peddling and bribery involving both highly placed Libyans and foreign individuals and corporations. The corruption trials are slated to begin soon, and any oil companies publicly named in the trials could be an early target for punitive actions.

13. Nevertheless, the RCC is unlikely to take such action against the nine current oil producers.(See Table.) Oil production is a source of huge revenues ($952 million in 1968 and an estimated $1.3 billion in 1969) which the RCC wishes to retain. Moreover, the major corruption charges revolve around concession awards made in 1966 and 1969 to a number of companies, most of which are not yet producing. Most currently producing companies had obtained concessions earlier and could be omitted from the proceedings.

CRUDE OIL PRODUCTION IN LIBYA

Production b (000 barrels per day) Percent

Operating Companies a Ownership 1968 1969 chance

Oasls 83.3% US, 16.7% Netherlands 635.4 772.4 +12.7

Esso 100% US 744.1 743.7 -0.1

Occidental 100% US 349.4 606.5 +73.6

Amoseas 100% US 224.8 365.9 +62.8

British Petroleum 50% US, 50% UK 306.6 308.4 +0.6

Mobil 75% US, 25% West Germany 233.8 259.6 +11.0

Phillips 100% US 7.6 6.1 -19.7

Aquitaine 16% US, 42% Spain, 42% France 3.6

Pan American 100% US 1.1 0.6 -45.5

TOTAL 2,552.8 3,066.8 +20.1

a Some of these operate on behalf of a group of owners.

b Average for the first 10 months of each year.

14. In any event, the producing companies will be under pressure from the RCC for higher payments to the Libyan Government. Libya received just over $1 per barrel in 1967 and 1968—a higher payment than any major producing country except Venezuela and about 15c per barrel more than Persian Gulf producers. But Libyan oil has an unusually favorable combination of characteristics. It can be delivered to Europe by tanker in only six days, whereas most Persian Gulf oil is 35 to 40 days away from Europe so long as the Suez Canal remains closed. Moreover, it is particularly suitable for high priced products such as gasoline and naphtha, and it has almost no sulphur—making it exceptionally low in air pollutants. Libya can play off some producing companies against others. The RCC will probably push vigorously the Idris regime's demand for an upward revision of the price structure on which Libyan revenues are correlated. The RCC is also likely to be much more adamant than the monarchy about pressing for increased government control of oil field operations and for participation by the government-owned Libyan Petroleum Company.

15. A Libyan attempt to nationalize oil production does not appear likely, particularly in the coming months when the RCC is trying to learn its job and consolidate its control. Nevertheless, it cannot be entirely ruled out, especially in the event of major Arab-Israeli military hostilities. The RCC is deeply committed to the Arab cause, and oil is the major weapon at Libyan disposal. Moreover, Libya is in a unique position to carry out nationalization without severe damage to itself. The principal bar to nationalization has historically been domination of the oil trade and markets by the seven major international oil companies; their share of the world market, however, has dropped from abut 90 percent in 1959 to some 75 percent in 1968, and they produce only about half of Libya's total output. West European countries depend greatly on Libyan oil. Twenty-five percent of the crude oil imported in 1968 by the European Common Market countries—and 43 percent of West German imports—came from Libya. If suppliers could not meet their contractual deliveries, independent oil companies in importing countries would probably not refuse to buy oil from nationalized companies, as long as the price remained competitive. Furthermore, Libya has accumulated foreign exchange reserves adequate to ride out a lengthy period during which it could seek new customers; imports other than oil field equipment could be maintained at current levels for roughly two years with the funds Libya now has on hand.

16. For the US, the impact of Libyan oil policy will be reflected principally in the balance of payments. By the end of 1968, American oil companies had invested about $1.2 billion in Libya and had repatriated profits totaling over $1.5 billion, The profit inflow was $478 million in 1968 and probably will amount to about $600 million in 1969. In addition, oil company purchases of equipment accounted for over $140 million out of a net inflow to the US of some $205 million from trade and other transactions with Libya in 1968. The effect of Libyan pressure for an increasing share in total oil earnings will be to somewhat retard the rapid growth of the profit flow, which has doubled in the past two years. Should American oil interests in Libya be nationalized, compensation even at the full total of cumulative investment would be equivalent to only two years' profit remittances at the current rate. Compensation at the declared book value of $700 million would be equivalent to profit remittances for only about one year. In case of nationalization, the balance of payments impact on the US would be somewhat offset by increased production and profits from American-operated concessions in other producing countries.

C. Arms, Bases, and the USSR

17. The Libyan regime is seeking arms. It almost certainly will want tanks and aircraft, probably in quantities at least as great as those the Idris regime was considering. The new regime has not withdrawn requests made by the monarchy for Chieftain tanks from the UK and jet fighters from the US, and it probably will continue to look to Washington and London for major items. However, the RCC has already shown its interest in diversifying sources of military support by contacting France and other Western countries about the prospects for both arms and training assistance. In some of these contacts, Libya may be acting as an intermediary for other Arab states. With cash available to purchase whatever it wants, Libya is in an excellent position. If it cannot satisfy its desires in the West, we do not think it would be particularly reluctant to turn to the Soviet Union.

18. The Libyans have stated that they mean to use Wheelus as a military airfield, but they will certainly not require the full extent of its facilities. To operate what they do need, they may choose to hire civilian contractors. In line with their desire to escape from predominant US and UK tutelage, they might turn to German or French sources for assistance. It is more likely, however, that they will request help from Egypt, which is capable of providing military or civilian technicians to run Wheelus at the level the Libyans will require.

19. If the Egyptians desire, the Libyans also would probably agree to Egyptian use of either Wheelus or El Adem as dispersal fields for Egyptian aircraft. From the Egyptian point of view, this would be somewhat more convenient than the present practice of using fields in Algeria and Sudan. For Egyptian purposes, El Adem is more conveniently located than Wheelus.

20. To date, the RCC has shown no inclination to cultivate strong links with the USSR. Soviet diplomats have complained about difficulties in gaining access to members of the RCC and about harassments by low ranking Libyan military personnel. A Soviet offer of military assistance made in the days immediately after the revolution was rejected. We doubt that the Libyans would see political benefits in an arrangement giving the USSR access to either Wheelus Air Base or the British facilities at Tobruk and El Adem on anything like extraterritorial terms at such time as these are evacuated. Foreign bases, per se, are a favorite target for Arab condemnation. On the other hand, the Libyans would almost certainly be willing to grant the Soviets over flight and landing rights and port visits as long as they were requested and conducted in accordance with normal procedures. Over the longer run, it is possible that Soviet-manned reconnaissance aircraft in some guise (e.g., under Egyptian markings) might be permitted access to facilities in Libya.2

D. Arab-Israeli Matters

21. The new regime in Libya clearly is determined to identify itself with the militant Arab line toward Israel. Its principal weapon is money, and it probably will be more generous than the monarchy. Payments pledged by the monarchy included annual subsidies of $59 million to Egypt and $25 million to Jordan agreed to at Khartoum in 1967. Of a further $58 million promised to Egypt by Idris in 1969, no more than half had been paid at the time of the coup. Additional amounts for Egypt and Jordan are likely, along with increased payments to fedayeen organizations; Libya apparently made some new pledges at the Rabat conference in December 1969, but the exact amounts are not yet known. The RCC also may dispatch some troops to Egypt and perhaps Jordan. These, however, will almost certainly be little more than token contingents.

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79—R01012A, Box 369. Secret; Controlled Dissemination. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, Defense, and NSA participated in the preparations of this estimate. The Director of CIA submitted this estimate with the concurrence of all members of the USIB with the exception of the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that it was outside their jurisdiction.

1 The circumstances under which such a contingency might arise will be more fully explored in NIE 11-6-70, “Soviet Policies in the Mediterranean Basin,” scheduled for publication in the first quarter of 1970.

2 The circumstances under which such a contingency might arise will be more fully explored in NIE 11-6-70, “Soviet Policies in the Mediterranean Basin,” scheduled for publication in the first quarter of 1970.

51. Telegram 169 From the Embassy in Libya to the Departments of State and Defense, January 26, 1970, 1346Z. 51. Telegram 169 From the Embassy in Libya to the Departments of State and Defense, January 26, 1970, 1346Z.1

January 26, 1970, 1346Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 169
O R 261346Z JAN 70 ZFF-1

42

ACTION SS-45

INFO OCT-01 SSO-00 NSCE-00 CCO-00/046 W 126656

OR 261346Z JAN 70 ZFF-1

FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5828 DOD

INFOUSCINCEUR

CINCUSAFE 16TH AF TORREJON 7272 FTW WHEELUS AB

AMEMBASSY BENGHAZI

AMEMBASSY LONDON

AMEMBASSY PARIS

SUBJ:

FUTURE USG MILITARY PROGRAMS

REF:

STATE 7024 (NOTAL)

1. I WAS INFORMED BY FONOFF YESTERDAY MORNING THAT AN APPOINTMENT FOR ME WITH QADHAAFI AND BWAYSIIR HAD BEEN ARRANGED FOR 1315 SAME DAY. AS DEPT AWARE, I ALREADY HAD SEPARATE PENDING REQUESTS TO SEE JALLUUD ON MILITARY RELATIONSHIP PROBLEMS AND BWAYSIIR ON MOST RECENT EXPULSION CASE AND OTHER MATTERS. I THEREFORE ASSUMED THAT MEETING PROBABLY GREW OUT OF THESE REQUESTS. HOWEVER, IT BECAME CLEAR ON ARRIVAL THAT THIS WAS QADHAAFI'S INITIATIVE AND RELATED PRIMARILY TO F-5 PROGRAM. GENERAL ATMOSPHERE WAS CORDIAL BUT MEETING LESS THAN SATISFACTORY IN THAT QADHAAFI OBVIOUSLY UNPREPARED ON VARIDUS SUBJECTS I RAISED AND ALSO PRESSED FOR TIME, RECEIVING ME LATE AND WITH OTHER APPOINTMENTS WAITING FOR HIM. NEVERTHELESS, I BELIEVE WE SUCCEEDED IN LAYING SOME BASIC PROBLEMS OUT ON TABLE AND RECEIVING SOME INDICATIONS OF LARG VIEWS THAT MAY BE USEFUL.

2. AFTER OPENING PLEASANTRIES, QADHAAFI ASKED ME HOW EVACUATION PROCEEDING. I GAVE BRIEF RUNDOWN AND EXPRESSED APPRECIATION FOR LARG COOPERATION WE RECEIVING. QADHAAFI EXPRESSED PLEASURE AND THEN RAISED MATTER OF SCHEDULED DELIVERY OF EIGHT F-5'S, STATING THAT US REFUSAL TO PROVIDE LARAF WITH AMMUNITION FROM STOCKS AT WHEELUS WAS AN OBSTACLE TO COMPLETION OF THIS DEAL. MILITARY AIRCRAFT WITHOUT AMMUNITION USELESS.

3. I REPLIED THAT THERE WAS OBVIOUSLY A MISUNDERSTANDING RE US POSITION ON THIS MATTER. I THEN CAREFULLY EXPLAINED TO HIM, AS WE HAVE WITH NUMEROUS OTHER LARG OFFICIALS, STATUS OF WRM AND REASONS WHY WE COULD NOT DEPLETE IT, AT SAME TIME, I MADE CLEAR TO HIM THAT USG CONTINUES TO BE READY TO CONSIDER REQUEST FOR AMMUNITION THROUGH MAAG CHANNELS. IN FACT, MAAG HAS BEEN WAITING SOME MONTHS FOR LARAF'S NORMAL REQUESTS BUT THESE HAVE NOT BEEN FORTHCOMING. WE HAVE NOT SAID THAT WE WILL NOT HONOR REQUESTS FOR AMMUNITION; WE HAVE MERELY SAID THAT SUCH REQUESTS MUST BE MADE THROUGH NORMAL CHANNELS FOR SUPPLY FROM NORMAL SUPPLY SOURCES.

4. I CONTINUED BY EMPHASIZING NEED TO CLARIFY LARG'S THINKING RE FUTURE OF US-LIBYAN RELATIONSHIP IN MILITARY FIELD,POINTING OUT THAT, AMONG OTHER CONSIDERATIONS, PRESENT USG SUPPORT FOR LARAF IS LARGELY BASED ON EXISTENCE OF WHEELUS. DEPARTURE OF BLUE SUITERS WILL REQUIRE NEW ARRANGEMENTS WHICH SHOULD BE MADE QUICKLY. LARG SHOULD BE FULLY AWARE OF THIS SO THAT IT CAN TAKE NECESSARY STEPS. I THEN EXPLAINED ROLE OF NORAIR IN PROVIDING FLIGHT LINE MAINTENANCE FOR F-5'S INCLUDING FACT THAT CONTRACT ASSUMES AVAILABILITY OF CERTAIN SUPPORT FUNCTIONS NOW SUPPLIED BY WHEELUS AND WILL HAVE TO BE REVISED IF LARG INTENDS RETAIN NORAIR. IF THIS CASE, LARG MIGHT ALSO WISH CONSIDER EXTENDING CONTRACT TO COVER OTHER SERVICES PRESENTLY PROVIDED BY USAF.

5. TURNING TO MAAG, I RAISED QUESTION OF ARMY SECTION, EMPHASIZING THAT SINCE SEPTEMBER 1 IT HAS SCARCELY BEEN UTILIZED. THIS WOULD APPEAR TO PLACE IN DOUBT ITS FUTURE USEFULNESS, BUT WE WISH CLARIFY LARG THINKING ON THIS QUESTION. AF SECTION BY CONTRAST CONTINUES TO WORK WITH LARAF BUT WE ALSO NEED TO KNOW LARG'S VIEWS RE ITS FUTURE UNDER NEW RELATIONSHIP WHICH MUST BE WORKED OUT.

6. QADHAAFI ACKNOWLEDGED SERVICES BEING PROVIDED BY AF SECTION AND EXPRESSED DESIRE TO CONTINUE SUCH COOPERATION. THESE FUNCTIONS WOULD CONTINUE AS USUAL UNTIL EVACUATION COMPLETED. THEREAFTER, FOUNDATIONS FOR NEW RELATION COULD BE LAID. SO LONG AS US AIRCRAFT IN USE, IT WOULD BE NECESSARY TO HAVE ASSISTANCE OF AMERICAN EXPERTISE.

7. REVERTING TO AMMO QUESTION, QADHAAFI STRESSED THAT ANY COUNTRY PROVIDING WEAPONS ASSISTANCE HAS RESPONSIBILITY TO SUPPLY AMMO. HE SAID COS HAD REPORTED TO HIM THAT US AUTHORITIES HAD PREDICTED THAT RESPONSE TO REQUEST THROUGH MAAG FOR AMMO MIGHT TAKE UP TO A YEAR. THIS WAS ASTONISHING. ORDINARY REQUESTS FOR AMMO AND SPARE PARTS MUST BE MET ON AN URGENT BASIS.

8. I SAID ONCE AGAIN THAT QADHAAFI'S INFORMATION SEEMED TO BE BASED ON MISUNDERSTANDING. RESPONSE TO REQUESTS FOR AMMO WOULD CERTAINLY BE FORTHCOMING IN MUCH SHORTER PERIOD OF TIME THAN ONE YEAR. NATURALLY, HOWEVER, LEAD TIME WOULD BE REQUIRED FOR PURCHASES. THERE WAS REALLY NO PROBLEM IN OBTAINING NECESSARY DECISION IF LARAF WILL SIT DOWN WITH MAAG TO DISCUSS MATTER. SUCH WORKING LEVEL CONTACTS NOW TAKING PLACE AND HOPEFULLY MATTER WILL SOON BE RESOLVED.

9. REVERTING TO QUESTION OF F-5'S, I ASKED QADHAAFI WHETHER I WOULD RE CORRECT IN DESCRIBING HIS POSITION AS FOLLOWS, QTE THAT LARG CONTINUES TD DESIRE PURCHASE EIGHT ADDITIONAL F-5'S IF IT CAN RECEIVE AMMO AND SPARE PARTS UNQTE. QADHAAFI REPLIED CITE WE WILL BUY THE AIRCRAFT IF WE ARE GUARANTEED AVAILABILITY OF AMMO AND SPARE PARTS WITHOUT COMPLICATION AND DELAY UNQTE.

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 169
O R 261346Z JAN 70 ZFF-1

42

ACTION SS-45

INFO OCT-01 SSO-00 NSCE-00 CCO-00/046 W 126656

OR 261346Z JAN 70 ZFF-1

FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5829 DOD

INFOUSCINCEUR

CINCUSAFE 16TH AF TORREJON 7272 FTW WHEELUS AB

AMEMBASSY BENGHAZI

AMEMBASSY LONDON

AMEMBASSY PARIS

SECTION 2 OF 2 TRIPOLI 169

SUBJ:

FUTURE USG MILITARY PROGRAMS

REF:

STATE 7024 (NOTAL)

10. I THEN REVERTED TO QADHAAFI'S ASSUMPTIONS THAT USG SUPPORT FOR LARAF WOULD CONTINUE UNTIL COMPLETION OF EVACUATION AND THAT NEW ARRANGEMENTS COULD AWAIT THAT DATE. I STRESSED THIS WAS IMPOSSIBLE AND IF LARG WAITS UNTIL JUNE 30 TO MAKE NEW SUPPORT ARRANGEMENTS, LARAF WILL RE GROUNDED. QADHAAFI SAID HE RECOGNIZED NEED FOR CONTINUED AMERICAN HELP AND WOULD CONSULT WITH LARAF AUTHORITIES. I INFORMED HIM THAT NORAIR REPRESENTATIVES ARE NOW IN LIBYA AND COULD BE CONTACTED, QADHAAFI MADE WRITTEN NOTE OF THIS AND INDICATED THEIR PRESENCE HERE AT THIS TIME IS VERY HELPFUL.

11. I THEN TURNED TO QUESTION OF CONUS TRAINING EMPHASIZING NEED, AS IN CASES AMMO AND SPARE PARTS, FOR FORWARD PLANNING. TRAINING SPACES MUST BE RESERVED MANY MONTHS IN ADVANCE AND IN PAST IT HAS BEEN NECESSARY DISAPPOINT LARAF WHEN IT REQUESTED TRAINING ON VERY SHORT NOTICE. AT PRESENT TIME WE UNAWARE WHETHER LARAF INTEREST IN CONUS TRAINING FOR SEVEN PILOTS AND 300 GROUND PERSONNEL REPRESENTS AN OFFICIAL REQUEST. QADHAAFI OBVIOUSLY UNINFORMED BUT INDICATED THAT LARG RECOGNIZES NEED FOR SUCH TRAINING AND THAT HE WOULD LOOK INTO MATTER WITH LARAF. I EMPHASIZED IMPORTANCE CLARIFYING THIS MATTER PROMPTLY IN INTERESTS ALL CONCERNED.

12. REVERTING TO ARSEC I AGAIN SOUGHT QADHAAFI'S VIEWS RE ITS FUTURE. HE REPLIED THAT SINCE MOST OF ARMY'S WEAPONS ARE BRITISH, ARSEC HAS NO REAL FUNCTION. I REPLIED THAT ARSEC HAS BEEN WORKING MOSTLY IN FIELDS OF COMMUNICATIONS AND MAINTENANCE. QADHAAFI SEEMED SURPRISED AND INDICATED HIS UNDERSTANDING THAT COMMUNICATIONS WORK WAS UNDER PRIVATE CONTRACT. I CONFIRMED THAT WHEREAS THIS WAS ALSO TRUE, ARSEC HAD BEEN QUITE SEPARATELY AND INDEPENDENTLY INVOLVED IN OTHER SECTIONS OF THE COMMUNICATIONS FIELD. QADHAAFI SAID HE WOULD LOOK INTO THIS MATTER AND LET ME KNOW LARG'S FURTHER VIEWS.

13. IT OBVIOUS AT THIS POINT QADHAAFI FEELING VERY MUCH PRESSED BY HIS SCHEDULE. I NEVERTHELESS PUSHED AHEAD WITH MATTER OF MATRATIIN WHICH IS SUBJECT OF SEPARATE TELEGRAM.

14. COMMENT: FOREGOING OBVIOUSLY NOT CLEAR-CUT IN CLARIFYING LARG'S THINKING RE LONGER TERM RELATIONSHIP. QUESTION OF FRENCH INVOLVEVENT LARAF WAS NEVER EXPLICITLY ADDRESSED BY EITHER QADHAAFI OR MYSELF. HE OBVIOUSLY DID NOT WANT TO GET INTO THIS QUESTION AND I AVOIDED IT BECAUSE IT WOULD HAVE OPENED UP WHOLE AREA OF COMPLICATIONS AND POSSIBLE CONTROVERSY WHICH WOULD HAVE NEGATED ANY PROSPECTS OF ADDRESSING ISSUES WE DID DISCUSS.

15. MY IMPRESSION IS THAT QADHAAFI HAD MADE UP HIS MIND AGAINST CONTINUATION F-5 DEAL AND THAT HIS ACCUSATIONS ABOUT USG UNWILLINGNESS TO SUPPLY AMMUNITION WERE EFFORT TO LAY GROUND WORK FOR CANCELLATION OF PROGRAM. I DO NOT BELIEVE IT IS IN OUR OVERALL INTEREST HERE THAT WE SHOULD PROVIDE THIS SORT OF PRETEXT. IF LIBYANS WISH CANCEL ARRANGEMENTS, I WOULD MUCH PREFER THAT IT BE FOR THEIR OWN REASONS AND THAT ONUS NOT BE SHIFTED ONTO US. HENCE MY EFFORTS TO MAKE CLEAR THAT MAAG CHANNELS CONTINUE TO BE OPEN TO THEM.

16. FONOFF HAS JUST CONVEYED QADHAAFI REQUEST THAT I CALL ON HIM AGAIN AT 2000 LOCAL AT AZIZIA BARRACKS. NO INDICATION GIVEN RE SUBJECT BUT IT MAY INVOLVE FUTHER DISCUSSION ABOVE POINTS SINCE COS WAS WAITING TO SEE QADHAAFI WHEN I LEFT HIS OFFICE YESTERDAY. IT IS ALSO OF INTEREST THAT LOCAL PRESS HAS NOT REPORTED FACT THAT I CALLED ON QADHAAFI YESTERDAY.

17. COUNTRY TEAM FURTHER VIEWS RE FUTURE MILITARY RELATIONSHIPS WILL FOLLOW WITHIN NEXT FEW DAYS.

18. WE WOULD HAVE NO OBJECTION IF DEPARTMENT DESIRES DOWNGRADE REFTEL AND THIS REPLY FROM EXDIS TO LIMDIS.
GP-3

PALMER

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to USCINCEUR, CINCUSAFE, 16TH AF TORREJON, WHEELUS AB, Benghazi, London, and Paris. The reftel is telegram 7024 to Tripoli, January 15. (Ibid.) In telegram 12659 to Tripoli, January 27, the Department instructed the Embassy to avoid the implication that Libya's request for ammunition would be received routinely or favorably. (Ibid.)

52. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, undated 52. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, undated1

Washington, undated

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION MEMORANDUM

MEMORANDUM FOR

THE PRESIDENT

FROM: Henry A. Kissinger [HK initialed]

SUBJECT:

Future U.S. Relationship with the Libyan Air Force

During our years at Wheelus Air Base, the U.S. Air Force helped the Libyans get their own air force started. The rationale in 1965-1966 was that this cooperation might provide the basis for continued U.S. use of Wheelus. After 1967, the U.S. delivered ten F-5 aircraft (simple jets designed for our military assistance program in less developed countries), trained pilots for them and provided some basic maintenance.

Now that our activities at Wheelus will be terminating in June, the U.S. Air Force will no longer provide that basic support at Wheelus. The question now arises: What kind of relationship should we substitute, if any?

The Ambassador and the Defense and State Departments recommend that the Libyans be told: - A US company (Norair) is prepared to contract with the Libyan government to provide full maintenance services for Libya's remaining seven F-5 aircraft.

- Northrup will continue to provide spares.

- The USG is willing to go on selling reasonable amounts of ammunition for these planes.

- The USG is prepared to train a few (7 or less) more Libyan pilots in the U.S. at Libyan expense.

- The U.S. will maintain a liaison unit of five USAF people in the embassy to facilitate the above.

- The commercial sale of 2 C-130s is proceeding.

The argument for this relationship is: - This approach would eliminate our direct support for the Libyan Air Force and reduce it to commercial transactions plus limited training.

- It would maintain a minimal US relationship against the possibility that things may change in Libya. The French aircraft will not become operational in Libya even in small numbers for more than a year.

- It would preserve a sense of some continued cooperation with the Libyan government as a backdrop for preserving as quiet an atmosphere as possible for our oil companies.

The argument against this relationship lies more in the future than in the present. This step is mainly shifting maintenance to a private contract. However, on the basis of pre-1969 arrangements eight more F-5's are scheduled for delivery at the end of this year. Following all the attention to the French-Libyan deal, going through with this delivery may well be politically impossible for us.

The question, therefore, is whether we should decide right now that we will not be politically able to maintain a serious on-going relationship with the Libyan air force and make a clean break.

On balance, there is something to be said for moving gradually and waiting out the situation a while longer.

Recommendation: That State be authorized to take the cutback position it proposes now in the context of phasing out Wheelus but be cautioned to do nothing that would commit us to shipping the remaining F-5's at year's end.

Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 738, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. I. Secret; Exdis. Sent for action. The President approved the recommendation. According to a covering sheet, the date of the memorandum was February 12. In telegram 25239 to Tripoli, February 19, the Department transmitted the outline for a new U.S. relationship with the Libyan Air Force. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 1 LIBYA—US)

53. Intelligence Memorandum 490/70, Washington, February 13, 1970 53. Intelligence Memorandum 490/70, Washington, February 13, 19701

Washington, February 13, 1970

DIRECTORATE OF INTELLIGENCE
Intelligence Memorandum

13 February 1970
No. 0490/70

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

An Intelligence Assessment of Libya

Introduction

This memorandum assesses current Libyan trends as they affect the staying power of the present regime and the directions in which its leaders appear to be moving.

NOTE: This memorandum was produced solely by CIA. It was prepared by the Office of Current Intelligence and coordinated with the Office of Economic Research, the Office of National Estimates, the Office of Strategic Research, and the Clandestine Service.

Libya in the Arab World

1. Developments in Libya should be viewed within the context of general trends in the Middle East. Foremost among these has been the growing involvement of all Arab states in the Palestine issue. This has meant, for the most part, joining the conflict against Israel or at least supporting it. US prestige and influence in the Arab world has been inversely related to this trend; from a high point of good will reached as a result of President EISENHOWER's actions in the 1956 Suez war, the course has been generally downward. The June 1967 war accelerated this trend, and a sharp drop followed the US decision in early 1969 to supply F-4 Phantom jets to Israel. Even the seven Arab states that could then have been characterized as political moderates or conservatives and had retained diplomatic relations with the US found it politically necessary to denounce the US publicly. The actual delivery of the aircraft and their subsequent highly publicized use in combat have led the Arab press to portray the US as a supporter and ally of Israel and the primary enemy of the Arabs.

The Junta

2. The members of the Revolutionary Command Council that installed itself in Libya in September 1969 were bound together by a common desire to overthrow King Idris, who was for them a symbol of corruption, the presence of foreign bases, and a too strong pro-West stance. They are young, inexperienced officers between the ages of 25 and 30, and have only vague ties to the various pan-Arab ideological movements. Although they proclaimed appropriate slogans in the early hours of their coup, they have not as yet developed a clear and agreed upon political program. Libya's new rulers are seized both by an enthusiasm for Arab nationalism and by a desire to modernize their country. They have neither the expertise nor the machinery to make and carry out decisions in an orderly manner, thus they are likely to be caught up in cycles of failure and frustration.

3. The power relationship within the junta remains largely unknown. Although Muammir Qaddafi has been named council president, prime minister, and commander in chief of the armed forces, he does not appear to be all powerful. The available evidence suggests that the 12-man council, all of whose members have finally been publicly identified, acts as a collegial group. There may also be other officers in the armed forces who have a special relationship with and access to the council. Recent evidence also suggests that the council has pro- and anti-Egyptian factions with the former presently in the ascendancy.

4. The junta members, who were suspicious of the ease with which they were able to oust the King, still are insecure. To date, however, the junta has been challenged only by its own members. In December 1969, the ministers of defense and interior were arrested before they could make a planned move against their colleagues. There have been reports of discontent among the tribes of Cyrenaica and elsewhere in the civilian sector. These groups do not possess sufficient arms to challenge the army seriously, accordingly in the present situation they do not appear to pose any real danger to the regime. Under present circumstances, any move against the regime is likely to come from within the army. The junta has begun transferring units of the armed forces that seem most likely to become troublesome—the Cyrenaicans—to Egypt for training and eventual duty along the Suez Canal. Thus far, approximately 2,600 men have been sent to Egypt, with another 1,900 scheduled to join them before the end of February.

5. Perhaps of far more significance than this is the movement of Egyptian troops into Libya, an operation that began in December. Some 1,500 to 2,000 Egyptian soldiers are now stationed in Benghazi and Tripoli. Approximately 500 other Egyptians have been assigned to military, security, and communications posts. Thus, the Egyptians may be in enough key points to forestall any countercoup by indigenous elements. In the event of foreign moves to topple the regime, these Egyptian units could probably be considered as controlling an air- or beach-head through which additional forces could be moved into Libya.

The Present Policy Trend

6. For Libya's new rulers, there is no obvious conflict between Libyan and Arab nationalism. One of the first statements issued by the junta was an attack on King Idris for his relatively passive attitude toward the Palestinian guerrilla movement and the Arab-Israeli conflict. In fact, however, there had been some support of the Arab cause by Idris. The Palestine Liberation Organization was allowed to carry out a number of activities in Libya, and sizable official contributions had been made to it. By the end of 1969 Libya had also contributed more than $200 million to Egypt and Jordan, but for the junta this was not enough.

7. At the recent Arab summit conference in Rabat, Qaddafi was most vocal in his demands that wealthy Arab states increase their commitment to the struggle against Israel. As proof of its own commitment the Libya leadership now has decided to grant Egypt $96 million in addition to its annual subsidy of $59 million. Another symbol of Libya's commitment to the Arab war effort is its transfer of troops to Egypt, even though this also serves as a convenient way to remove possible dissidents.

8. Upon seizing power, the council announced that it would honor existing oil concessions, which brought in revenues last year that may have amounted to $1.2 billion, and the oil companies report that operations in Libya have continued without significant harassment. In January the Libyan Government began negotiations with a number of operating oil companies, including some US corporations. These talks aim at securing higher posted prices on which government revenues are based. The companies are being threatened with unspecified punitive actions if they fail to reach an agreement. Nationalization, always the ultimate possibility, has not been raised by the new Libyan rulers and at this point does not appear to enter the picture. Indeed, Libyan commitments to purchase a sizable number of French aircraft and promises of more aid to Egypt and Jordan would suggest that Libya cannot afford to engage in adventurism in its oil arrangements.

9. So far, given the quick US decision to meet Libyan demands for the evacuation of Wheelus Air Base, official relations have not been overly difficult. Certain irritations have arisen, however, and the Libyans have so far failed to delineate the nature and the form of the military assistance relationship they profess to desire. This may have to await complete evacuation of the base, because the Libyans continue to be highly suspicious of US and British intentions.

10. To date, the junta has kept the USSR at arms length. The Soviets offered military assistance in the first few days of the coup, but were quickly rejected. As far as we know, subsequent approaches have also been rebuffed. This negative attitude of the Libyans may be reinforced by the advice reportedly offered by Nasir not to become dependent upon the Soviets for support. France, seeing a big power vacuum in Libya and aware of the economic advantages available, is seeking to fill that void partly. Paris' future intentions are unclear, other than its obvious desire to increase its influence all along the North African littoral. The Maghreb states, which are themselves moving toward a closer relationship with France, probably hope that the growing role of France in Libya is a force that will help preserve Libya's Maghreb orientation.

The Junta and its Future

11. The life expectancy of the junta will ultimately depend upon several factors. First and foremost, the junta must guard against serious dissidence within its own ranks. In December 1969, Qaddafi had to act quickly to a potential threat from within the junta. Coup attempts are also possible by either members of the former ruling clique or other disaffected civilian groups; however because they lack cohesion and an effective power base, their chances of dislodging the junta are minimal. Moreover, Nasir is apparently willing to give support in preventing any effort of this type. Over the longer run, the rulers of Libya need to find ways to encourage popular support. To be sure, much mileage will be gained from publicizing the removal of Western military forces from the country and the use of the US as a whipping boy for Arab military shortcomings. Public attention, however, cannot be diverted from domestic problems forever. Such civilian support as there is for the regime comes from professional men, university graduates, lower grade military officers, lower level government officials, and students—precisely the same elements that were the most disaffected under the monarchy. Having proclaimed its intention to modernize Libya and rid it of the evil vestiges of the old regime, the junta will have to show some signs of making good its promise.

12. Another factor is the relationship between the junta and Egypt. At some point, it could well become a liability to both parties. At present it would be difficult for opponents of the regime to attack its close cooperation with Egypt without being accused of hampering the struggle against the Israelis. As the relationship is maintained—and perhaps expanded—the presence of large numbers of Egyptian advisers and troops in Libya could become a source of irritation. A growing realization that financial resources that could be used for internal development are being sent outside Libya could add to public discontent. For the Egyptians, the tangible benefits accruing from their present relationship are important. If the junta maintains power and acquires a substantial arms inventory, Libyan military equipment might eventually represent a contingency asset for Cairo. During the next few years, however, Egyptian ability to assimilate more sophisticated weapons will remain limited, and Libyan arms will be of far less significance to Nasir than Libyan financial support.

13. With the passage of time, increased self-confidence and experience may make the Libyan junta more independent minded. Moreover, recalling his previous difficulties in Syria and Yemen, Nasir himself may come to have second thoughts about extensive involvement with the Libyan regime. Whatever the course of Libyan-Egyptian relations and internal Libyan politics, the junta's policy is likely to remain militantly anti-Israel. This is probably the one important issue on which few Libyans would disagree. Although Libya's business relations with the US will probably be correct, Tripoli will be largely hostile, or at least cool, toward the US which it will view as the chief mainstay of Israel.

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DI/OCI Files, Job 79—T00830A, Box 2. Secret; Noforn. Prepared in the Office of Current Intelligence of the Central Intelligence Agency, and coordinated with the Office of Economic Research, the Office of National Estimates, the Office of Strategic Research, and the Clandestine Service.

54. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, March 20, 1970 54. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, March 20, 19701

March 20, 1970

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION
March 20, 1970

MEMORANDUM FOR

THE PRESIDENT

FROM: Henry A. Kissinger [HK initialed]

SUBJECT:

Options for Possible [text not declassfied] Action in Libya

[text not declassfied] I requested [text not declassfied] consideration of the [text not declassfied] actions which might be undertaken in support of U.S. policies and interests in Libya.

[text not declassfied] presented several options for consideration noting that an essential prerequisite to undertaking any of them is a reliable [text not declassfied]picture of the policies and intentions of the Libyan government. [text not declassfied]

[text not declassified]

[text not declassfied] unanimously favored [text not declassfied] option labeled 1-A which is: Intensify efforts to influence the Libyan government to adopt policies consistent with U.S. objectives. Oppose Libyan leaders and policies inimical to U.S. interests.

The U.S. objectives to be furthered by these efforts would be as follows: 1. To maintain normal diplomatic and commercial relations with Libya. (Including U.S. oil interests.)

2. To influence Libya to maintain its independence, to develop its own resources primarily as a member of the Mediterranean region with strong ties to Western Europe and a balanced rapport with both the Maghreb and Libya's eastern Arab neighbors, including Egypt.

3. To deny the development of an intolerable level of Soviet or other communist presence and influence in Libya—including that exerted indirectly through radical Arab states.

4. To use the U.S. position in Libya to support the development of regional stability in the Mediterranean and the Middle East.

[Page 2 not declassified]

RECOMMENDATION:

That you approve the [text not declassfied] option to intensify efforts to influence the Libyan government to adopt policies consistent with the U.S. objectives listed above and oppose Libyan leaders and policies inimical to U.S. interests as outlined in the plan of action at Tab A.

Attachment Tab A

APPROVE [RN initialed]
DISAPPROVE
OTHER

1 Source: National Security Council Files, Nixon Intelligence Files, Libya. Secret; Eyes Only. Sent for action. Tab A is not printed. Nixon approved the recommendation on March 23.

55. Telegram 724 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, April 13, 1970, 1428Z. 55. Telegram 724 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, April 13, 1970, 1428Z.1

April 13, 1970, 1428Z

10

ACTION SS-45

INFO OCT-01 SSO-00 NSCE-00 CCO-00/046 W 068406

O 131428Z APR 70

FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6121

SECRET TRIPOLI 724

EXDIS

CORRESCTED COPY PARA TWO AND THREE

SUBJECT:

“SIGNALS” ON US-LIBYAN RELATIONS

1. SUMMARY EVIDENCE HAS BEEN ACCUMULATING OVER PAST FOUR OR FIVE DAYS THAT RCC IS ENGAGED IN DEBATING FUNDAMENTAL FOREIGN POLICY DECISIONS INVOLVING FUTURE OF RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN LARG AND US IN PARTICULAR. ONE OF CONTENDING FACTIONS REPORTEDLY IS ARGUING STRONGLY THAT USG IS “HOPELESS CASE”, A “LOST CAUSE” THAT SHOULD BE WRITTEN OFF. ADVOCATES OF TERMINATING RELATIONSHIP WITH USG POINT TO OVERALL US POSITION ON ARAB-ISRAEL DISPUTE AND CONTEND THAT USG ON BILATERAL BASIS WITH LIBYA HAS DONE LITTLE IF ANYTHING TO BUILD ON HOPEFUL ATMOSPHERE CHEATED BY WHEELUS WITHDRAWAL AGREEMENT. ADVOCATES CHARGE USG HAS ONLY APPEARED TAKE OCCASIONAL NEUTRAL STAND IN ARAB ISRAEL DISPUTE AND INSIST IT CANNOT RPT NOT BE COUNTED UPON. THEY RECOGNIZE THERE ARE INDIVIDUAL PRIVATE AMERICANS WHO UNDERSTAND AND APPRECIATE ARAB POSITION (EVEN WHILE NOT AGREEING WITH IT COMPLETELY), BUT DISCOUNT THESE INDIVIDUALS AS BEING COMPLETELY WITHOUT INFLUENCE 1N AMERICAN SOCIETY. OTHER GROUPINGS OF VARYING PERSUASIONS WITHIN RCC AND.LARG REPORTEDLY ARE ARGUING AGAINST MAKING ANY WIDE-RANGING AND PERMANENT DECISION RE FUTURE TOTAL RELATIONSHIP WITH UNITED STATES IN HASTE AND ON BASIS LIMITED EVIDENCE SO FAR AVAILABLE OF REAL US INTENTIONS TOWARD LARG.

2. EVIDENCE OF DEBATE FALLS INTO FOUR GENERAL ACCUMULATIONS: FIRST. UNDERSECRETARY FOREIGN MINISTRY MANSUUR KIKHYA TOLD GEORGE WASHINGTON LAW PROFESSOR AND MRS. W. T. MALLISON APRIL 11 THAT (A)LARG IN PROCESS MAKING BASIC DECISION RE FUTURE RELATIONSHIP US (B) MANY IN RCC ARE ARGUING STRONGLY US SHOULD BE WRITTEN OFF COMPLETELY, (C) THAT HE AND SOME OF HIS PROFESSIONAL COLLEAGUES IN FOREIGN MINISTRY (INCLUDING MINISTER BWAYSIIR) DO NOT RPT NOT SHARE HOPELESS CACE ANALYSIS BELIEVING US TRADITION OF JUSTICE AND FAIR PLAY CAN STILL BE APPEALED TO AND ENERGIZED IN FAVOR ARABS, AND (D) THAT ATTEMPTS OF FOREIGN MINISTRY STAFF TO CONVINCE RCC THAT LARG CAN STILL WORK WITH US ARE UP-HILL LAST DITCH EFFORTS WHOSE SUCCESS IS THOROUGHLY UNCERTAIN. SECOND. CAS HAS BEEN PICKING UP INDICATIONS THAT RCC IN PROCESS OF MAKING SERIES MAJOR DECISIONS PRINCIPALLY IN FOREIGN POLICY FIELD, THAT DECISION-MAKING PROCESS HAS PRODUCED SERIOUS DISAGREEMENTS AMONG COUNCIL MEMBERS WHICH HAVE LED TO BROAD SPLITS AMONG VARIOUS RCC MEMBERS AND THAT ONCE MADE, DECISIONS MAY PRODUCE CABINET RE—SHUFFLE WHICH WILL REPLACE BWAYSIIR AS FOREIGN MINISTER. THIRD. ACTING LARAF COMMANDER PRESSED EMBOFF APRIL 11 FOR DEFINITIVE INDICATION US INTENTIONS VIS-À-VIS LARAF. SEE TRIPOLI 723. FOURTH. FORMER PRIME MINISTER MAHMUUD MAGHRABI (WHO FORMER STUDENT MALLISON) SOUGHT OUT PROFESSOR AND MRS. MALLISON EVENING APRIL 12 FOR THREE HOUR SESSION. MAGHRABI REPORTED HE HAS BECOME IN PAST TWO-THREE MONTHS CLOSE PERSONAL ADVISOR AND CONFIDANT TO PRIME MINISTER AND RCC PRESIDENT QADHAAFI. HE STATED HIS IMPACT ON RCC AND ON LARG POLICY IS FAR GREATER NOW THAN IT EVER WAS WHILE HE WAS NOMINALLY PRIME MINISTER. HE NOTED HE HAD ACCOMPANIED QADHAAFI THROUGHOUT RECENT CYRENAICAN SPEAKING TOUR. HAD PROVIDED MANY OF SPEECH IDEAS, AND HAD SAT ON PLATFORM NEXT TO QADHAAFI DURING MAJOR POLICY SPEECHES AT TOBRUK, DERNA AND BAIDA. DURING COURSE LONG CONVERSATION, MAGHRABI ASSERTED USG WAS “LOST CAUSE” AND THAT US AS NATION COULD NOT BE COUNTED-UPON. HE COMMENTED HE WAS PRESSING SAME ANTI-US ARGUMENTS ON QADHAAFI AT EVERY OPPORTUNITY. MAGHRABI TOLD MAILLISONS. HE WOULD PREFER GO TO FRONT AND JOIN COMMANDOS, BUT THAT QADHAAFI HAD INSISTED HE WAS MORE NEEDED AND USEFUL IN LIBYA: HE CONCLUDED HE WOULD THEREFORE REMAIN HERE AS LONG AS QADHAAFI WANTED HIM DESPITE HIS OWN PERSONAL PREFERENCES.

3. POSSIBILITY OF COURSE EXISTS LARG IS CONSCIOUSLY USING MALLISON TO FEED INFORMATION INTO USG SINCE MALLISON HAS MADE NO SECRET OF HIS VISITS TO EMBASSY TO SEE AMBASSADOR AND OTHER EMBOFFS. POSSIBILITY OF INTENTIONAL INFORMATION OPERATION, HOWEVER, WOULD NOT APPEAR TO VITIATE VALIDITY OF INFORMATION BEING PASSED ALONG, RE CURRENT BASIC POLICY REVIEW. INDEED,LARG MAY BE “SIGNALING” IN BROADEST POSSIBLE STROKES TO MAKE CERTAIN WE GET MESSAGE THAT RCC IS DEBATING FUNDAMENTAL POLICY CHOICE.

4. MAGHRABI HAS ARRANGED FOR MALLISON TO SEE QADHAAFI APRIL 13. HE APPARENTLY IMPLIED SESSION MIGHT WELL BE LONG ONE. EMBASSY WILL ATTEMPT DEBRIEF MALLISON ON HIS MEETING WITH QADHAAFI. HOWEVER, MALLISON HAS EXPRESSED, CONSIDERABLE RELUCTANCE SEE EMBOFF AFTER SEEING PRIMIN AND SUGGESTED INSTEAD HE WOULD GET IN TOUCH WITH ASST SECY NEWSOM UPON HIS RETURN TO WASHINGTON APRIL 15.

5. MY COMMENTS WILL FOLLOW APRIL 14.
GP-4

PALMER

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL LIBYA—US. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. The LARAF commander pressed the Embassy for a decision on the F—5s in telegram 723 from Tripoli, April 13. (Ibid., DEF 12-5 Libya) Palmer's follow-up comments were sent to the Department in telegram 734 from Tripoli, April 14. (Ibid.)

56. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Deputy Director for Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency through the Deputy Director for Plans (Karamessines) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Helms), Washington, April 16, 1970 56. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Deputy Director for Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency through the Deputy Director for Plans (Karamessines) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Helms), Washington, April 16, 19701

Washington, April 16, 1970

16 April 1970

MEMORANDUM FOR:

Director of Central Intelligence

THROUGH : Deputy Director for Plans

SUBJECT :

The [text not declassfied] Libyan Operation and F-5 Aircraft

1. The United States has contracted to deliver 8 F-5 aircraft; the commitment predates the September revolution. The matter of the U.S. Government honoring its agreement with Libya has assumed a political significance that obviously transcends the military value of the aircraft.

2. I hosted a lunch on 15 April for Ambassador David Newsom and Deputy Assistant Secretary Rodger P. Davies; the latter represented Joe Sisco. David Blee and Archie Roosevelt completed the Agency side of this meeting.

3. The purpose of the meeting was to expose State more fully to the thinking underlying the “Option 1-A” approved by [text not declassfied]the President. Newsom consistently took the position that the USG was not really interested in Libya and that in official matters the White House did not appear to reflect any of the attitude inherent in both the [text not declassfied] discussion, as he understood it, and the decision [text not declassfied] He cited the White House view on the problem of the 8 F-5 aircraft as evidence of this. Both Newsom and Davies appreciate that the decision on the F-5s was directly related to the French Mirage deal with Libya, the agony over Phantoms for Israel, public attitudes on the Arab-Israel war and the Israeli pressures on the problem of Libyan arms. Nevertheless, both thought it might help save Libya if the USG could get around the problem of reneging on its F-5 agreement.

4. Ambassador Palmer has come in with a proposal that is designed to gain time and avoid the risk of a crisis over a Libyan charge that the U.S. is not meeting an obligation. The cable is attached and is a concise statement of the problem.

5. I have had extensive indicators from the oil companies in the past ten days that they are now convinced that they should compromise and offer the Libyans a price adjustment. What they will offer is late and little but may just get them by their own crisis with the Libyans.

6. I think we are making some headway on our Option 1-A operation; it will take several months to measure progress more concretely. In the meantime, no bad news on Libya is good news [text not declassfied]

7. If there is any opening which will permit the USG to slip around the F-5 question it would clearly be most helpful to the purposes of [text not declassfied] U.S. policy objectives in Libya to do so. Since the White House has shown interest in the fate of Libya, would it not be appropriate for you to use an occasion to go over this one lightly with at least Dr. Kissinger? If the opportunity occurs and you share our view on this problem, I recommend that you register interest and concern on this with Kissinger. At a minimum our colleagues in State would be appreciative of your intervention. However, all of us expect that if the F-5s are sold as agreed, there would be almost insurmountable pressures to sell Phantoms to Israel. If the government is not prepared to resist these pressures, it would be better not to go through with the F-5 agreement.

[signed]
James H. Critchfield
SAC/DDP

Attachment

CONCUR:

C/AF Division

C/NE Division

1 Source: National Security Council Files, Nixon Intelligence Files, Libya. No classification. The attachment is not printed.

57. Telegram 70798 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Libya, May 9, 1970, 1748Z. 57. Telegram 70798 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Libya, May 9, 1970, 1748Z.1

Libya, May 9, 1970, 1748Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State 070798
9 MAY 70

ACTION:

Amembassy TRIPOLI

INFO:Amembassy BENGHAZI

CINCEUR

CINCUSAFE

16TH AF TORREJON

CHMAAG TRIPOLI

7272 FTW WHEELUS AFB

EXDIS

SUBJ:

Future US Relationship with Libyan Air Force

REF:

(a) State 25239

(b) Tripoli 360 (notal)

(c) Tripoli 565

JOINT STATE/DEFENSE MESSAGE

1. Following instructions should be held for presentation upon Ambassador Palmer's return. After careful consideration Libyan and general area factors, we have decided that we should take following positions re LARG requests for LARAF support:

2. Ambassador would start out with general statement his impressions of his Washington visit with principal emphasis on desire USG for friendly relations with LARG. He would state that he had found in Washington a considerable concern over the course of Libyan-US relations. Our government had in mind the professions of desire for a new relationship after we agreed to leave Wheelus. Instead we have experienced moves against both the official and private American community. We have not seen the development of the new relationship as we had hoped.

3. Ambassador goes on to say he had been asked to reiterate to LARG at highest levels that the United States fully accepts the change in government in Libya and has no desire or intention to interfere in its internal affairs. We would hope this could be reciprocated by a lessening of the apparent suspicion directed toward us by some in the Libyan Government.

4. We recognize the differences which exist between us in the view of the Arab-Israel issue. Even here, we feel that the Government of Libya has not taken sufficient note of the moves made by the United States toward a balanced policy in the area.

5. Ambassador would then lead into subject of the additional eight F-5s confirming that question of their delivery has been under review.

6. We wish to confirm that, after some slippage because of a Northrop strike, production of the aircraft is proceeding normally amid present indications are that the planes will be ready for delivery in January and February 1971. We also wish confirm that no action has been taken or is contemplated to divert these planes to other possible purchasers.

7. As LARG is aware, the terms of the letter of offer permit the USG to cancel all or part of the order at any time prior to delivery “under unusual and compelling circumstances when the best interests of the US require it” (Clause A-6). An option to cancel is, of course, also open to the LARG (Clause B-4). These were standard provisions in all such sales contracts and are intended to enable either party to review the situation at any time prior to delivery in the light of circumstances at the time.

8. We do not believe current situation provides basis for a definite decision now to proceed with deliveries which will not in any event take place for another nine or ten months; neither do we wish to take any prejudicial action at this time. Consequently, we have taken a deliberate decision not to invoke Clause A-6 of the letter of offer at this time but to make our decision on the basis of the general area situation and the developing relationships between the two countries much closer to the time of actual delivery.

9. We hope that our reasons for thus deferring a decision will be understandable to the LARG. Meanwhile, we are prepared to carry out the following actions in accordance original contract: (a) USG is prepared to accept five pilots qualified for assignment to F-5 pilot up-grade spaces and to place them in training beginning in late May 1970. Actual flying training would begin in October. Provision of spaces would, of course, be on sales basis. You should remind LARG that courses to be preceded by up to 15 rpt 15 weeks English language training, depending on English comprehension level (ECL). (ECL of 80 required prior to F-5 up-grade training.) We will continue to provide other training on a course-available basis for qualified trainees. FYI: We wish to keep number trainees at minimum and believe both course availability and non-availability qualified candidates will accomplish this. END FYI.

(b) Pursuant para 1(b) State 25239 you may also inform LARG we willing sell reduced quantities ammunition requested by LARG. Procurement led time on most items (if we cannot release from stock) is 12 months after receipt of accepted FMS case. We anticipate, however, that we could obtain release of partial and possibly full quantities of most items from stock in approximately 90 days. (Details in septel.) FYI: Foregoing quantities of munitions based on USCINCEUR planning factors for all countries under CINCEUR jurisdiction. Factors take into account reasonable sortie rates, mix of munitions most likely to be carried by F-5, and anticipated aircraft commission and attrition rates. Quantities are comparable with quantities WRM furnished through grant aid and FMS to other African countries. END FYI.

(c) Remainder State 25239 still applies (NORAIR contract, spare parts, C-130s and military liaison section to handle military assistance problems).

10. We would also expect that LARG would proceed with NORAIR contract, thus permitting substantial scaling down of MAAG to level acceptable to both governments.

11. If queried publicly re present status second F-5 contract, Department will say “Deliveries under the contract are not due until early next year. Meanwhile we intend to keep the matter under continuing review. No further comment.”
END

ROGERS

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL LIBYA—US. Secret. Drafted by Palmer; cleared by J, AF, AF/N, NEA, L, PM, DOD/ISA, SAFUSI, and Joint Staff; and approved by Rogers.

58. Intelligence Brief INRB 131 From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to Acting Secretary of State Richardson, Washington, May 27, 1970 58. Intelligence Brief INRB 131 From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to Acting Secretary of State Richardson, Washington, May 27, 19701

Washington, May 27, 1970

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
INTELLIGENCE BRIEF
DIRECTOR OF INTELLIGENCE AND RESEARCH
May 27, 1970

To :

The Acting Secretary

Through:

S/S

From : INR - George C. Denney, Jr. [GCDJ initialed]

Subject:

Libya: Will the Government Move Against the Oil Companies?

This report was produced by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research. Aside from normal substantive exchange with other agencies at the working level, it has not been coordinated elsewhere.

Oil is Libya's Major Diplomatic Weapon. Concern over the ultimate intentions of the present Libyan Government toward the mainly American and British-owned oil industry in Libya appears well justified: the ruling junta is clearly no friend of the international “majors” and is almost certainly considering a number of a1ternative solutions to Libya's 3 present heavy dependence on those companies (as evidenced by Libya's recent contacts with the Soviets and other Eastern Europeans, the French, and the A1gerians). However, in connection with the current negotiations over the “posted” or tax-reference price of crude oil, it seems unlikely that the Libyans would move against foreign equity interests in the industry as a whole—by total or partial nationalization, by sequestration, or by general revocation of concessions.

Libyan Prime Minister Mu'amar QADHAAFI probably views western (US, UK and to a lesser extent FRG) equity interests in Libyan oil as the most important remaining hostage to the anti-Israel cause, and he probably would not squander his highest trump card, unless and until he were to reach the conclusions (a) that cooperation of any sort with the pro-Israel Western states is counterproductive to the cause and (b) that he could nationalize the oil interests of these states without military or subversive moves against his regime.

There is little evidence that he has reached either conclusion. On the first point, Libya is continuing to seek some limited military cooperation with the US as well as the UK and FRG. Furthermore, QADHAAFI has just launched an inter-Arab diplomatic initiative for his own, as yet undisclosed, plan for the settlement of the Arab-Israeli confrontation. Given the great influence on QADHAAFI of UAR President NASSER, this “QADHAAFI plan” (although almost certainly calling for strong Arab pressures against the US) probably also reflects Nasser's waning hopes for a political settlement based on US influence over Israel. Unless and until Nasser called on Libya to take all-out action against US interests, QADHAAFI is not likely to act rashly against the US oil interests in Libya. On the latter point, QADHAAFI would in any case move extremely cautiously until after the complete evacuation of American forces from Wheelus Air Base, now scheduled for mid-June. On balance, and assuming that the Arab cause does not deteriorate dramatically during this period, QADHAAFI probably will not nationalize the industry as a whole over the next few weeks.

Some Companies Are More Vulnerable Than Others. On the other hand, the Libyans will almost certainly continue to harass, threaten, and restrict individual companies in different ways (such as the recent production limitations imposed on Occidental). There is probably at least an even chance that the Libyans will move soon against the equity interests of one or more American oil companies (most likely, by the revocation of individual concession agreements), partly to settle old scores and partly to pressure the rest of the industry into moving toward an acceptable solution to the posted price issue. Many Libyans—particularly chief oil negotiator and former Prime Minister Mahmud MAGHRABI—are convinced that a number of companies (notably Occidental) engaged in flagrant corruption not only in obtaining their original concessions, but also in their other operational problems with the royalist government. Some of the companies were associated very closely in one way or another with now discredited officials of the former regime, some of whom have been actively plotting against the present regime. There are many skeletons in the closet, and, depending on which facts are known to and considered important by the Libyans, a number of companies are undoubtedly vulnerable to individual action. Furthermore, some companies may also be subject to Libyan action for failure (by the present government's stricter standards) to comply with their legal obligations under their concession agreements and related regulations. Thus, action against any one company over these next few weeks need not, and probably will not, indicate Libyan intentions to move against the industry as a whole.

INR/Africa

Director : WCHarrop

Analyst : BWBrown

Ext. : 20688

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, PET 6 LIBYA. Secret; Noforn; Limdis. Drafted by Bazil W. Brown, Jr. (INR/Africa); cleared by Harrop. For more on the oil negotiations in Libya, see Foreign Relations, 1969-72, volume XXXVI, Energy Crisis, 1969-1974.

59. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Packard), Washington, June 2, 1970 59. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Packard), Washington, June 2, 19701

Washington, June 2, 1970

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WASHINGTON
June 2, 1970

Copies To:

UJC

S/PC

AF

AF/N

PM

LH S/S-S:CMS

Dear Dave:

I am writing to request your review of the current State/Defense instructions on termination of the USG-Libyan Government Economic Assistance Agreement. Paragraph C of the Agreement provides for the payment of “$1,000,000 per year for each of the calendar years 1965 through 1971.” Nevertheless, the State/Defense airgram instructs Ambassador Palmer to inform the Libyan Government that no more payments will be made since the US has in fact overpaid due to termination of our effective use of Wheelus AFB as of November 19, 1969.

The Honorable
David Packard,
Deputy Secretary of Defense.

The legal merits of this complicated issue have been the subject of differences between our lawyers for some months. Our respective legal offices differ essentially over whether we are legally obligated to pay for our effective use of Wheelus in 1968 and pro rata in 1969, based on Paragraph C of the Economic Assistance Agreement (the State position), or whether the USG has paid more than legally required (the DOD position constructed from the negotiating history). While the Legal Adviser's Office has accepted the DOD position as a plausible legal argument, it believes the more persuasive conclusion is that the timing of the payments, as well as their totality, were in consideration for Wheelus and that the USG is therefore obligated under Paragraph C of the Agreement to pay $1,000,000 for 1968 and $906,840 for 1969 (the pro rata amount through November 19). This amount could, of course, be offset by any valid claim which we determined to exist and decided to press under international law arising out of early termination of our effective use of Wheelus and other areas at LARG initiative.

The Department is of the view, based on recent consultations with Ambassador Palmer, that submission of the current USG position would not be beneficial to overall USG interests. We believe that it would be difficult to present, inasmuch as it could not be supported by any written understanding with the Libyan Government, and that it would almost certainly become the object of a dispute. One possible LARG reaction would be the demand that unpaid amounts under the Economic Assistance Agreement be offset against the $7,000,000 due the USG under the 1967 F-5 contract. Another reaction would be the contentious filing of claims in connection with Wheelus withdrawal prior to the June 30, 1971 deadline provided in the December 23, 1969 Agreed Minute.

The policy rationale underlying our decision to withdraw from Wheelus AFB was based on our desire to remove an important stumbling block from USG-LARG relations and to develop a fresh start. Having made this basic decision, we believe it important to complete our final withdrawal in a manner which promotes rather than detracts from this objective. Such has been our conduct in other areas of the Wheelus withdrawal. The Libyans have fulfilled their understanding thus far to facilitate our withdrawal. Adherence to our present position would, in our view, be inconsistent with our general policy. Despite uncertainties in our relationship with Libya at this time, and in recognition of the importance of other US interests in that country, we wish to avoid positions on Wheelus, where possible, which we consider likely to adversely affect our overall interests.

I would therefore appreciate your looking into this matter in the light of the above points and would hope that you could concur in the attached draft telegram which would authorize the Ambassador to acknowledge that we owe $1,906,840 under the Economic Assistance Agreement but reserve our right to present any valid claim we may wish to present under international law and our intention of including this amount in the discussion of other outstanding financial questions in the near future. There is some urgency to this as we should send revised instructions to Ambassador Palmer before the completion of the withdrawal from Wheelus and the termination of the Defense Facilities Agreement which, as you know, is imminent.

Sincerely,
[signed]
U. Alexis Johnson
Enclosures: Memorandum of Law Draft Telegram

Eclosures:

Memorandum of Law

Draft Telegram

Clearances: PM - Mr. Stoddardt (substance)

L - Mr. Rhinelander (draft)

AF/N - Mr. Blake

H - Mr. Leahy

AF/N:RSSuddarth:L/AF:EVerville:am

x21723 5/29/70/x20311

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AID (US) 4 LIBYA. Secret. Drafted by Suddarth and Elizabeth Verville (AF/N) and cleared by PM, L, AF/N, and H. Enclosures are not printed.

60. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Eliot) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 12, 1970 60. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Eliot) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 12, 19701

Washington, June 12, 1970

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington. D.C. 20520
June 12, 1970

MEMORANDUM FOR

MR. HENRY A. KISSINGER
THE WHITE HOUSE

Subject:

Wheelus Air Force Base Closure

Enclosed is a copy of an information memorandum to the Secretary prepared by the bureau of African Affairs.

[signed] Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.
Executive Secretary

Enclosure:
As stated.

SUBJECT:

Wheelus Air Force Base Closure -INFORMATION MEMORANDUM

On June 11 the U.S. formally turned over Wheelus Air Force Base to the Libyan Government after an uninterrupted U.S. presence there since World War II. Following a simple ceremony that was attended by Acting Prime Minister Jaluud and Ambassador Palmer, the Wheelus Commander transferred command to the Libyan Air Force and the last 48 USAF personnel remaining at Wheelus departed for Germany.

Under the Wheelus Agreement all permanent constructions reverted to the Libyan Government without compensation. This property cost $77 million at initial construction and is currently valued at $43 million after depreciation. During the withdrawal the USAF removed to other USAF installations equipment valued at $21 million and sold about $900,000 worth of non-critical equipment and $750,000 worth of aircraft fuel to the Libyan Government for which full payment has been received. Over 4,000 airmen and dependents were also withdrawn. Previous Wheelus functions (as a weapons and gunnery training facility for USAF Europe-based tactical aircraft) have now been transferred to bases in Europe, chiefly in Spain and Turkey.

The LARG has apparently renamed Wheelus “Ukba ibn Nafia”, after the 7th century Arab conqueror of North Africa (who also expelled the Christians from there). The LARG has not revealed its intended use of Wheelus other than to declare that it will be used “to defend Arabism and humanity”. It has repeatedly denied that it would allow control of former U.S. and U.K. bases to pass to “foreigners”.

Group-3

Downgraded at 12-year intervals, not automatically declassified.

The Libyan Air Force still maintains its headquarters at Wheelus and we expect that French technicians may work there in connection with the new Mirage deliveries expected later in 1970.

The Wheelus withdrawal has been accomplished over the last six months with full Libyan cooperation. The event itself passed without incident or significant adverse publicity in Libya or the Middle East. The LARG is, however, planning ten days of celebrations later in the month and the possibility exists that delegations from other Arab countries, notably the UAR and Sudan, will be invited to participate. Negotiations between the Libyans and ourselves are scheduled to begin June 13, on a series of complicated issues connected with our withdrawal from Wheelus. These include termination of the Wheelus Base Agreement, the Economic Assistance Agreement (under which we paid for use of Wheelus) and possibly of the termination at LARG request of our MAAG Agreement.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 738, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. I. Confidential. In telegram 1510, June 27, Ambassador Joseph Palmer took the Deputy Prime Minister to task for the criticism the Libyan Air Force Commander had leveled at Washington during the turnover ceremony, causing Palmer to boycott the remaining events. JALLUUD assured Palmer that he and other RCC members had had no prior knowledge of what Farjaani intended to say. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL LIBYA—US)

61. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Packard) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson), Washington, June 26, 1970 61. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Packard) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson), Washington, June 26, 19701

Washington, June 26, 1970

THE DEPUTY SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON, D. C. 20301
26 JUN 1970

Honorable U. Alexis Johnson
Under Secretary for Political Affairs
Department of State
Washington, D. C. 20520

Dear Alex:

I am replying to your letter of June 2nd about possible payments due to the Libyan Government, under the 1954 Economic Assistance Agreement, as a quid pro quo for the use of Wheelus through November 1969. Given the differing views of Counsel, I believe it would be an error to give the Libyans any statement to the effect that we owe them anything under the Economic Assistance Agreement. I should add that our lawyers remain convinced that we do not have a legal obligation to pay the amounts in question, and I do not think that we should be reluctant to explain to the Libyans that our records show that the payments agreed under the Economic Assistance Agreement in 1954 represented an average annual quid pro quo of $2 million.

As a practical matter, I would recommend against any further payments regardless of how one comes out of the legal question in view of our claim for damages resulting from our forced, pre-mature withdrawal from Wheelus. That claim exceeds, and thus cancels out, the $1.9 million that the Libyans might argue are due under the Economic Assistance Agreement.

I recommend that Ambassador Palmer be instructed accordingly.

Sincerely,
[Packard signed]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15 LIBYA—US. Secret. The attached letter is printed as Document 59.

62. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Moore) to Acting Secretary of State Johnson, Washington, July 2, 1970 62. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Moore) to Acting Secretary of State Johnson, Washington, July 2, 19701

Washington, July 2, 1970

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington, D.C 20520
July 2, 1970
Rec'd in S/S - 7/2/70

TO:

The Acting Secretary

THROUGH:

S/S

FROM: AF -C. Robert Moore [RM initialed]

SUBJECT:

Circular 175 Authority for Termination of Outstanding USG-Libyan Government Agreements - ACTION MEMORANDUM

In response to Ambassador Palmer's recommendations for the forthcoming negotiations with the Libyan Government (Tab B), we request Circular 175 authority for Ambassador Palmer to negotiate and terminate, with one exception, all USG-Libyan Government agreements currently in force. Both Governments would reserve their respective legal positions regarding any claims which may have arisen under international law in connection with these agreements prior to their termination.

We believe this course of action desirable for the following reasons: (a) amicable termination of the agreements may provide us with some leverage with the Libyan Government which we believe is anxious to terminate existing agreements, particularly the Wheelus Base, Economic Assistance and MAAG Agreements; (b) wiping the slate clean of agreements negotiated with the former Monarchy shows our willingness to respond to repeated Libyan assertions that such an action is a necessary pre-condition for a new Us-LARG relationship; (c) such a gesture may provide support for those in Libyan Government councils who may be arguing for a continuing relationship with the USG. For this reason, an important ingredient in our negotiations is the tentative “post-aid” technical assistance proposals which we authorize Ambassador Palmer to put forward. (We have obtained agreement from AID and the US Geological Survey to make certain proposals.)

Our agreements with Libya, which Ambassador Palmer would be authorized to terminate, fall into four categories: (1) 1954 Defense Facilities Agreement (TIAS 3107) and supplementary Memoranda of Understanding (TIAS 3607, 4054 and 4620). Ambassador Palmer already has authority to sign this termination.

(2) Economic Assistance Agreement, as amended. (TIAS 3105, 4577.) Although Ambassador Palmer has authority to terminate this agreement, authority is needed to amend his instructions regarding the settlement of financial obligations under this Agreement. We have reached a compromise with Defense which we believe can be satisfactorily put forward to the Libyans, at least through the next negotiating round. Our strategy entails maneuvering the LARG into balancing all the claims which it might have against the USG, including any claim for payment of our obligations under the Economic Assistance Agreement, against a possible claim we will lay on the table for costs (which we are still determining) resulting from the LARG's denial of our effective use of Wheelus AFB after November 19, 1969. The amount of this possible USG claim is, of course, indefinite, for purposes of seeking LARG agreement.

The cable of instructions at Tab A reflects language on the Economic Assistance Agreement which we have worked out with DOD subsequent to your exchange of letters with Mr. Packard.

If our negotiating tactic does not work, it may be necessary for the Department to go back to Defense, on the basis of overriding policy considerations, to persuade the Air Force to discharge its financial obligations under the Economic Assistance Agreement.

(3) Military Assistance Agreement, as amended. (TIAS 3857, 3858.) Ambassador Palmer requires authority to terminate these agreements. The Military Assistance Agreement would be terminated by way of USG waiver of the one year period for the taking effect of LARG notice of termination, rather than by USG agreement to terminate the Agreement. This will result in the continuation in force, under the terms of the Military Assistance Agreement of the provisions relating to restrictions on use and transfer of military equipment furnished under the Agreement. We would also try to obtain privileges and immunities for a small and re-constituted US Military Liaison section. If necessary, however, we believe that we can run a minimal military assistance program without either a MAAG agreement or MAAG personnel. TIAS 3858 relating to the return to the USG of MAP equipment no longer needed by the Libyans cannot be terminated.

(4) Agreements Relating to Economic and Technical Assistance Matters. (TIAS 3382, 3290, 3602, 3810, 4974 and 3480.) Ambassador Palmer requires authority to terminate these agreements. Libya became an “aid-graduate” country in 1965 and several of these agreements are no longer operative. Despite the fact that some provisions of one of the agreements could be theoretically beneficial to future activities of American technical assistance personnel (limited privileges and immunities), on balance we believe it desirable to terminate these agreements for the following reasons: (a) since the LARG has indicated its opposition to their continuation, we believe we would have difficulty in securing LARG cooperation in applying their provisions to any future US-LARG technical assistance projects; (b) we believe the LARG would be receptive at this point only to a pragmatic, ad hoc approach to technical assistance; (c) possible service agencies (USGS and AID) indicate that the termination of these agreements would not affect their current authority to operate in Libya, and that they would be able to negotiate on an ad hoc basis for necessary LARG cooperation.

In sum, cancellation of these economic and technical assistance agreements would have little or no adverse effect on US programs, and we believe it could have important advantages in laying the psychological basis for a new “post-Wheelus” phase in USG-Libyan relations. Our gesture towards a “post-aid” relationship is an important step in responding directly to a Libyan national interest and thus could be helpful to our efforts to protect our substantial interests in the Libyan oil industry.

The attached cable (Tab A) would authorize Ambassador Palmer to proceed along the foregoing lines. Final authority to sign the termination Notes and any related understandings will be subject to approval by the Assistant Secretary for African Affairs, with appropriate concurrence of DOD and of an Agreed Minute which Ambassador Palmer will submit during the negotiations. The termination notes have been cleared by DOD and L.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you sign the attached cable (Tab A).

Attachments:

Tab A -Telegram of Instructions

Tab B -Tripoli 1370

Tab C -Memorandum of Law

Clearance: AF/N - Mr. Blake

L- Mr. Salans (draft)

AF/N:RSSuddarth/CWBray:jk

7/1/70 x 20723

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15-4 LIBYA—US. Secret. Sent for action. Drafted by Suddarth and Bray; and cleared by Blake and Salans. The attachments are not printed. The detailed instructions (Tab A) were sent to Tripoli in telegram 105547 on July 2. (Ibid., POL LIBYA—US) The formal notes of termination of outstanding U.S.-Libyan agreements were transmitted to Tripoli in telegram 106573, July 4. (Ibid.)

63. Intelligence Memorandum 531/70, Washington, July 31, 1970 63. Intelligence Memorandum 531/70, Washington, July 31, 19701

Washington, July 31, 1970

DIRECTORATE OF INTELLIGENCE
Intelligence Memorandum
LIBYAN ARMS SUPPLIES SINCE THE 1969 REVOLUTION
31 July 1970
No. 0531/70

Introduction

Libya became independent in 1951 and formed its first army in 1953. In September 1969, an army coup replaced the monarchy with a Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) headed by Colonel Muammar Qaddafi. Before the coup, all weapons and military equipment were of Western origin, primarily British and US, acquired through purchase and grant aid worth in all about $75 million. Since the coup in 1969, Libya has drastically reduced its dependence upon the UK and the US, has concluded a shaky $400-million military-economic deal with France, and has received clandestine deliveries of Soviet-made tanks from Egypt, as well as the recent overt deliveries of tanks and other equipment via two Soviet freighters. The 1970 Libyan defense budget is $245.5 million, about 21 percent of the total budget.

Note: This memorandum was produced solely by CIA. It was prepared by the Office of Current Intelligence, and coordinated with the offices of National Estimates, Strategic Research, and Economic Research, and with the Directorate of Plans.

The United Kingdom

1. Until 1970, the chief supplier of military equipment to Libya was the UK. British dealings involved equipment worth over $40 million, including tanks, armored cars, artillery, small-arms, and naval ships. Some of this has not been delivered; Libya has changed its mind about some items, and the UK has reneged—at least for the moment—on an order for 162 Chieftain tanks.

2. Britain was instrumental in setting up the Libyan Army and paramilitary forces through a military mission that was part of a 20-year defense pact signed in 1953. The goodwill gained thereby among the Libyan armed forces, however, did not survive the change of government last year. Libya had previously regarded the agreement primarily as a defense against Egypt. When the new government patterned itself on Nasir's and brought in Egyptian troops and security men to help sustain it, there was no longer any need for a Western defender. This alienation from Western influence made the UK wary of delivering its best tanks into pro-Egyptian hands. London's new Tory government will probably re-examine the order and may conclude that since British tanks might pre-empt further Soviet deliveries, British commercial interests should benefit from the sale. At present, only a small British mission remains in Libya.

The United States

3. The US commenced its military aid to Libya in 1957 when it sent a Military Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG) to administer the grant aid given to Libya under the Military Assistance Program (MAP). From 1957 to 1970, this aid totaled about $33 million in small-arms, armored vehicles, telecommunications, and aircraft. MAAG conducted Libyan Air Force training while the British handled Libyan Army and Navy training. The US mission was based at Wheelus Air Base, but when this installation was handed over to the Libyans on 11 June 1970 MAAG was reduced to a liaison section of five men attached to the US Embassy . The Libyans now have nine F-5s and three C-130s among their fleet of 30 aircraft. Eight more F-5s are due to be delivered in early 1971, and five C-130s remain on order. Five Libyan airmen are presently scheduled to receive flight training in the US.

4. Despite the political differences between Libya and the US, primarily over US policy toward Israel, the Libyans apparently wish to continue receiving US military assistance, perhaps as a stopgap measure until French Mirage deliveries can begin. On the other hand, delivery of more US Phantoms to Israel would probably cause a strong Libyan reaction against the US, including a complete breakdown of any further military assistance programs.

The French

5. The French have only recently entered the military assistance picture in Libya, but they did so with high drama and great initial impact. In January 1970, Paris announced the conclusion of a military-economic assistance program that included the eventual sale of 110 Mirage aircraft. The package was estimated at some $400 million. Despite pressure from Israel and the US, as well as from domestic public opinion, Paris seized the opportunity of making the sale to increase French prestige and influence in the Arab world and reap the economic advantages that this seemed to entail. In justifying their decision, the French argued that a vacuum existed in Libya as a result of the US and UK pullout, and that if they did not sell the planes, the Soviets would.

6. The high hopes the French originally had for using the arms deal as a wedge for rapidly expanding cultural and economic ties have dimmed, primarily because of Libyan indecision. There have been reports that the Mirage sale itself is in trouble, but there is no firm evidence that either the French or the Libyans intend to break their contract. Details regarding the training of Libyan pilots have not been worked out, but 18 Libyans have already departed for training in France and—at last report—more were expected to leave in the fall.

The Egyptians

7. Egyptian military assistance has been delivered clandestinely, and it is not yet clear whether the armaments that Cairo has shipped to Libya were from Egyptian inventories or were cut-out deliveries from the Soviet Union. In any event, the equipment has been delivered by Egyptian ships, and it has been manned by Egyptian personnel. It consists of two or three ex-Soviet minesweepers and an estimated 65 obsolescent T-34 tanks, which arrived in March and. May of this year complete with Egyptian training missions. Although it has been suggested that the armored training mission merely served as a cover for an Egyptian force that would buttress the RCC in case of trouble, an adequate “palace guard” already existed in the form of two Egyptian commando battalions and perhaps 1,500 Egyptian security men. Egypt also transferred its own Naval Academy out of enemy range in Alexandria to the Libyan town of Susa, where it would presumably serve the Libyan Navy as well.

8. This program of military assistance has been supplemented by political discussions concerning some form of tripartite union between Egypt, Libya, and Sudan. To date any such “union” is without substance, and the initial steps toward it have dealt largely with economic cooperation. In short, it was believed that Nasir wished to establish a relationship with Libya that would enable him to derive maximum benefits from Libya's oil wealth while becoming as little involved as possible. He wanted to maintain the pro-Egyptian RCC, and he probably hoped that he could benefit from a role as the Soviet Union's arms broker in Libya much as he had done in Yemen.

The Soviet Union

9. The Soviet Union entered the picture suddenly and with little warning with an overt delivery of tanks and artillery on 18 July 1970. Since the coup in September 1969, the Soviets had made offers to Libya, and a special envoy from the Soviet Defense Ministry had visited Tripoli as early as 19 September. In return, Deputy Prime Minister JALLUD and another member of the RCC journeyed to Moscow in November to line up military supplies in case talks with the British collapsed. In March, JALLUD was reported to have gone to Moscow again, rather than to his announced destination of Cairo. The Libyans reportedly said they preferred Soviet T-55 tanks (an improved model of the T-54) if Chieftains could not be obtained from the British. [text not declassfied]

10. The known situation at present is that at least 57 T-54/55 tanks, plus Soviet-made artillery and armored vehicles were unloaded from two Soviet arms vessels [text not declassfied] To date, we have no hard information on any arms agreement, its date, or its terms, nor have we any good reporting on the presence or the extent of any Soviet military mission in Libya. It is possible that the Egyptian armored unit personnel are capable of training Libyans in T-54/55s as well as the T-34s.

Outlook

11. There seems to be no doubt that the Soviet Union has been eager to become a military supplier to Libya since the 1969 coup, but until now the Libyans had appeared to hold Moscow politely at arms' length. Nasir is reported to have advised Libya in March to deal with the French rather than the Soviets in order to bind Paris more closely to the Arab cause. More recently, Soviet pressure on Nasir appears to have led him to counsel Libya to make some sort of deal with the Russians in order to placate them, as well as to standarize its equipment with the other important Arab states. One step Nasir is reported to have urged unsuccessfully was for Libya to allow the Soviet Union to use al-Adem airfield after the British evacuation.

12. Until the extent of the Soviet deliveries is known, three speculations seem reasonable. The RCC has already announced that it intends to obtain arms from all quarters “so that it will be indebted to no one.” Among its present suppliers, the US, France, and the UK all have various problems causing a delay in deliveries; Egypt is not itself a manufacturer of arms and has to give serious consideration to its own needs. This leaves the USSR ready, willing, and able to deliver goods that Libya wants immediately, and it is unrealistic to expect that the Libyans could have held off dealing with the USSR much longer. The political aspects of the deal will probably become clear when the arrangement for training personnel is revealed.

13. Secondly, the USSR may have learned a lesson in Yemen about using Egypt as its front, and it may have decided that Soviet arms purchased by Libya would be delivered by the Soviet Union in Soviet vessels for all the world to see. In addition to gaining credit in Libya for the Soviet Union, direct delivery would also give the Soviets greater leverage over the Libyan arms supply and perhaps over Nasir as well by exerting some control over his bankers, the Libyan RCC.

14. A third possibility, raised by US Ambassador Palmer, is that the Soviet deliveries might be for broader Arab requirements rather than solely for Libyan use. It is possible that Libya is intended to be an area for the maintenance of strategic reserves of weapons and a training sanctuary for all the Arab confrontation states.

15. In any event, this is probably the first direct delivery to Libya by the USSR of any major items of military equipment. The new deliveries may well be an indication that the Libyans will turn to the Soviet Union, for reasons of reliability of supply if nothing else, as the main source of equipment for their land forces in the future.

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DI/OCI Files, Job 79—T00830A, Box 6. Secret; Noforn. Prepared in the Office of Current Intelligence of the Central Intelligence Agency, and coordinated with the offices of National Estimates, Strategic Research, and Economic Research, and with the Directorate of Plans.

64. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon, Washington, August 5, 1970 64. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon, Washington, August 5, 19701

Washington, August 5, 1970

SECRETARY OF STATE
WASHINGTON
August 5, 1970

MEMORANDUM FOR

THE PRESIDENT

Subject:

Soviet Military Deliveries to Libya

The introduction of Soviet medium tanks and armored personnel carriers into Libya directly from the USSR on July 20-22 has not in itself significantly altered the arms balance in the region. However, we are concerned over its implications for the future of US-Libyan relations, and are therefore asking Ambassador Palmer to return to Washington for consultations.

Downgraded at 12-year intervals, not automatically declassified.

The tanks involved are medium models, more sophisticated than those previously in the Libyan inventory. Our intelligence indicates that they came directly from the Soviet Union. Their delivery follows a British refusal to supply the Chieftain tanks contracted for by the old regime and inconclusive LARG negotiations for French and West German models. Although we have no information on the extent of any Libyan-Soviet agreements covering the deliveries, the way is clearly opened for the USSR to become a significant supplier of the Libyan armed forces and possibly to establish a training mission in Libya. This would make sense in Libyan terms, since the Libyan Revolutionary Command Council suspects both the US and UK as being hostile to the regime, unreliable suppliers, and pro-Israeli. The fact that we have not indicated that we will deliver the eight F-5s to Libya for which they have a valid contract strengthens this Libyan impression of us. The British find themselves in the same position inasmuch as they have suspended indefinitely any action on the delivery of 188 Chieftain tanks for which the Libyans also have a valid contract. (Both contracts, of course, were signed with the old regime.)

The purchase of Soviet equipment is also consistent with the strong pro-UAR attitude of the RCC's leader, Colonel QADHAAFI. In fact, purchase of the Soviet equipment may have been stimulated by the Egyptians, who have been urging other Arab nations to accept Soviet offers of military equipment. Moreover, purchase of the Soviet equipment would be consistent with the Libyan regime's policy of “unity” with Egypt and Sudan, whose armed forces are Soviet-equipped.

We still have two significant interests in Libya we wish to preserve: our important stake in the petroleum industry, and our diplomatic presence. The consultations with the Ambassador would be designed to obtain his considered estimate of the chances of their survival over the near and mid-term.

[signed]
William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Secret.

65. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, August 12, 1970 65. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, August 12, 19701

Washington, August 12, 1970

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM FOR

THE PRESIDENT

FROM: Henry A. Kissinger [HK initialed]

SUBJECT:

Appointment for Ambassador Palmer

Secretary Rogers has recommended that you see our Ambassador to Libya, Joseph Palmer, who is here until Friday on consultation. [Memo at Tab A] The Secretary has also transmitted a memorandum for you on recent Soviet arms deliveries to Libya. [Tab B] That issue along with the problems currently facing our oil companies there and the Libyan role in the Mid-East situation are the subjects which Palmer is here to discuss.

As has been mentioned to you previously: - The Libyans may be aiming at establishing a government-owned petroleum production complex. They have already approached several production-related American companies with joint venture schemes giving Libya 51% control.

- The Soviets have been shipping arms to Libya (continuing into this week). Revolutionary Command Council head Qadhafi has stated that this represents Libya's interest in avoiding dependence on any one supplier.

- Qadhafi has informally assumed the role of trying to harmonize Arab disunity. Following the meeting he convened of Arab foreign and defense ministers last week, he issued a statement which, in essence, supported everyone, including Nasser and the armed Palestine struggle.

Ambassador Palmer has been thoroughly debriefed in Washington and my staff has talked at length with him. I do not believe that a meeting with you is necessary. The essence of Secretary Rogers' memo on the Soviet arms shipments was covered in last week's brief.

Recommendation: That I extend your regrets to Ambassador Palmer.

Approve
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Secret. Sent for action. No action indicated, but a note on the covering memorandum indicated that Saunders contacted the Ambassador to express regrets. Tab A is not printed. Tab B is printed as Document 64.

66. Memorandum for the Record, Washington, August 19, 1970 66. Memorandum for the Record, Washington, August 19, 19701

August 19, 1970

19 August 1970

MEMORANDUM FOR

THE RECORD

SUBJECT:

Minutes of the Meeting [text not declassfied] 18 August 1970

PRESENT:

Mr. Kissinger, Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Packard, Mr. Johnson, Admiral Moorer, and Mr. Helms.

Ambassador Joseph Palmer, Ambassador C. Robert Moore, and Mr. John Anderton were present for Item 1.

Mr. William Wells was present for Items 2 through 5.

Mr. Cord Meyer and Mr. Wymberley Coerr were present for the entire meeting.

1. Libya - Result of Ambassador Palmer's Visit

a. The session on Libya opened with a tour d'horizon on that country by Ambassador Joseph Palmer, who was on a TDY trip to Washington. Among the factors he cited were the following: (1) The young regime (oldest 28 and youngest 24) seems to be solidly established.

(2) The anti-foreign devil thrust has begun to diminish.

(3) The motivation of any future nationalization of oil is essentially a desire to control their own resources. Envisoned cutbacks of oil production are really for conservation—to spin out the estimated 18-year life of the oil supply. The Libyans are insistent on obtaining the same resource data as the oil companies would have for the United States. The companies in question have not been especially forthcoming.

(4) On the other hand: (a) There is some lessening of suspicion of Americans.

(b) A negotiated settlement on the posted price of oil remains a possibility.

(c) One of the greatest opportunities of the U.S. is in post-aid technical assistance; the Libyans want and appreciate our technological prowess.See Special Minutes for Additional Items

(d) Most of the Libyan students seeking education outside the Arab world will come to the United States. (Here, the Chairman interposed a serious question: Since 1968, far-left, anti-American forces have concentrated on foreign students—others in the USA tend to ignore them and there is a very good chance that radical activists will emerge from this American exposure who will work against all U.S. interests. The irony was cited of students from lesser developed countries returning from Moscow somewhat disillusioned with Marxism but returning from the USA well fired up to challenge the existing order. The Chairman mentioned Mobutu, who no longer wanted to risk sending Congolese students to the States. Mr. Kissinger said that this question transcended [text not declassfied] but attention should be paid.)

(e) The Soviet arms deal (following bickerings with British and French) was a straight cash arms deal without Soviet technical personnel being involved thus far.

b. In regard to Option 1-A, the Ambassador made himself clear: (1) [text not declassfied]

(2) [text not declassfied]

(3) [text not declassfied] he was in favor of: (a) encouraging good relations with the regime;

(b) improving ties with Morocco and Tunisia;

(c) [text not declassfied]

(d) [text not declassfied]

(e) [text not declassfied]

(f) [text not declassfied]

c. There was a lengthy exchange on [text not declassfied]
d. [text not declassfied]
e. In summing up, Ambassador Palmer requested a period of time in which to work [text not declassfied] Once more it became apparent that procedures are actually subservient to personalities and that, in most instances, individuals will work out their own problems.

[text not declassfied]

Distribution Mr. Mitchell

Mr. Packard

Mr. Johnson

Admi. Moorer

Mr. Helms

7 JUL 1970
MEMORANDUM [text not declassfied]

SUBJECT :

Status Report or Libya [text not declassfied] Action:

Libya - June 1970

[text not declassfied] directed that Libyan developments be reviewed periodically at approximately three-month intervals. The short term outlook for Libya, the actions taken in support of Option 1-A (see attachment for elaboration of this Option) and the nature of additional [text not declassfied] activity which might be taken to influence the Libyan Arab Republic Government (LARG) are outlined below for further [text not declassfied] consideration.

I. SHORT TERM OUTLOOK FOR U.S. INTERESTS IN LIBYA

In an up-dating of the December 1969 National Intelligence Estimate (NIE) 36.5-69, prepared on 6 May 1970, the Office of National Estimates concluded that the earlier assessment which stated that “the main interests of the U.S. are not endangered by the new government in Libya” remained valid but conceded that “there are, however, many potential problem spots in U.S.-Libyan relations.” Ambassador Palmer, reporting in a message to the Department of State on 8 June 1970, concluded: “On balance, we see no hard evidence at this time that the Libyan Government (LARG) intends a precipitate early break in relations, except as it may see its options foreclosed by some development in the Middle East area or our Middle East policy.”

In spite of these cautiously optimistic judgments, the public posture of the Libyan Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) has been increasingly hostile to U.S. interests in Libya; the Egyptian presence in Libya has grown, and the Libyans have taken modest steps to expand their relations with the USSR. While maintaining a rather inflexible position in negotiations with the oil companies on posted prices, the LARG has harassed Occidental Petroleum and Amoseas by decreeing sharp cutbacks in production and blocked exports on liquified natural gas from Esso's newly completed plant. Steps have been taken toward closer coordination of policies with the UAR and Sudan, and UAR military forces and training facilities in Libya have reportedly been augmented. Partially as a bargaining tactic with the U.S. oil companies, the LARG flirted with the Soviet Union by sending its Minister of Petroleum to Moscow and welcoming a Soviet geological survey team in Libya shortly thereafter.

In none of these areas has there been a significant development that dramatically alters the situation that existed in February 1970 when the [text not declassfied] approved Option 1-A. Events in the Middle East during this period have, however, produced a further erosion in the U.S. position. The policies of the Libyan regime vis-à-vis the United States will be significantly influenced by the course of the Middle East crisis surrounding the Arab-Israel war and the Palestine problem. For example, a decision to sell Phantoms to Israel, or a decision not to deliver those F-5's for which the LARG has contracted, will have an important impact on U.S.-Libya relations.

[Omitted here are specific actions taken in support of Option No. 1-A]

1 Source: National Security Council Files, Nixon Intelligence Files, Libya. Secret; Eyes Only.

67. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Deputy Director for Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency (Karamessines), Washington, August 20, 1970 67. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Deputy Director for Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency (Karamessines), Washington, August 20, 19701

Washington, August 20, 1970

UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE
FOR POLITICAL AFFAIRS
WASHINGTON
August 20, 1970

Dear Tom:

Because of the amount of detail involved, just for your background [text not declassfied] I am sending to you the attached draft of a memorandum addressed from me to you on Libyan Option 1(a), which was the basis of discussion of this matter by Ambassador Palmer and myself last Tuesday.

Sincerely,
[signed]
U. Alexis Johnson

Enclosure.
Mr. Thomas H. Karamessines,
Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency.

cc: [text not declassfied]

TAB A
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington, D.C. 20520

MEMORANDUM FOR:

Mr. Thomas H. Karamessines Deputy Director for Plans Central Intelligence Agency.

FROM:J - Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson Under Secretary for Political Affairs

SUBJECT:

Libya - [text not declassified] Option 1(a)

We have given considerable thought within the Department to Option 1(a) and come to the following conclusions.

General Considerations

1. The regime is solidly in power.

2. Its intense suspicion of all foreigners and its massive surveillance of foreign missions greatly restrict foreign maneuverability.

3. Any actions which heighten its suspicion of foreign interests can only increase the danger to those interests.

4. The activism and impetuosity of the regime will be blunted only through a doing and learning process. In the absence of these factors, outsiders have little if any capability to guide, cajole, force or trap the regime into different courses.

5. Although the regime has taken a number of steps against our interests, it would be a mistake to interpret all such steps as anti-American. If Swiss companies were producing 88% of Libya's oil, the LARG would undoubtedly still be doing just what it is now to obtain a greater return from and more control over the industry.

6. We have had some influence over the LARG through traditional diplomacy: (a) the phase-out of Wheelus has lowered LARG suspicions; (b) the rate of expulsions has greatly diminished; (c) anti-US propaganda has lessened somewhat; (d) the LARG has resisted temptations so far to accuse us of being involved in plotting; (e) we undoubtedly have more frank and useful dialogue with LARG than any other Western power, with the exception of the French.

7. The bulk of our economic interests in Libya are still intact.

8. The LARG wants continued access to our science and technology. It has welcomed several initiatives we have taken in this field and has made some itself. It has recently decided to send almost all of its overseas students to the United States.

9. We are still in business with the only radical Arab State with which we have diplomatic relations.

Against this background, I have the following specific comments on Option 1(a): A. [text not declassfied] 1. [text not declassfied]

2. [text not declassfied]

3. [text not declassfied]

B. [text not declassfied] 1. [text not declassfied]

2. [text not declassfied]

C. [text not declassfied] 1. [text not declassfied] [Page 3 not declassified.]

4. [text not declassfied]

5. [text not declassfied]

6. [text not declassfied]

7. [text not declassfied]

8. [text not declassfied]

We would welcome your reactions to the foregoing considerations and your views on further actions that might be undertaken in this regard.

AF:Ambassador Palmer:sp

1 Source: National Security Council Files, Nixon Intelligence Files, Libya. Secret.

68. Memorandum From Samuel Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, August 28, 1970 68. Memorandum From Samuel Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, August 28, 19701

Washington, August 28, 1970

INFORMATION
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON 21584
August 28, 1970

MEMORANDUM FOR

DR. KISSINGER

FROM:Samuel M. Hoskinson [SH initialed]

SUBJECT:

Plot against Libyan Government

State has sent over for your attention a file of cables (Tab A) which raise the possibility of some form of armed intervention in Libya by a combined group of Libyan exiles and mercenaries. The consensus of State and CIA is that this activity, if it takes place, is designed essentially to free certain figures prominent under the old regime from prison. The plotters are billing it as a coup attempt but from their description it is most likely a foray to release political prisoners or a crude provocation.

The conspirators have sought our help but we have made it clear that we have no desire to become involved in this operation. Their plot, according to our embassy in Tripoli, seems doomed to political self-defeat and even if successful would only result in the release of detention of a group of undesirables anyway. More importantly if we were suspected of involvement by the Government we could expect a “violent reaction” and strong reaction against our interests in Libya. The embassy concludes that “the operation only makes sense for the instigator and possibly one of his jailed friends, certainly not for the U.S. or West generally.”

All contacts with the plotters have been broken off and precautions are being taken to insure that no U.S. military activity could inadvertently be connected with the operation should it take place. CIA, however, is attempting to run down further information through its channels [text not declassfied]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Top Secret. Sent for information. The attached list of cables is not printed.

69. Memorandum From the Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Moore) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, December 31, 1970 69. Memorandum From the Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Moore) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, December 31, 19701

Washington, December 31, 1970

BRIEFING MEMORANDUM
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington, D.C. 20520
December 31, 1970

TO:

The Secretary

THROUGH:

S/S

FROM: AF -C. Robert Moore, Acting [RM initialed]

SUBJECT:

F-5s for Libya - Your Meeting-of January 6, 1971, 11:OO a.m.

Ambassador Palmer has again been pressed by the Commander of the Libyan Air Force for an immediate decision on the F-5s for Libya. The Libyan Commander has indicated his awareness that the aircraft are virtually ready for delivery. He stated that he had waited “long enough” and that he now had to know where he stood. He concluded by saying that if the decision was not communicated to him shortly, he would have to bring the “RCC back into the act”. The Ambassador has urged that we respond by January 8.

The policy issues at stake remain unchanged since this subject was outlined in my memorandum of December 4, 1970 to the Acting Secretary (attached). AF continues to share Ambassador Palmer's view that it would be in the national interest for us to deliver the planes.

Attachment: Memo of 12/4/70

Copies to: NEA - Joseph Sisco

PM - Ronald Spiers

H - Colgate Prentice

L - Mrs. E. Verville

Clearance:

AP/N: James J. Blake

AF/N:ALLowrie:rjp

12/31/70

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington, D.C. 20520
DEC 4 1970

TO:

The Secretary

THROUGH:

The Under Secretary S/S Theodore L. Eliot Jr.

FROM: AF -David D. Newsom [DN initialed]

SUBJECT:

F-5s for Libya - ACTION MEMORANDUM

discussion:

The eight Northrop P-5 fighter aircraft which the United States agreed to sell the previous Libyan regime in June 1969 will leave the production line this December. They will be ready for delivery on schedule in January and February. Officially, we have had “under review” since March the question of whether it would be in our interest to deliver these aircraft. Ambassador Palmer believes strongly that we must now decide this question since he may be asked by the Libyans at any time regarding our intentions and he cannot indefinitely indicate that no decision has been made. Defense has also asked for a decision regarding the disposition of these planes in order to complete its programming for the remainder of the fiscal year.

A decision on this subject could conceivably be delayed until perhaps March by disposing of these eight planes through the military assistance program to another recipient than Libya, and by earmarking another eight for delivery to Libya before the summer of 1971. AF does not believe the chances of a change for the better in our bilateral relations with Libya or in the Middle East situation between now and March are significant enough to warrant a continued postponement of a decision. Although as noted below PM is in agreement in principle with going ahead with delivery, it points out that a decision to proceed at this time would probably result in an adverse reaction from Congress thus jeopardizing the pending FY 1971 supplemental request for military assistance funds. PM therefore makes its concurrence in this memo contingent on the supplemental request.

Defense has also raised the possibility of delivering the eight F-5s to Libya out of the production of Northrup's Spanish licensee. Such deliveries would, however, still require United States approval, and those who object to delivery in principle would no doubt feel that this procedure was merely a subterfuge.

The Ambassador believes that we should deliver the eight planes on schedule to Libya under the contract of June 1969. AF and DOD agree with him. NEA does not.

The reasons for delivering the planes are several.

- We have a valid contract with the Libyan Government, although it was signed with the pre-revolution regime. The contract does contain a “changed circumstances” clause which L believes could be invoked to justify non-delivery (see attachment.) However, PM believes that doing so would set an undesirable precedent and cast doubts on our role as a reliable military supplier.

- Militarily, the eight planes are inconsequential in the Middle East situation. Their flying range is limited and logistical support of them in a combat zone over the canal would be either difficult or impossible. Libyan pilot and mechanic skills are limited severely in number and quality. Even with these planes Libya would have only 18 fighters.

- Politically, the delivery of the planes might reassure the Libyan regime regarding our intentions toward it. Failure to fulfill the contract would eliminate for a long time any basis for mutual confidence that may exist. It could also provoke retaliation by the regime against our diplomatic presence in Libya, and, at worst, cause a break in relations with the last “radical” Arab regime with which we have such relations. Less likely, but still possible, would be a retaliation against the American oil interest. Non-fulfillment would certainly confirm to the regime its conviction that our policy toward the Arab world is negative and toward Israel, positive.

NEA does not disagree basically with the foregoing reasoning. However, it believes that: - We would encounter substantial Congressional, press and public criticism for “arming” a government which advocates a military solution to the Palestine problem and has been increasingly unfriendly in its attitude toward the United States. This criticism would be increased as a result of the political federation of Libya with the UAR and Sudan which Syria has now joined. H, in general, shares this estimate of the possible Congressional reaction.

- Israel, and its friends in the United States, would demand still more military assistance to offset the addition to Libya's air force, thus adding to pressures for escalation in military supply to the area.

- Libya does not need the planes for its defense. Its defense needs will be more than met by the purchase of a substantial number of French Mirages, delivery of which should begin soon. Critics of the F-5 transaction would make this point. (Originally, about 104 Mirages were ordered, but this number may be reduced to 60, according to unconfirmed intelligence reports.)

- Libyan preoccupation with our Middle East policy means that there is little we can do under present circumstances that is likely to change their attitude toward us basically. Despite our withdrawal from Wheelus, our attempts to maintain good relations have been basically one-sided.

- Deliveries of aircraft to Libya, in light of its closer relation with the UAR, in effect are deliveries to Egypt. Even the French are beginning to get concerned that further moves toward federation raise serious questions regarding Libya's commitment that the Mirages would not fall into third party hands and not be used in the Arab-Israel dispute. Libya is in no position to give such an assurance to the United States and, even if it did, it would be meaningless.

NEA's view is shared at the staff level of the White House which regards the possible disadvantages of fulfilling the contract as outweighing the possible advantages of doing so.

Some consideration has been given to the possibility of delivery of the planes to the Libyans on the condition that they transfer them and the nine F-5s they now have to Tunisia through a bilateral arrangement with that country after 17 Mirages had been delivered to Libya. NEA and H do not believe this arrangement would off set the adverse public and Congressional reaction that would be generated if we were to go through with the deal now, or deflect increased Israeli demands on us. Defense would have no objection in principle to the arrangement but notes that it could not provide the funds that might be needed to make it work. (Tunisian financial resources are sharply limited.)

Thus, the basic question is whether the U.S. interest would be best served by (a) informing the Department of Defense that delivery of the F-5s to Libya is to be made on schedule, or (b) informing the Department of Defense that the contract is not to be fulfilled. Your approval of one of these two options is requested below.

If the decision is to deliver the aircraft, Ambassador Palmer would have to notify the Libyan Government so that arrangements may be made by the Libyan Air Force to receive them. If the decision is negative, the tactics and timing of informing the Libyans would be left to Ambassador Palmer.

Option 1

Inform the Department of Defense that delivery of the eight F-5s to Libya is to be made on schedule pursuant to the June 1969 contract.

Approve
Disapprove

Option 2

Inform the Department of Defense that the June 1969 contract with Libya for eight F-5s is not to be fulfilled and the eight planes covered by it may be disposed of elsewhere.

Approve
Disapprove

Attachment:

Legal Memorandum.

AP/N:JJBlake:rjp

12/2/70

Clearance: PM/MAS:FDorough (draft)

NEA:JJSisco (draft)

H:Amd. Symmes (subs)

1 Source: National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret. The paper was drafted by Blake, and cleared by PM/MAS, NEA, and H. In telegram 196791 to Tripoli, Tunis, and USCINCEUR, December 9, the Department explained that it saw no way to deliver the F—5s to Libya for later transfer to a third party. (Ibid.)

70. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Deputy Director for Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency (Critchfield) to the Director of Current Intelligence (Parmenter), Washington, February 23, 1971 70. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Deputy Director for Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency (Critchfield) to the Director of Current Intelligence (Parmenter), Washington, February 23, 19711

Washington, February 23, 1971

23 February 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR:

Director of Current Intelligence Attention: Mr. William Parmenter

SUBJECT:

LIBYA

1. It is my impression that we may be approaching a critical point in Libya; I underline “may” because of the tenuous judgements involved on the following: a. that Qaddafi is gradually taking personal control of the government and is supported by the entourage described in the attached cable;

b. that Sadat and the Egyptians are probably very unhappy with Qaddafi and may be considering an effort to unseat him:

c. that JALLUD is the Egyptian candidate to replace Qaddafi;

d. that [text not declassfied] is very hard-line on the Libyan regime and gives some support and encouragement to those who would oust it;

e. that Qaddafi is increasingly open and active in his opposition to communist influence in the Arab world;

f. that the USSR is unhappy with Qaddafi;

g. that the Libyans are engaged in preparations to run the Libyan oil industry, at a reduced level, with service contracts and direct marketing in Europe and elsewhere;

h. that Qaddafi and his supporters are prepared to make one last effort to preserve a basically U.S./Western European orientation of Libyan society and its oil-based economy; and

i. that the oil companies are prepared to stand their ground at all costs against Libyan demands that are far out of line with the Gulf-OPEC agreement.

2. One of the most immediate problems facing us is: “Who is making the decisions in Libya?” I have not seen any reporting from the Embassy that suggests that JALLUD has been downgraded and that the relatively unknown Sulieman Qaradha (formerly Qaddafils private secretary) and Al Huni are the dominant influences on foreign policy — including the critical decisions that lie ahead on Libya's role in the oil world. [text not declassfied] Does OCI have a clear view of this situation?

3. It is possible that the four OPEC producers in the Mediterranean will reach agreement on guidelines which will then be the basis for the individual country negotiations with the individual companies; this is apparently what the Libyans have in mind. The positions of the Libyans and the oil companies appear to be too widely separated to be easily bridged by the complicated process of negotiations now prospect. [text not declassfied] If pressures develop in this process, it is clear that the wings are fairly crowded with parties that are anxious to rush on stage and play a role in exploiting the shaky situation which may develop. The British, some of the Europeans (Germany and Italy for example), the Egyptians, the Israelis, the Libyan exiles and, finally, the Soviets have objectives and interests in Libya which, in the present context, are not congruent with those of the U.S. Any of these might, in a rapidly changing situation in Libya, be tempted to improve its position at the expense of the U.S.

4. I have no recommendations to make at this time; the sole purpose of this memorandum is to elicit thought, stimulate collection of information and to seek your assistance in continuing the analysis of this problem in the days and weeks immediately ahead.

James Critchfield
Special Assistant to the DDP

Attachment

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 79-01229A, Box 1, AA—1, AF DIV, 1971. Secret. The attachment is not printed. The memorandum has Critchfield's typed signature with an indication he signed the original.

71. Telegram 373 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, February 24, 1971, 1147Z. 71. Telegram 373 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, February 24, 1971, 1147Z.1

February 24, 1971, 1147Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 373
P 241147Z FEB 71

43

ACTION SS-45

INFO OCT-01/046 W 032992

P 241147Z FEB 7

FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7442

INFO

AMEMBASSY BENGHAZI

TRIPOLI 373

SUBJ:

TOUR D'HORIZON WITH QADHAFI: F-5'S

1. I HAD HOUR AND THREE-QUARTER SESSEQN WITH QADHAFI FEBRUARY 23 AT AZIZIYAH BARRACKS. KIKHYA ANDMARTHINSEN ONLY OTHERS PRESENT. QADHAFI TURNED UP IN CASUAL SPORT ATTIRE AND WAS RELAXED AND CORDIAL THROUGHOUT MEETING. FOLLOWING ARE HIGHLIGHTS: MEMCON BEING POUCHED.

2. AFTER I MADE PRESENTATION BASED ON POINTS INCLUDED STATE 4025 (EXCLUDING PARAS 3 AND 4, WHICH INTERVENING EVENTS HAVE MUTED SOMEWHAT), QADHAFI RESPONDED AT SOME LENGTH.

3. HE SAID THERE ARE NO REAL ISSUES OUTSTANDING BETHEEN USG AND LARG EXCEPT ARAB-ISRAEL DISPUTE. PERSONALITIES CHANGE BUT POLICIES OF STATES CONTINUE AND US POLICY CONTINUES TO BE ONE OF TOTAL COMMITMENT TO ISRAELIS. CONTINUATION OF THIS POLICY WILL HARM US INTERESTS, INCLUDING RELATIONS WITH ARAB COUNTRIES. REFERRING TO MY REMARKS ABOUT US DISAPPOINTMENT THAT RELATIONS DID NOT IMPROVE AS RESULT WHEELUS EVACUATION, ETC., QADHAFI SAID YOUNG INEXPERIENCED ARMY OFFICERS WHO SUCCEEDED TO POWER AFTER REVOLUTION WERE OPTIMISTIC WHEN USAF EVACUATED BASE THAT GOOD BILATERAL RELATIONSHIIP WOULD DEVELOP. BUT US HAS NOT RECOGNIZED THAT LAR PART OF ARAB NATION AND CANNOT ISOLATE ITSELF, AS MONARCHY TRIED TO DO, FROM REALITY OF UNITY OF ARABS. NO ARAB GOVERNMENT CAN DO SO HE ASSERTED, AND US MUST RECOGNIZE THIS FACT. IN THIS CONTEXT, IT IS CONTRADICTION FOR US TO ASPIRE To GOOD RELATIONS WITH ARABS, BECAUSE US RELATIONSHIP WITH ISRAELI, ENEMY OF THE ARAB NATION, PRECLUDES THIS. HE ASKED WHAT IS REASON FOR THIS SPECIAL US RELATIONSHIP WITH ISRAEL: HE COULD SEE NO HISTORICAL, GEOGRAPHICAL, RELIGIOUS OR OTHER RATIONAL BASIS FOR IT. THUS, HE MUST CONCLUDE, USG DOESN'T LIKE ARABS: “WHY DOES US HATE ARABS?” HE ASKED. HE SAID THAT HE LEARNED IN CAIRO AND ELSEWHERE THAT OTHER ARAB LEADERS AGREE THAT SOLE PROBLEM THEY HAVE WITH USG IS AMERICAN COMMITMENT TO ISRAEL. “WE FEAR US WILL LOSE US BECAUSE OF THIS COMMITMENT.

4. QADHAFI TALKED ABOUT ROLE OF USSR AND COMMUNISM IN AREA. “WE ARE AGAINST COMMUNISM BUT WITH RUSSIAN” HE SAID, “BECAUSE THE USSR HELPS THE ARABS.” HE WENT ON TO ADD “WE BOTH, AS MUSLIMS AND CHRISTIANS—PEOPLE OF THE BOOK: ABHOR ATHEISTIC COMMUNISM. BUT ON POLITICAL GROUNDS ARAB MUST BE FRIENDS TO THE USSR WHICH BEFRIENDS THEM AND CANNOT BE WITH A (CHRISTIAN) WEST WHICH BEFRIENDS ISRAEL.

5. QADHAFI ALSO RAISED TWO SPECIFIC MATTERS OF CONCERN TO HIM. HE INDICATED THAT HE HAS SEVERAL INTELLIGENCE REPORTS THAT CIA IS PLOTTING AGAINST REVOLUTIONARY REGIME. HE THEN WENT ON TO SAY THAT FOR A WHILE AFTER EVACUATION LARG HAD ORDERED ITS “OFFICIAL” NEWSPAPER AL-THAWRA AND LIBYAN RADIO TO CEASE ATTACKS ON USG. HOWEVER THIS BAN HAD BEEN LIFTED IN VIEW US PRO-ISRAELI POLICY. MOREOVER, UNWARRANTED ATTACKS AND CRITICISM OF LARG AND LARG PERSONALITIES, INCLUDING QADHAFI HIMSELF, APPEAR IN US MEDIA. HE CITED RECENT TIME MAGAZINE ARTICLE, SEVERAL REPOTS IN NEW YORK TIMES—“WE SEEK OUR RIGHTS” RE OIL, QADHAFI COMMENTED, “WE ARE NOT IRRESPONSIBLE"—AND ARTICLE IN NATIONAL REVIEW. THESE INDICATE AMERICAN WRITERS MOTIVATED BY HATRED AND BLINDNESS VIS-A-VIS LARG.

6. AIMS OF LARG POLICY HAVE BEEN CLEAR SINCE SEPTEMBER REVOLUTION, QADHAFI SAID. THESE ARE (A) TRUE NON-ALIGNMENT, INCLUDING OBTAINING ARMS FROM EAST AND WEST, REFUSING SOVIET PRESENCE DESPITE ACQUISITION SOVIET ARMS, AND DENYING NAVAL VISITS REQUESTED BY USSR JUST AS US REQUESTS FOR VISITS WOULD BE DENIED, (B) ENMITY TOWARDS OUR ENEMY, (C) FRIENDSHIP TOWARDS OUR FRIENDS, AND (D) ELIMINATION AND PROBIBITION OF FOREIGN BASES. “WE THOUGHT USG WOULD ENCOURAGE THIS POLICY,” HE SAID, “WE ARE NON-ALIGNED, WE SEEK OUR RIGHTS, WE ARE FRIENDS TO OUR FRIENDS: THERE IS NO REASON FOR US TO RESENT US.”

7. I RESPONDED COVERING THE SAME POINTS QADHAFI HAD ADDRESSED. OUR TALK I SAID WAS PROOF THAT THE BASIC PROBLEM BETWEEN US IS THE ARAB-ISRAELI DISPUTE. I WELCOMED THE CHANCE TO DISCUSS IT AND HOPED FOR MORE FRANK EXCHANGES WITH HIM AND OTHER LARG OFFICIALS ON THIS SUBJECT. EVERY NATION DECIDES ITS POLICY IN THE LIGHT OF ITS NATIONAL INTERESTS AND US POLICY IS TO DO ALL IN ITS POWER TO SEEK JUST, HONORABLE, AND PEACEFUL SETTLEMENT IN ME DISPUTE SINCE PEACE IN AREA IS IN OUR INTERESTS. USG UNDERSTANDS WIDESPREAD DESIRE FOR ARAB UNITY, SEES PARALLELS WITH AMERICAN HISTORICAL EXPERIENCE AND SYMPATHIZES WITH GOAL OF UNION BASED ON DESIRES OF PEOPLES.

8. US ADMIRES LARG'S POLICY OF NON-ALIGNMENT WHICH, NOTED, HAS BEEN REFLECTED BOTH IN WORDS AND DEEDS.

43

ACTION SS-45

INFO OCT-01/046 W 032992

P 241147Z FEB 7

FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7443

INFO

AMEMBASSY BENGHAZI

TRIPOLI 373

THERE, IS NO HATRED OR RESENTMENT TOWARDS ARABS IN GENERAL, TOWARDS ANY OTHER ARAB REGIME, OR TOWARDS THE LARG. THE US HAS MILLIONS OF CITIZENS OF ARAB ORIGIN; IT WANTS ONLY FRIENDSHIP OF ALL PEOPLES IN THE AREA. REGARDING LIBYA, I SAID, THE USG RECOGNIZED THAT THERE WERE WEAKNESSES IN THE PRE-REVOLUTIONARY SOCIETY AND UNDERSTANDS THE LARG'S DESIRES FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND A BETTER LIFE. I REMINDED QADHAFI THAT OUR OFFERS TO HELP ACHIEVE THESE DESIRES REMAIN OPEN. THOUGH HE DID NOT RESPOND SPECIFICALLY TO MY SUGGESTION THAT US COULD HELP NOW IN CERTAIN DEVELOPMENT FIELDS, QADHAFI, UNLIKE JALLUD, DID NOT REJECT THE CONCEPT OUT OF HAND. ON CONTRARY, HE EVINCED KEEN INTEREST WHEN I DESCRIBED SUCCESS TUNIS HAD ACHIEVED THROUGH USE IMPROVED WHEAT SEEDS DEVELOPED BY US. QADHAFI, LIKE JALLUD, IN FINAL ANALYSIS, HAS STRONG PRAGMATIC STREAK.

9. RETURNING TO QUESTION OF US ROLE IN THE ME DISPUTE, I POINTED OUT THAT WHILE OUR POLICY HAS BEEN CONSISTENT, IMPORTANT DIFFERENCES IN APPROACH HAVE EMERGED RECENTLY. I CITED PRESIDENT NIXON'S STATEMENT THAT US IS NEITHER PRO-ARAB NOR PRO-ISRAEL, BUT RATHER IS PRO-PEACE, AND STRESSED THAT GOAL OF US POLICY IS ACHIEVEMENT OF JUST, PERMANENT PEACE. I EMPHASIZED THAT PRESENT ADMINISTRATION IS MOVING ACTIVELY IN QUEST FOR PEACE. GUAR HAS GIVEN USG A CHANCE TO PROVE IT MEANS WHAT IT SAYS. I SUGGESTED LARG SHOULD GIVE US SAME CHANCE.

10. RESPONDING TO QADHAFI'S SPECIFIC COMPLAINTS, I DENIED CATEGORICALLY THAT CIA PLOTTING AGAINST REGIME. I CITED FALSE DOCUMENTS, SUCH AS INFAMOUS FORGED MESSAGE RE RABAT SUMMIT, WHICH EX-FON MIN BWAYSIR KNEW ABOUT, AS EXAMPLE OF HOW THOSE UNFRIENDLY TO US ATTEMPT TO DISCREDIT US WITH OTHER NATIONS. I WENT ON TO REMIND QADHAFI THAT THERE IS NO OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER IN US AND THAT AMERICAN PRESS IS COMPLETELY FREE. THUS, PRESS MAY BE ILL-INFORMED OR MAY PRINT IRRESPONSIBLE ITEMS SUCH AS NATIONAL REVIEW ARTICLE WHICH I POINTED OUT SPEAKS TO AND FOR ONLY A SMALL SEGMENT OF US POPULATION.

11. QADHAFI TOOK UP THE “PLOT” ISSUE AGAIN BRIEFLY AND VOLUNTERRED VIEW THAT ANY COUP IN LAR WOULD LIKELY MEAN TAKEOVER BY EXTREME RIGHTISTS. AFTER POPULATION'S EXPOSURE TO “REPUBLICAN REGIME” PEOPLE WOULD REACT AND RIGHTISTS WOULD BE THROWN OUT BY “MORE EXTREME LEFTIST” COUNTER COUP, AND SO FORTH, A PROCESS, HE SAID, FROM WHICH NO ONE WOULD BENEFIT. I SAID THAT WE AGREED WHOLEHEARTEDLY AND THAT HE COULD BE SURE WE WOULD NOT BECOME SO INVOLVED.

12. QADHAFI TURNED TO QUESTION ARMS SUPPLIES TO PARTIES. HE ASKED IF USG WOULD SELL PHANTOMS TO ANY ARAB COUNTRY. OBSERVING THAT HIS QUESTION VERY HYPOTHETICAL, I SAID USG WOULD CONSIDER SUCH A REQUEST IN THE CONTEXT OF THE BALANCE OF POWER IN THE AREA. US IS CONCERNED, I SAID, TO MAINTAIN THE BALANCE IN ORDER TO FOSTER A PEACEFUL SETTLEMENT. QADHAFI OBJECTED THAT US ARMS SUPPLIES TO ISRAEL SINCE 1967 HAVE PERMITTED THE ISRAELIS TO RETAIN TERRITORIES SEIZED THROUGH AGGRESSION. I REPLIED THAT US ARMS SHIPMENTS TO ISRAEL, MADE RELUCTANTLY AND IN A LIMITED MANNER, WERE NECESSARY TO SAFEGUARD THE BALANCE OF POWER WHICH THREATENED BY MASSIVE SOVIET ARMS SUPPLY, AVOID FURTHER FIGHTING, AND PERMIT THE ACHIEVEMENT OF A PEACEFUL SOLUTION TO THE PROBLEM. BUT, QADHAFI ARGUED, THE ARABS HAVE A RIGHT TO EXPEL THE AGGRESSOR AND TO LIBERATE THEIR OCCUPIED TERRITORIES. I RESPONDED THAT US SEEKS SAME GOAL OF RESTORING ARAB TERRITORY; WE SEEK THIS OBJECTIVE IN CONTEXT OF PEACE.

13. QADHAFI ASKED ABOUT PROCURING SIDEWINDERS FOR F-5'S AND FIELD ARTILLERY FOR LARA. I TOLD HIM THAT CONGRESS HAS PROHIBITED SALES OF SIDEWINDERS TO AFRICAN STATES BECAUSE MISSILES ARE VERY COSTLY AND WE WISH TO AVOID SOPHISTICATED ARMS RACE IN CONTINENT WHICH DESPARATELY NEEDS RESOURCES FOR ECONOMIC DEVELDPMENT. QADHAFI TOOK THIS PHILOSOPHICALLY AND ACKNOWLEDGED WISDOM OF SUCH RESTRAINTS. RE PURCHASE OF 170 MM GUNS, I SAID PROSPECTS ARE NOT BRIGHT BECAUSE OF FMS LIMITATIONS AND FACT SUCH EQUIPMENT NOT AVAILABLE COMMERCIALLY. QADHAFI SOMEWHAT SCORNFULLY OBSERVED THAT THE US ALWAYS SAYS “NO” TO SUCH ARMS REQUESTS WHILE THE USSR IS READY TO RESPOND AFFIRMATIVELY; SAME PROBLEM FACED NASSER AND AS RESULT HE WAS “PUSHED” TO COOPERATE WITH USSR. “WE MAY BE PUSHED” SAME WAY,” HE SAID. “WE NEED FIELD ARTILLERY—EITHER THE US 170 MM'S OR THE RUSSIAN 130 MM'S.” IF NECESSARY LAR WILL PURCHASE GUNS FROM RUSSIANS. QADHAFI DID NOT ANSWER WHEN I ASKED HIM HOW MANY 170 MM GUNS THE LARG REQUIRES, BUT WHEN I REMARKED ON THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE APPROACHES OF THE US AND THE USSR TO SUCH QUESTIONS, HE SMILED AND ACKNOWLEDGED “THAT'S A PROBLEM OF A DEMOCRACY.” I ASKED HIM WHETHER HE THOUGHT SOVIET READINESS TO PROVIDE ARMS WAS PRIMARILY BECAUSE OF THEIR CONCERN FOR ARAB INTERESTS OR TO FURTHER THEIR OWN WIDER INTERESTS. HE SHRUGGED AND SAID SOVIETS MIGHT BE MOTIVATED BY “FRIENDSHIP” OR “PERHAPS BY DESIRE TO ANNOY UNITED STATES.”

14. IT WOULD APPEAR THAT KIKHYA CONTRARY TO MY EARLIER IMPRESSION (TRIPOLI 185) HAD NOT GOTTEN THE MESSAGE ABOUT THE RELATIONSHIP OF MY TALK WITH QADHAFI TO THE F-5 DECISION, SINCE AT THE END OF OUR MEETING HE HAD NOT RAISED THE SUBJECT. IN AN EFFORT DRAW HIM OUT, I REMARKED THAT NO DECISION HAS AS YET BEEN MADE BY THE USG AND ASKED IF LARG IS STILL INTERESTED IN THE PLANES. QADHAFI APPEARED SURPRISED THAT THERE WAS ANY DOUBT IN MY MIND AND QUICKLY RESPONDED “YES” AND ASKED IF THERE WERE ANY NEWS. I SAID THAT I WOULD UNDERTAKE TO GET A FIRM RESPONSE SOON.

15. OUR COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS WILL FOLLOW IN SEPTELS.
GP-3

PALMER

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 LIBYA. Secret; Priority; Exdis. It was repeated to Benghazi. In the referenced telegram 4025 to Tripoli, January 9, the Department had advised that the “consensus is that fulfillment [of the F—5] contract difficult justify in terms current Libyan posture toward Middle East peace initiative, their present attitude toward US and US interests in Libya, and generally poor prospects for any marked improvement.” Paragraph 3 dealt with expulsions of American citizens from Libya and paragraph 4 with the petroleum negotiations. (Ibid., DEF 12-5 LIBYA) In telegram 185 from Tripoli, January 26, Palmer discussed the F—5s with MUFA Undersecretary KIKHYA. (Ibid.) In a subsequent comment, telegram 381 from Tripoli, February 24, Palmer wrote that there was “nothing new” in Qadhafi's emphasis on the U.S.-Israeli relationship, but that he was struck by the Libyan leader's commitment to non-alignment, his pragmatism, and the cordiality of his reception. (Ibid.)

72. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 18, 1971 72. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 18, 19711

Washington, March 18, 1971

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION
March 18, 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR

DR. KISSINGER

FROM: Harold H. SaunderS [Hal]

SUBJECT:

F-5 Aircraft for Libya

One of the issues that has been hanging around for a long time may come to a point of decision in the next month. I believe the decision is self-evident, but I do want to acquaint you with the issue.

Prior to the Nixon Administration and prior to the Libyan coup, the US had entered into a contract selling a small number of F-5 aircraft to Libya. Ten were delivered long ago and eight remain to be delivered under the contract. Delivery of the final eight has been withheld because of the political situation in Libya and the present government's position toward the Arab-Israeli conflict. Also, the rationale for our involving ourselves with the Libyan air force—our retention of Wheelus airbase ended with our departure from Wheelus.

I personally cannot conceive how we could defend sending any combat aircraft to Libya under the present circumstances. Therefore, I see it as a foregone conclusion that we will not go through with this contract.

Ambassador Palmer, however, will be back here on consultation next month, attempting to persuade Secretary Rogers to go ahead with the sale. His rationale is that we need to maintain some line to this Libyan government.

My answer to that is that this Libyan government is not going to like us no matter what we do.

I assume you agree.

Yes [HK initialed]
No
MAR 30 1971

MAR 19, 1971

HAK:
I sympathize with Hal's view but (1) the F-5's can't do any significant harm in the Arab-Israeli contest, (2) if we don't sell them the French or the Russians will and (3) there may be a way we could use them to loosen up the aid talks (and here we have a real economic interest).

Obviously there would be domestic criticism unless a good aid settlement emerges.

RTK

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Secret. Sent for action. Although Richard Kennedy registered his dissent in an attached memorandum, Kissinger initialed his agreement on March 30.

73. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 27, 1971 73. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 27, 19711

Washington, March 27, 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR:

THE PRESIDENT

FROM: HENRY KISSINGER

SUBJECT:

International Oil Situation — Libyan Phase

Negotiations between the major oil companies and the oil ministers of the Mediterranean oil countries have reached a difficult period.

Libya, which represents the Mediterranean countries, has demanded: - a substantial increase in the posted price of oil, on which taxes are based;

- that the companies reinvest a portion of their profits in the producing countries;

- and a bonus payment to the Mediterranean countries due to the savings realized by the companies because of the lower transportation costs for oil from Mediterranean, as opposed to Persian Gulf, terminals to Europe.

The oil companies are worried that Iraq and Algeria will support the Libyan price demands by participating in an oil embargo, should the companies reject Libya's proposals. They fear also that Libya and Algeria are determined to force a price settlement in the Mediterranean high enough above that recently reached between the companies and Persian Gulf producers in Tehran to cause the Persian Gulf countries to repudiate the Tehran agreement and ask for further increases in payments from the oil companies. (The Shah has said he would not do this but if the Mediterranean settlement is too high, domestic pressures may force him to do so.) The companies are concerned that if the Mediterranean companies do embargo oil the resulting oil shortage would be so intolerable to governments of consuming countries that they would then force the oil companies to accede to Libyan demands.

The companies are now considering their next moves. They have been told informally that they must meet Libya's demands by midnight on March 18 — (or else). However, Libya has so far avoided a major confrontation and can continue to do so in the present situation if she so wishes.

1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Box CL 293, Memoranda to the President, December 1970—April 1971. Secret. Sent for information. A March 31 notes reads “The President has seen.”

74. National Intelligence Estimate 36.5-71, Washington, April 30, 1971 74. National Intelligence Estimate 36.5-71, Washington, April 30, 19711

Washington, April 30, 1971

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
Libya
NIE 36.5-71 30 April 1971

NOTE

This Estimate assesses likely developments in Libyan policy, particularly with regard to international relations. Since the Libyan regime is a small and secretive group that appears to have formulated few long-range plans, there are areas of considerable uncertainty, and the judgments are necessarily tentative. Most are intended to apply only to the next year or two, although a few longer term trends also are indicated.

CONCLUSIONS

A. The Revolutionary Command Council (RCC), led by the 28 year-old Colonel Qadhafi, has gained great credit in Libya by forcing the evacuation of Western military bases and by winning huge increases in income from oil. It has done little to improve the lives of Libya's two million people or to provide for broad participation in the running of the country. It is not likely to move much farther in these areas in the months ahead, but since the expectations of the Libyan people are not very high, dissension will probably remain small in scale and geographically fragmented. We believe that the RCC has sufficient assets—in public acceptance, troops, and money—to maintain itself in office for the indefinite future.

B. Regarding oil, the RCC's short-term goals are to increase income and conserve Libya's assets. For the longer run, it wants a greater Libyan role in oil operations. Outright nationalization seems unlikely, at least in the next year or two, but steps to increase government control of the oil industry in Libya will continue.

C. In a sharp break with the previous regime's policy, the RCC has turned primarily to Egypt for military training and technical assistance and to France, the USSR, and Czechoslovakia for arms. Concurrently, it has continued to seek some of the weapons ordered from the UK and the US by the Idris regime, though it wants to change some of the orders. The government clearly wants an elaborate military establishment and prefers to avoid dependence on any single source of supply. But Libyan personnel resources are so severely limited that no amount of arms and money will give the Libyan Armed Forces the capacity to pose a measurable military threat to any of its neighbors, much less Israel.

D. The RCC wants to be important in Arab affairs. It has given a substantial portion of its income to other countries, largely to encourage unity efforts and to promote the anti-Israeli cause. Qadhafi has apparently been the prime advocate of the recently proclaimed federation of Egypt, Syria, and Libya. We doubt that it will become a significant supranational organization, but Qadhafi wants to cooperate with Egypt, derives some benefit from doing so, and by dint of the subsidy to Cairo, gains a limited voice on general Arab policy toward Israel. In any case, Libya's sheer financial ability to influence Arab—and even world—affairs will grow rapidly.

E. Libyan relations with the Great Powers are colored by Libya's fervent interest in the Arab-Israeli situation. The USSR gains some credit in Libya for its consistent support for the Arabs. Nevertheless, the RCC has shown no desire for close ties with Moscow. We believe that the RCC will continue to keep both the US and the USSR at arm's length, while seeking to diversify its ties to other Western Powers and to strengthen its relations with the Eastern Arabs.

F. Certain Arab-Israeli events could greatly alter Libya's international outlook. A major outbreak of hostilities could lead to expulsion of the US official presence and to a Libyan move against one or more of the oil companies. A settlement, on the other hand, could reduce Libyan involvement in eastern Arab affairs; in time, if it held, the greatest single impediment to US-Libyan relations would decline in importance.

DISCUSSION

I. THE FIRST 18 MONTHS

1. Two major and immensely popular changes have marked the first year and a half in office of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC)—evacuation by the US and UK of their bases and a whopping increase in payments by foreign oil producers operating in Libya. Both came in the area which the impatient young activists who make up the RCC consider paramount—achieving Libyan control over Libya's destiny. The RCC leaders know that the operations of the world oil industry are beyond their reach, but they are also acutely aware that in today's market Libya's role as nearby supplier of a fifth of Western Europe's oil gives them an unprecedented amount of leverage over Western nations. They remain ready to use that leverage to get increased revenue and, they hope, to affect the course of the Arab-Israeli confrontation.

2. The RCC appears to have consolidated its control, holding over half the ministerial posts and staffing the government with young men apparently loyal to itself. There are periodic reports of disgruntlement, plotting, and complaints, but—on the basis of the scanty evidence available—serious dissension appears to be small in scale and geographically fragmented. Old regime exiles may entertain hopes of a return to power and may mount periodic coup attempts, but we doubt that they have adequate support within the country to make them a serious threat to the RCC. The Cyrenaican Defense Force and the Tripolitanean Police, which might have served as focal points for discontent, have been disbanded; about half their members have been absorbed into the regular armed forces and the remainder have been retired or dismissed. The Cyrenaican tribes have been further subjected to government control by the transfer of title to all tribal lands to the state, which can henceforth permit or deny tribal use of the land and water. Two Egyptian commando battalions, of about 350 men each, are stationed respectively in Benghazi and Tripoli as security insurance for the regime.

3. Three RCC members stand out. Muammar Qadhafi, the 28 year-old Prime Minister, Defense Minister, and Chairman of the RCC, is clearly the most influential man in the regime. His colleagues are consulted, they sometimes argue heatedly with him, but in the end his view has usually prevailed. Qadhafi has on occasion appeared impetuous and emotional, and something of a zealot. Certain facets of policy—notably emphasis on public observance of religious forms and on close ties with Egypt—reflect in part the weight of his personal convictions. Qadhafi has been the prime advocate of new Arab unity schemes. Next to Qadhafi, the two most influential RCC members appear to be the Deputy Prime Ministers, 26 year-old Abd al-Sallam Jaluud (production, industry, and economy) and 27 year-old Abd al-Munim al-Huni (services, interior, and local government). Jaluud has played a prominent role in dealing with Westerners; he handled the discussions that led to the withdrawal of 6,000 US and British military personnel from Libya, as well as two sweeping revisions of agreements with foreign oil companies. Security is al-Huni's responsibility; he controls the national police force, established by the RCC to replace the tribal forces of the old regime, as well as the foreign and domestic intelligence services.

II. DOMESTIC OUTLOOK

4. The transformations in Libya's form of government and in its foreign relations have not been matched by major changes in Libyan social institutions or by a new role for the public in political life. The bulk of the population—which numbers only about two million—remains poor, agrarian, diseased, and illiterate. The social clock has been turned back in some respects; the RCC has imposed conformity to traditional customs on an urban elite minority that had become accustomed to a measure of social freedom. The educated younger generation, deprived of opportunities for political expression and participation under Idris, had high hopes for the new regime; these have been frustrated.

5. The RCC seems to be groping for some kind of political structure that will satisfy desires for popular participation without impinging upon the regime's freedom of action.RCC members have discussed the possibility of forming a single political party, presumably along the lines of Egypt's Arab Socialist Union. Qadhafi has promised that a constitution will be prepared and elections held at some unspecified time. The only overt political action by the regime to date has been a series of popular rallies addressed by individual members of the RCC; when members of the public presumed to criticize or question the government on these occasions, however, the RCC members seemed affronted.

6. Internal economic decisions have reflected uncertainty and inexperience at the top. Following the coup, the RCC suspended work on many publicly-financed projects, pending restudy of contracting procedures and awards, and the construction industry suffered. Trade and banking also slumped, especially when all major firms in both categories were forced to accede to majority ownership by Libyans. Expulsion of the resident Italian community (15,000-20,000 members) in mid-1970 eliminated most of the skilled artisans and modern-sector farmers in Tripolitania. However, the economic sectors most sharply affected were operated largely by and for foreigners. Subsequent government actions have tended to revive sectors of the economy that benefit Libyans. In May 1970, a new budget reinstated most of the suspended projects and increased allocations for economic development. Some assets that were foreign owned have been transferred to Libyans. On balance, the average income and living standard of Libyans probably has changed little since the revolution. Improvement, if any, has not been great, and shortcomings in housing, employment, medical facilities, and agricultural programs have given rise to complaints. A notable exception is the military, which has received substantial boosts in pay and perquisites.

7. Despite the many problems facing the RCC, dramatic political changes do not seem likely in the near future. There are no indications of differences of opinion within the RCC serious enough to trigger a rupture. Opposition from elements outside the RCC seems likely to remain fragmented for lack of a single compelling issue. If elections are actually held, Qadhafi presumably will be the only candidate for chief executive. Oil revenues will continue to give the regime sufficient resources to provide material goods more than adequate to satisfy Libyan expectations, which are not high. The RCC members do not seem disposed to focus their energies on the mundane problems of providing jobs, housing, and social services. They have concentrated on popular, emotional issues on which they have achieved important victories. However, the regime risks disappointing its constituency, now that such dramatic victories are past. Over time it could face real trouble from within its own ranks or from outsiders—e.g., a dissident group of military officers or members of one or another pan-Arab political party.

OIL

8. In its 1970 negotiations with the oil companies, the RCC insisted on compensation for past low receipts, especially in the early 1960s, when Libya was paid 10 to 15 cents per barrel less than the Middle Eastern average. It demanded a posted price1 increase, plus a very large payment representing a retroactive increase in the posted price back to the beginning of production for each company. To bring pressure on the companies to come to an agreement, as well as for conservation reasons, the RCC forced oil production down from 3.7 million barrels per day (bpd) to 2.9 million bpd. In the settlements reached in September 1970, which featured playing off oil companies against one another, the companies agreed to increase the posted price and agreed to settle the retroactive claim by increasing the tax rate from 50 to about 55 percent. As a result of the 1970 settlements, Libya was assured about $1.4 billion in 1971 for roughly the same amount of oil that provided revenues of $1.1 billion in 1969.

9. Since the September 1970 settlements in Libya, the international oil industry has seen important changes. The 55 percent tax rate rapidly was extended to most Persian Gulf producers, whose posted prices also were increased somewhat. Venezuela unilaterally legislated higher posted prices and an increased tax rate. The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) met and agreed to cooperate in demands for further increases in prices and other revenue measures. Libya immediately announced demands in addition to those of OPEC—justifying the demands by pointing out Libya's entitlement to retroactive compensation. In an effort to avoid being whipsawed between Libya and Persian Gulf producers, the oil companies succeeded in banding together to carry out coordinated negotiations in Teheran and Tripoli. A 5 year agreement was reached in Teheran in February 1971 between the oil companies and the Persian Gulf producers that set the minimum tax rate at 55 percent, increased posted prices, and fixed a schedule for increasing prices through 1975.

10. New talks between the companies and the Libyans began almost immediately after the Teheran agreements. Oil industry representatives, wary of being victimized again by Libyan divisive tactics, mutually supported each other and agreed on common offers. Deadlines were set, approached, and passed. The Libyan negotiators alternately threatened and cajoled. Oil officials from Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and Algeria—all with oil whose value would be affected by the Libyan settlement— announced their support for Libya without committing themselves on the extent of that support. After 6 hectic weeks, an agreement was signed which will net Libya about $2.00 per barrel for oil produced during the remainder of 1971 and as much as $2.30 in 1975. (Under the late 1970 agreement, the Libyans had been getting $1.30 per barrel.) If production runs at the 3.2 million bpd level of early 1971, therefore, Libya will receive total oil revenues of about $24 billion in 1971. The oil industry attained its principal objective—a 5 year agreement generally consistent with the Gulf settlement. Libya, on the basis of geographical advantage and low sulphur oil won a higher permanent differential between the payments for Libyan oil and for Gulf oil and an industry-wide commitment on future exploration activity. For all the histrionics and brinksmanship, the Libyan regime demonstrated a clear understanding of the international oil situation and a willingness to reach a negotiated settlement.

11. This is not to say that relations with the oil companies will be tranquil in the future. The Libyans are determined and cocksure, and they have shown themselves willing to get tough on occasion. They undoubtedly will continue to make the oil companies pay a high and rising price—in terms of revenues, reinvestment, and control of operations—in exchange for the right to operate. They will probably find excuses for reopening negotiations with one or more of the companies well before the expiration of the five year contracts now in force. Such a confrontation could be triggered by Libyan demands for higher prices, for greater Libyan participation, or by political and diplomatic developments.

12. While negotiating for higher revenues per barrel and imposing production controls, the RCC also has been pressing for a greater Libyan role in future oil operations. A deep-seated interest in an independent oil production capability no doubt is enhanced by the fact that almost 90 percent of current production is controlled by US-owned companies, who are subject to Libyan antagonism because of US support for Israel. During the 1970 negotiations, one company preferred to relinquish a small field rather than continue operating in accord with Libya's demands; that field is now being operated by the Libyan National Oil Company (LNOC). The RCC has announced that future concessions will be granted only to joint ventures with LNOC, and all domestic oil distribution and marketing facilities have been nationalized. The Libyans also have been consulting with the Algerians on methods of dealing with foreign oil companies. This could presage a Libyan move, along the lines developed by Algeria in 1967, to gain a controlling voice in management of one or more of the oil companies and control of their use of funds through administrative fiat rather than legal change in ownership. All of this would serve, among other things, to give Libyans badly needed experience in the operation of the oil industry.

13. The Libyans probably intend to take over the oil industry gradually, rather than by outright nationalization; we believe the latter remains unlikely, at least within the next year or two. Under the latest agreement, Libya can count on revenues of at least $2.3 billion annually. Nationalization would entail substantial loss of income, at least for some months, and would require Libya to take investment risks in exploring for new fields and developing new markets. The number of Libyans capable of managing or participating in modern industrial pursuits is extremely limited, and their talents are sorely needed in other sectors of the economy. Our judgment is that the RCC was not—and will not soon be—eager to take on all the hazards and difficulties that nationalization would entail. Therefore, the US balance of payments will probably continue to benefit from substantial profit remittances from Libya for at another couple of years—especially in view of rising prices for oil.

IV. FOREIGN RELATIONSHIPS

A. Military Affairs

14. The RCC has completely revamped Libya's military relationships with the outside world. Egypt has become the primary—but not the sole—source of military training and technical assistance, and Cairo appears to be using some Libyan facilities for Egyptian purposes. The former UK airfield at El Adem, now Nasser Air Base, houses about 300 Egyptian personnel and some 30 to 40 Egyptian Mig aircraft; on occasion, it is used as a dispersal field for Egyptian bombers and transports. Egypt has about 200 army personnel nearby, training Libyan units. There are also a handful of Egyptians in Ukbah Bin Nafi (formerly Wheelus) Air Base, which is used by the Libyan Air Force, assisted by Greek and Pakistani training missions. In 1970, when Egypt was subject to Israel's deep penetration raids, the Egyptian Naval Academy was transferred to Libya, but it was subsequently returned to Egypt.

15. After obtaining the withdrawal of US und UK military installations, the RCC attempted to continue those military supply contracts negotiated by Idris which it approved—specifically those for jet aircraft from the US and Chieftain tanks from the UK. For a variety of reasons, including an apparent rebuff by the UK, however, it also turned expeditiously to France and the USSR. For about $250 million, France agreed to sell 110 Mirage aircraft during 1970-1974, and the first delivery—of 6 planes—took place in early 1971. Libya also bought Soviet arms; by the end of the year about $40 million worth of Soviet equipment, including about 130 tanks, 24 self-propelled guns, 90 artillery pieces and 100 armored personnel carriers (APCs) had been delivered. So far this year, it has received at least 120 APCs from Czechoslovakia. Meanwhile, the RCC continues trying to negotiate arms contracts with the West.

16. Building an elaborate military establishment probably will remain a principal aim of the RCC, and ample funds are available. Deliveries of Mirage aircraft are likely to proceed more or less according to schedule—24 in 1971 (including the 6 already delivered), and a similar number in 1972, even though the Libyans probably will not be able to handle any number of the aircraft operationally within the next year or two. Libya has already paid for 40 planes, and it probably would take an overt Libyan breach of the prohibition on transfer to or stationing in another country to impel Paris to break the contract. Since the Egyptians and Syrians cannot provide competent pilots for all of their own Migs, we do not expect any such transfer, although a few Egyptians probably would have been seconded to the Libyan Air Force. Even if the putative federation comes into existence, the pilot shortage will remain; moreover, the guidelines for the federation as we now understand them leave military forces under national—not federal—control.

17. Resolution of arms supply problems with the UK will be more difficult. The British have refused to sell major weapons to the combatants in the Arab-Israeli confrontation, but they would find it difficult to deny pending Israeli requests for Chieftain tanks if they sell them to Libya, since Jaluud has publicly insisted that all Libyan weapons will be available for the battle against Israel. The Libyans under Idris paid British manufacturers over $100 million as down payments for arms which have not yet been delivered; if the UK flatly refuses the RCC's request for Chieftains (and for other arms in place of missiles ordered by Idris), the disposition of this money will be the subject of a long legal dispute. If the UK decides to sell what Libya wants, it will probably get additional military orders. The UK's most likely course is to postpone any final action on this thorny question as long as possible, hoping for some change in the diplomatic situation that will make a sale more palatable politically. But the very large amounts of money to be earned from arms sales to Libya, the British vulnerabilities inherent in Libya's oil role and Libya's holdings of sterling, and the rationale underlying the Conservative Government's decision to sell arms to South Africa lead us to conclude that London, if forced to decide, will eventually sell.

18. The Libyan purchases of Soviet-made weapons have not been accompanied by any notable closeness in Libyan political relations with the USSR. A junior charge d'affairs sent by Idris remains Libya's sole diplomatic representative in Moscow. The Libyans have refused to permit Soviet military technicians to enter Libya to maintain Soviet-supplied equipment. They have sent no military personnel to the USSR for training. The Soviet cultural exchange program continues to be sharply restricted, as it was before the revolution, and Soviet diplomats continue to complain of surveillance and rudeness. The number of Libyan students studying in Communist countries has not increased beyond the level of 15 to 20 prevailing under Idris. In sum, the RCC looks on the Soviets in much the same way as it does other European foreigners. The Russians, of course, do have the virtue in Libyan eyes of consistent support for the Arabs vis-à-vis Israel.

19. We are not sure of the total size of the arms orders Libya placed in Moscow in 1970, but shipments continue to arrive sporadically, and further deliveries are almost certain. At present, the Soviets are willing and eager to provide desired equipment and other suppliers are not. The refusal of the Libyans to accept Soviet technicians virtually guarantees exasperating maintenance difficulties and continuing Libyan complaints. If the UK again becomes a major arms supplier, we believe that the Libyans would probably cut back on purchases from the USSR. Even if arms sales by Moscow continue, we doubt that Libyan-Soviet relations will become close; the RCC is too xenophobic for that, and it is not under the kind of threat that helps make Egypt receptive to very close Soviet ties. In particular, we think it highly unlikely that Soviet military air or naval units would be permitted to operate from Libyan facilities in any guise—except possibly in the context of major Arab-Israeli hostilities.

B. Arab Affairs

20. The importance of Arab issues and interests to the current Libyan leadership is tremendous. Idris remained aloof from the Arab world. Qadhafi and company have plunged in. Qadhafi has been the prime mover in promoting various schemes for Arab unity. He has repeatedly pressed the Egyptians to move forward on plans for unity faster than they like. He has toured Arab capitals, often uninvited and without prior warning of his impending arrival, ruffling tempers along the way. He has loudly and simultaneously condemned King Hussein and extremist Palestinians, to the obvious distress of both. He demanded that all Arab states adhere to the Qadhafi plan—which boils down to a united Arab nation ready to do battle with Israel. He tried to embarrass all concerned into attending a summit meeting at which a schedule for action would be drawn up. So far, all this effort has had two obvious results: Qadhafi has won recognition in other Arab capitals as a factor to be coped with on the Arab scene (albeit as gingerly as possible), and Qadhafi seems to have become aware that all the sincere rhetoric in the world will not necessarily inspire the Arabs to united action.

21. The close relationship obtaining between Egypt and Libya is a natural outgrowth of the history of the two countries and the two regimes. For most Libyans, Cairo has long been the intellectual and cultural capital of their world. Although Libyan resentment of foreigners leads to pedodic complaints about the sizable Egyptian presence, there is no evidence that such frictions are growing. For the RCC members, Nasser served as inspiration and model before the revolution and as mentor immediately afterward. He seems to have had considerable ability to influence their actions in the months between the revolution and his death. With Nasser gone, Egyptian influence on the RCC probably has declined somewhat. The RCC members probably are inclined to see themselves—young and active revolutionaries—in favorable contrast to an aging Egyptian leadership which has lost its revolutionary èlan. Moreover the Libyan RCC is undoubtedly becoming less willing to seek advice in the light of it successful confrontations with foreign governments and foreign oil companies.

22. Qadhafi has been liberal with money as well as words. In the 18 months since the revolution, he has promised over $400 million to other Arab countries. He has actually paid over about $250 million under these pledges, as well as about $150 million under commitments made by the Idris government. (See Table.) Cairo has been the major beneficiary; without the $160 million or so received from Tripoli in the last year, it might be suffering serious financial difficulties. Jordan has been less fortunate; during the September 1970 confrontation between Hussein and the fedayeen, Libyan payments of $25 million annually due under the Khartoum agreement of 1961 were suspended, and they have not been resumed.

AID PAYMENTS BY LIBYA

(Dollars in millions)

Recipient Donora April 1967-March 1968 April 1968-March 1969 April 1969-March 1970 April 1970-March 1971

Egypt Idris6 60 59 87 87

Rcc 48 104

Jorden Idris 25 30 30 19

Fedayeen Idris ? ? ?

RCC 12

Sudan RCC 20

Iraq RCC 28

Yemen RCC 4

South Yemen RCC 3

Syria RCC 24

Arab Economic Development Fund Idris 3 3 3

RCC 5

Other RCC 5

TOTAL LOANS AND GRANTS Idrisc 88 92 120 106

RCC 96 153

a Libyan Government making aid commitment.

b Khartoum commitment ($59 million annually beginning October 1967) plus additional commitments.

c The RCC assumed obligations undertaken by Idris; RCC payments in this regard totaled about $42 million during September 1969-March 1970 and $106 million during April 1970-March 1971

23. Libya surely will continue to support Egypt financially in the absence of a negotiated settlement with Israel, and the bilateral relationship will remain important to both. Neither can easily afford to antagonize the other seriously—at least in present circumstances; both can gain from the friendship. Because of Cairo's financial dependence, its advice will tend to be muted, while Qadhafi will be inclined to assert himself as more of an equal in the relationship.

24. Qadhafi will probably continue to press for progress toward a federation of Arab nations. Plans for a very loose union of Egypt, Libya, and Syria—with the Sudan free to join at some unspecified date—have been announced. but the timetable for implementation is long and the details of the arrangement are hazy. Evidently the federal government—if and when it comes into being—will act largely as a coordinating body for foreign policy. Initial reports indicate that two of the three heads of state will be entitled to override the third, but powers of enforcement are unspecified and probably will not exist. As a practical matter, therefore, only unanimous decisions are likely to be pursued with any vigor. Given the disparate assets and interests of the member states, unanimity probably will equate with blandness—in deeds, though not in words. All things considered, we doubt that the federation will become much more than a consultative and coordinating organization without substantial supranational characteristics.

25. The strong ties between Cairo and Tripoli will continue to hamper development of close relations between Libya and the other countries of North Africa. Algeria obviously is interested in increasing its influence with the RCC, but not at any great cost to itself. Common interest in oil provides a basis for Libyan-Algerian cooperation in formulating negotiating positions. Algeria provides technical assistance to the LNOC, and the Libyans probably will continue to look to Algeria for inspiration in developing an independent oil exploration and production capacity. They also seem inclined, of late, to cultivate the general ethnic and cultural ties they have with Tunisia. But the essential focus of Libyan attention will almost certainly be eastward.

26. Despite all the activist rhetoric that has spewed forth from Tripoli since the revolution, we do not believe that the RCC will involve more than token Libyan forces against Israel. Libya has at most 19,000 military personnel; the bulk are men with less than a year's service and minimal technical competence. In short, Libya will not have the capacity to pose a measurable military threat to any of its neighbors, much less to contribute significantly to Egyptian capabilities against Israel.

27. Libya's financial capability to influence international developments will, however, grow rapidly. Libya can be expected to use its money to try to gain diplomatic support for the Arab cause and to encourage “neutralism” in the East-West confrontation. At the current production rate, annual revenues from oil will total $2.3 billion or more in each of the next several years. Libya cannot possibly spend such sums for internal purposes. Imports of civilian goods and services, excluding the oil sector, now run about $700 million annually; a 50 percent increase, which would be extremely difficult to absorb in Libya's circumstances, would raise these imports to about $1 billion annually. Defense imports currently are budgeted at abut $140 million a year; Libyan ability to use even that amount is highly questionable. Thus, Libya probably cannot spend much more than $1 billion a year for its own requirements. It will have a minimum of $1.0-$1.5 billion annually in the next several years to give away, put in the bank, or use to strengthen its position in the oil industry (e.g., by buying tankers). Last year it gave away about $260 million. If gifts and loans continue at about that level, Libyan reserves would rise at the rate of $1 billion or more annually, perhaps reaching $6 billion in 3 or 4 years. Even if foreign gifts and loans are greatly increased or Libya spends heavily for oil-related investments, and only $500 million, say, is added to reserves annually, Libya would have $4 billion—as much hard currency as is now held by France or Japan—within 5 years.

C. Libya and the United States

28. The Libyans would like to buy some arms from the US, although this probably is not now a vital element in bilateral relations. Pilot training on US-supplied aircraft has been arranged with Greece and with a private US firm. Most of the spare parts and technical services needed to maintain Libya's small fleet of US-supplied military aircraft can be obtained outside of direct US-Libyan official channels, albeit with some difficulty and added expense. Far more important to the total relationship will be the relationship between Libya and the oil companies that develops in the months ahead, the role of the US Government in oil matters, and—most critical—the Libyan assessment of the US role in the Arab-Israeli situation.

V. SOME CONTINGENCIES

29. Should something happen to Qadhafi, the RCC would probably stick together under a now leader. Jaluud is the most likely one. He appears to be highly regarded by his colleagues as well as by foreigners who have had the not always happy experience of negotiating with him. As long as the RCC is in power, we would expect it to follow existing policies on almost all major issues. Indeed, even the overthrow of the RCC probably would not lead to major changes in Libyan policy on oil. However, a new regime probably would make some changes in other domestic policies and in relations with the rest of the Arab world, and a successor might pursue somewhat less militant policy toward Israel.

30. If relations between Libya and the oil companies should deteriorate to the point of a drastic curtailment or total shutdown of oil production and export by companies now operating in Libya, we believe that Libya could produce and market a substantial amount of oil on its own account. Libya has ample financial reserves to continue imports and other foreign transactions for several years. And it would probably not take long before Libya would find foreign purchasers (e.g., Germany, Italy, France) willing to buy oil directly. Procurement of tanker charters and hiring of technical assistance personnel would pose difficult, but probably not insuperable, problems for the Libyans. Libya's geographical position, the quality of its oil, its massive production, and limits on excess capacity elsewhere are such that attempts by other oil producers to replace Libya in European markets would probably fall short of total success. In these circumstances, however, direct Libyan sales certainty would remain well below current exports for an extended period. If the Suez Canal were open at the time, the problems for the Libyans would be greater.

31. Developments during an oil crisis could alter Libya's foreign relations. Relations with the US would be severely strained; whether diplomatic ties would be severed and trade with the US embargoed would depend on Libya's assessment of the role that the US Government was playing in supporting the oil companies. If a crisis involved a sharp political conflict between Libya and the governments of the owner companies (principally the US and the UK), the USSR probably would hasten to offer goods, arms, and technical assistance on credit and earn some political points in Libya thereby. Some Western governments (e.g., France, Italy, and Germany) might offer to negotiate for direct purchase of oil from Libya. Within the Arab world, there would be pressure for the other oil producers to back Libyan demands, but there are limits on how far they would go—as there were this year. Any Arab producers who attempted to take advantage of the situation at Libya's expense would incur sharp Libyan displeasure.

32. A major outbreak of Arab-Israeli hostilities probably would have similar effects in some respects. It probably would lead the Libyans to expel the US official presence and might lead them to move against one or more of the oil companies, as a means of hurting Israel's principal arms supplier. It could cause a rearrangement of inter-Arab friendships, as Libya would embrace those countries that fought hardest or talked loudest against Israel, while shunning the others.

33. On the other hand, some sort of Arab Israeli settlement would create indecision, confusion, and mental agony in Tripoli. The Egyptians, conscious of their financial needs, would try to satisfy the RCC, but the kind of Arab concessions to Israel inherent in almost any conceivable settlement would be viewed by the RCC as a sellout of the Arab cause and the onus of Libyan blame would fall on Cairo. After the initial shock wore off, however, the RCC would probably realize that vocal opposition to a settlement would antagonize Egypt without harming Israel. In the end, Libya would probably come to accept the situation and might reduce its involvement in eastern Arab affairs. In time, if the settlement held, the greatest single impediment to US-Libyan relations would decline in importance.

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79—R01012A, Box 418. Secret. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, Defense, and NSA participated in the preparations of this estimate. The Director of CIA submitted this estimate with the concurrence of all members of the USIB with the exception of the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that it was outside their jurisdiction. Pages six and seven, not published, featured a map.

1 Posted price is an artificial price used as the base for calculating payments to governments of producing countries. Royalty is a percentage of posted price; tax rates are applied to posted price less costs of production and less royalties.

75. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Moore) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, May 8, 1971 75. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Moore) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, May 8, 19711

Washington, May 8, 1971

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington. D.C. 20520

TO:

The Secretary

THROUGH:

J - Ambassador Johnson [UAJ initialed] S/S

FROM: AF - C. Robert Moore [CRM initialed]

SUBJECT:

F-5s for Libya - ACTION MEMORANDUM

DISCUSSION:

Following your conversation with Ambassador Palmer and Mr. Newsom on the question of the aircraft for Libya, that we have three choices: (1) to delay further, (2) to seek further assurances from the Libyans; and (3) to decide not to deliver the aircraft.

Ambassador Palmer continues to believe that delivery of the aircraft is important to the US-Libyan relationship and that a negative decision may precipitate a substantial set-back to our efforts to improve cooperation. At the same time, he believes strongly that he cannot continue to put the Libyans off as we have for the past year, particularly in light of growing Libyan pressures for a yes or no answer.

After further consultations with him, we are inclined to regard the idea of requesting further assurances from the Libyans as inadvisable. Although it is quite possible that the Libyans would be willing privately both to give and to honor such assurances, Qadhafi's statements on the Mirages cast doubt on the regime's willingness publicly and unequivocally to confirm them. To explain to the press or Congress, even on a background basis, the fact that they could not really be moved from Libya efficiently could only breed resentment with the Libyans. There is also the question of whether we would feel the general area situation and state of domestic opinion would warrant a positive decision. In other words, Ambassador Palmer would be opposed to requesting the assurances unless we were prepared promptly to deliver the planes provided the assurances were both positive and publicly useable.

We therefore believe that we should say no to the Libyans on the remaining eight aircraft, taking advantage of the changed circumstances clause in the original contract. We would express our willingness to provide all necessary help for their utilization of the remaining aircraft, but express the view that it is in our common interest to phase out our military relationship.

We anticipate some perhaps strong expressions of unhappiness on the part of the Libyans but do not feel it will result in any break in diplomatic relations. We can probably anticipate that should any difficulties arise on the Mirage arrangements; the Libyans will obtain aircraft from the Soviets, probably using our refusal as an excuse. We should be prepared to explain the rationale of our decision to the Egyptians in Cairo.

DOD dissents from this decision and argues for a postponement of it if a favorable decision to deliver the planes cannot be made. Its argument for a postponement is based on the desirability of us knowing more about the key aspects of the newly-formed Federation of Arab Republics. We share Ambassador Palmer's view that he must have a decision on this matter by the time he returns to Tripoli at the end of May - which would be at least three months before the September 1 plebiscite called to ratify the establishment of the Federation. We therefore regard DOD's desire for further delay as impractical, in addition to disagreeing with it on substantive grounds.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you sign the attached instruction to Ambassador Palmer.

Attachment:

Outgoing cable

Clearances: NEA:Mr. Sisco (draft)

PM:Mr. Pickering (draft)

L:Mr. Salans (draft)

AF/DDNewSom:AF/N:JJBlake:nf:rjp

5/5/71 x 22530

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret. Sent for Action. Rogers initialed the option in the first paragraph “to delay further.” Drafted by Newsom and Blake; and cleared by NEA, PM, and L. The attachment is not printed.

76. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, May 17, 1971 76. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, May 17, 19711

Washington, May 17, 1971

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
INFORMATION
Unlogged
May 17, 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR

DR. KISSINGER

FROM: Harold H. Saunders [Hal signed]

SUBJECT:

Plot Against the Libyan Government

You may recall that we mentioned to you last fall rumors of a plot by some Libyans to try to free political prisoners in Libya and launch a movement by them against the government. This has been on and off ever since, and Dick Helms in the attached described some of the later episodes. This is just to keep you informed.

The Plot: In January, the CIA [text not declassfied] were tipped off that a group of European mercenaries (including British and French nationals) had been recruited to conduct a commando raid against a prison in Tripoli with the objective of freeing some 150 political prisoners, supplying them with arms and turning them loose to form the core of a counter-revolutionary force within Libya. The mercenaries were reportedly to use a ship known as La Caravelle, bearing the Panamanian flag, which was based in Bari, Italy.

CIA, closely coordinating with State, felt that all evidence pointed to the fact that the plot was unlikely to succeed in overthrowing the LARG and that we would be blamed and that would jeopardize the oil negotiations then going on. [text not declassfied] British mercenaries involved in the plot were warned that their cover was blown and were advised to call off the scheme. The upshot was that the mercenary leadership agreed to do so, but not without passing a warning through its contacts that another attempt would probably be made in the near future.

In mid-March, CIA was again made aware that the plot was reactivated and being augmented by the addition of a former German minesweeper, Le Chepigana, which was first located by CIA in Tangier and subsequently moved to Casablanca. La Caravelle, in the meantime, had moved to Trieste. [text not declassfied] The Italians [text not declassfied] seizing of the Caravelle and expelling her crew; the Moroccans have detained the Chepigana by launching an investigation into the ship and its crew. At this point, La Caravelle has left Trieste and is in the Ionian Sea, and Le Chepigana is still detained in Casablanca.

CIA believes that, while the plot is temporarily thwarted, this does not mean that it no longer poses a threat to the Libyan government. However, it may be abandoned for the time being. They believe that one of the leading sponsors is a Libyan exile, Omar Shalhi, a former advisor to King Idris, whose brother Aziz Shalhi was imprisoned immediately after the Qadhafi takeover in September 1969. Omar, apparently operating from Europe, is extremely wealthy and [text not declassfied] that the originally promised payoff for a successfully completed raid was apparently sizeable. Recently, though, there was a report saying that Omar Shalhi may himself be calling the operation off since, despite his sizeable investments in crews and ships, the plot has repeatedly failed.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. The attachment is not printed.

77. Memorandum, Washington, May 17, 1971 77. Memorandum, Washington, May 17, 19711

Washington, May 17, 1971

7 MAY 1971
MEMORANDUM [text not declassified]

SUBJECT:

Status Report on [text not declassified], Libya [text not declassified] has directed that Libyan developments be reviewed periodically. Consequently, outlined below is a review of the significant changes in the Libyan situation since the June 1970 Report [text not declassified] an examination of United States Government (USG) objectives within the framework of these new conditions, an assessment of current anti-regime activities, and recommendations.

I. SIGNIFICANT CHANGES IN THE LIBYAN SITUATION SINCE JUNE 1970

A. The death of UAR President Gamal Abdel Nasser on September 28, 1970 was probably the most significant event affecting Libya during the period under review. Nasser's influence over Libyan Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) Chairman Qadhafi was considered a moderating force in post-coup Libya. Reportedly Nasser counseled the Libyans not to nationalize their oil industry, which consists predominantly of American companies, and not to press for a speedy development of the tripartite union between Libya, the UAR, and Sudan, while at the same time advising them to maintain the West as the primary supplier of Libyan military hardware. Although it is too early to assess fully the ramifications of Nasser's death upon Libyan/UAR relations, the increasingly intimate relations of these states exemplified by the “Tripoli Charter” appeared to be cooling by early 1971.

B. Relations between Libya and the more radical Arab states seemed at first to become closer and then to wane during the period under review. In the summer of 1970, Qadhafi proposed a plan to the capitals of the Arab states affected by the Middle East confrontation. The Qadhafi Plan, as it soon became labeled, called for a more direct and aggressive confrontation with Israel by the Arab nations and promised Libyan financial support for this action. In September 1970, Libya broke diplomatic relations with the Kingdom of Jordan during that government's struggle with the Fedayeen, and abrogated the Khartoum agreement to make regular financial payments to Jordan. Early in November 1970, plans for the political, military and economic integration of Libya, the UAR, and Sudan were officially announced; later the same month, Syria's candidacy began to be considered. Simultaneously, the magnitude of the real barriers to Arab unity were becoming more and more apparent to the Libyan leadership, and throughout the reporting period, there were increased reports of Qadhafi's frustrations with these states and disillusionment over the rejection of the Qadhafi Plan throughout the Arab world.

C. The arrival of Soviet tanks and other military hardware in Tripoli on 18 July 1970 gave substance to the fears of many Western observers that it was only a matter of time before the Soviet Union would be able to exploit its Middle Eastern foreign policy objectives, which appeared to be closely aligned with those of the post-revolutionary Libyan leadership, and to utilize these common interests to increase Soviet influence in Libya. In the wake of further breakdowns in arms discussions between Libyan and British leaders, problems with the French over the Mirage contracts, and the failure of the USG to deliver Northrop F-5's, the Libyan military mission to Moscow during mid-November 1970 appeared to presage increased Soviet participation in Libyan military affairs. But, the first Mirage aircraft were turned over to the Libyans in December 1970 and the Libyans have continued to press the USG for the delivery of Northrop F-5's, and the British for Chieftain tanks. The UAR MIG Squadron has been isolated in Tobruk, and Soviet technicians have been refused entry into the country to supervise the use and maintenance of the Soviet equipment.

D. By September 1970, Libyan officials had successfully negotiated settlements with all the major foreign oil producers in the country. The agreement increased Libyan oil revenues approximately 20 percent over the annual 1.2 billion dollars. The agreement also served as a catalyst for new demands by the entire OPEC community. The mid-February agreement between OPEC and the Persian Gulf producing oil companies served as a foundation for additional Libyan demands on foreign oil companies. Negotiations opened in Tripoli with Western oil companies in late February and were successfully completed on 2 April. The new agreement covers a five year period and may presage a period of comparative stability in our commercial relations, instead of the friction and frustration of the recent past.

II. USG OBJECTIVES RELATED TO CURRENT LIBYAN SITUATION

A. Make the Libyan authorities aware that the U.S. is prepared to live with a Libyan regime which is truly independent and free of Soviet influence in order to continue the maintenance of diplomatic and commercial relations between Libya and the U.S. The fact that the U.S. accepts an independent Libya was directly conveyed to the leadership of the UAR via President Nasser before his demise and indirectly to the Libyan authorities through a variety of [text not declassified] means. The reiteration of this theme and Libya's failure to find evidence of a USG role in any of the anti-regime activities appears to have had a salutary effect upon the Libyan leadership and to have tempered the short-term Libyan actions against the U.S. in the diplomatic arena. Although the U.S. has little leverage left with the Libyan leadership, it is believed they are unlikely to break diplomatic relations with the U.S. in the near future. Since the U.S. is viewed by the Libyans as the primary supporter of Israel, a settlement of the Palestine issue and a subsequent reduction of tensions in the Middle East would be needed to increase significantly U.S. chances of maintaining friendly relations with Libya in the long-term, and of further developing its commercial interests there.

B. Convince Libyan leaders of the value of continuing the major American role in the development of Libyan petroleum. Attempts undertaken to convince the Libyan government that the USG accepts the new Libyan leaders may have assisted in creating the viable atmosphere in which the American oil producers were able to arbitrate their differences with the Libyan authorities and arrive at an amicable agreement.

C. Convince the Libyan authorities of the dangers of allowing Soviets, Chinese Communist or other Communist influence in their country. [text not declassified] operations have probably reinforced the existing fear of communism and communists among the Libyan leadership. Only when the Libyans were denied access to first line military hardware of the West did they purchase Soviet tanks and other Soviet military hardware and reiterate their intention to procure arms from the best sources of supply whether East or West. They have remained steadfast in opposition to entry of Soviet technicians to supervise the use and maintenance of this equipment; they have isolated the Egyptian MIG training squadron at Nasser Air Force Base in Tobruk; and Qadhafi has continued to chastise communism in his speeches.

D. Promote closer ties with the West. [text not declassified] the Governments of Greece and Pakistan, [text not declassified] to play an increased role in the economic and military affairs of the new regime as a buttress against communist encroachment. [text not declassified] initiatives to the French and Italians encouraging them to maintain a foothold in Libya. These efforts, combined with a continued reiteration of the line that the USG can live with the Libyan regime, have contributed to the maintenance of the fragile ties between Libya and the West.

E. Promote the goal of an independent Libyan State with balanced attachments to the Maghreb and the UAR. This objective has become more feasible as the young Libyan leadership's ideals of Arab unity have become tarnished by the realities of the significant divisions among the Arab states. After Nasser's death, the problems of coordinating their common efforts were increased. The training of Libyan troops in the UAR initially proved to be a failure, the establishment of a joint naval academy in Susa (Libya) was completely unsuccessful, and efforts to establish free trade and border controls have been plagued with problems. As these difficulties between Tripoli and Cairo have increased, the Libyans have commenced to increase their interaction with the other Maghreb states. On 8 December 1970, the Libyan RCC ratified a Libyan-Tunisian technical cooperation agreement, and in January 1971, Libya and Algeria initiated closer cooperation on oil issues.

F. Discourage any marked increase in Libyan involvement in the support for hostilities against Israel; discourage Libyan alignment with extremist Arab states or Libyan support to efforts by radical Arab governments or movements to overthrow moderate Arab regimes. The new Libyan revolutionary government offered to “bankroll” an increase in hostilities against Israel shortly after it had consolidated its position in Libya. In September 1970, Libya broke diplomatic relations with the Kingdom of Jordan during the latter's struggle with the Fedayeen and supported the Government of Syria's effort to assist the Fedayeen against Jordanian troops. While Libya has been widely asked for financial assistance and indications of Libyan willingness to grant this aid have been reported, there is no hard information available that Libya has actually disbursed all the aid it had promised. For example in September 1970 the Libyan Director of the Budget received instructions that money due to the Palestinian commandos for the period 1 August to 1 December 1970 should not be sent to them, but should be used for Libyan internal development purposes.

III. CURRENT ANTI-REGIME ACTIVITIES

In the first sixteen months following the revolution there have been at least seven counter-coup attempts within Libya and an additional one initiated from Chad. All of these efforts were successfully neutralized by the Libyan authorities. CIA is currently monitoring the development of two additional counter-coup efforts [text not declassified] One of these plans is directed by a group of former Libyan military officers who are in diplomatic and other posts abroad. The group is allegedly coordinating anti-regime activities among Eastern Libyan Tribal groups and oppositionist “second level officers” within the Libyan military. [text not declassified]CIA uncovered a second plan involving a maritime operation to land a small European mercenary force in Libya to release 150 political prisoners from the Tripoli prison. The released prisoners, all active in official capacities under the former regime, would disperse into the countryside to form the nucleus of an anti-regime force.

Two attempts have been made to carry out this second plan—one in late January/early February and the second in late March/early April. If these attempts had succeeded in actually landing mercenaries for the operation planned, the results would have been disastrous. The mercenaries might conceivably have succeeded in freeing the prisoners, but there was no chance that the ultimate purpose of the operation could be accomplished, i.e., forming a resistance group to overthrow the regime. The mercenary force was too small to accomplish that objective by itself and was expected to receive little, if any, internal support, backed as it was by the discredited Old Regime politician, Umar al-Shalhi. The attempt would also almost certainly have had a catastrophic effect on the delicate oil negotiations then being carried on and subsequent Libyan suspicions of Western complicity [text not declassified]

The second attempt involving some 25 foreign mercenaries and two vessels, a 17 ton sloop named La Caravelle and a former German minesweeper now named Le Chepigana, was revived on or about 16 March [text not declassified] the La Caravelle, located in Trieste, was hindered from playing its assigned role in the plot and Le Chepigana, now located in Casablanca, is being held by Moroccan authorities pending the results of an exhaustive investigation which should prevent her from playing an effective role in this plot for the time being. [text not declassified]

[Omitted here is operational detail.]

V. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

USG objectives in Libya remain intact. The U.S. continues to maintain diplomatic ties with Libya. The U.S. oil companies have continued to operate in Libya. There has been no discernible increase in Soviet influence over the new Libyan government. The influence of the UAR and other radical Arab states has not proved intolerably inimical to U.S. interests in the area. Finally, Libyan resources have not been utilized in significant amounts to affect the balance of peace and war between Israel and the Arabs.

Although most analysts agree that the Libyan RCC will not remain indefinitely as ostensible collegial rulers, there is no convincing evidence that a change in government will result from any of the anti-regime activities [text not declassified]

MEMORANDUM [text not declassified]

SUBJECT:

[text not declassified] Status Report on Libya, January 1971

1. The State Department is in general agreement with Sections I-III of the subject memorandum [text not declassified]

2. [text not declassified] Diplomatic efforts by the Embassy, increasing self-confidence and experience among the Libyan leaders, and area developments undoubtedly were also factors at work.

3. The Department believes caution is needed in estimating the extent and duration of the somewhat favorable elements in the current Libyan situation, particularly as they may relate to the regime's attitude toward the United States. Our future military relationship to Libya remains undefined, and the regime is still unaware of our intentions with respect to delivery of the eight F-5s. Although an oil pact has been signed, only time will indicate its stability and the future of the American companies. Libya's attitude toward the Middle East question continues to differ sharply from our own, and its subsidy to Jordan has not been resumed. The impact of the newly-announced Federation on Libyan policies is also obscure; at a minimum, it would appear to signal a turning away of Libya from cooperation with the Maghreb.

4. [text not declassified] frustrating two coup attempts against the Libyan regime was most helpful. Some measure of Libyan confidence in US attitudes toward the regime may have resulted from the ability of the Embassy to alert the regime to the second of these plots.

5. [text not declassified] The Department wishes only to point out that the size of the American presence in Libya undoubtedly remains a matter of interest to the Libyan regime [text not declassified] It believes the personnel profile proposed by the Ambassador would be consistent with our desire not to draw undue attention to the American official presence in Libya and consistent as well with the attainment of Option 1-A.

AF/N:JJBlake:nf

4/23/71

1 Source: National Security Council Files, Nixon Intelligence Files, Libya. Secret; Eyes Only. The May 24 covering memorandum from Hoskinson to Kissinger is not printed.

78. Airgram A—6 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Libya, June 16, 1971 78. Airgram A—6 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Libya, June 16, 19711

June 16, 1971

AIRGRAM
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
A-6

TO:

Amembassy TRIPOLI

FROM:Department of State

DATE:

JUN 16 1971

SUBJECT:

Policy Planning Paper

REF:

CA-5632, November 3, 1970

Attached are three copies of the Policy Planning Paper for Libya, as approved by the members of the NSC Interdepartmental Group for Africa.

The paper constitutes an official statement of US policy towards Libya and should be used as a guideline by all elements of the Embassy in the preparation of policy statements, action plans and future budgetary projections.

ROGERS

Enclosures As Stated

LIBYA: Policy Planning Paper

Introduction

In approving this paper, Ambassador Palmer has stressed the importance of viewing U.S. policy towards Libya not just in bilateral terms, but also in the wider context of other significant U.S. interests and policies in the area which condition all our relations with Libya. These include: (1) the dependence of Europe on Libyan oil production and on U.S. oil companies as suppliers, set against the unpredictable character, relatively unrestrained freedom of action and aggressive oil policies of the present Libyan regime; (2) the increased Soviet presence in the Mediterranean combined with the reduction of Western (U.S., UK and Italian influence in Libya since the 1969 coup; (3) the U.S. commitment to a peaceful solution of the Arab-Israel conflict and to the security of Israel, set against Libya's militant Arab nationalist posture; and (4) the fluid inter-Arab political situation, including the evolving nature of the Arab Federation.

In examining these considerations, it should be born in mind that we are dealing with a primitive, largely illiterate people of under two million, living in a country with presumed limited (apart from oil) natural resources, and led by relatively inexperienced and unpredictable men. Libya's income from oil revenues will soon be $2 billion a year, and her foreign exchange reserves may, in five years, equal those of Italy. How this enormous wealth will be used, and what will happen politically and economically as a result, remains very much to be seen. The American oil companies have retained their predominant position in Libya, and the LARG appears to be inclined to turn to the U.S. for its technological needs. 450 Libyan students are in the United States, and some movement of non-petroleum oriented technology and capital towards Libya is discernible.

We are deliberately keeping a low official profile in Libya, and the next months and probably years will be the ones of watchful waiting and patient efforts to help keep the LARG on a moderate and sensible track. It follows that some of the listed “U.S. objectives” are more properly described as “hopes.”

A. U.S. Interests in Libya

1. Libyan oil is a critical factor in maintaining the economic and military position of our NATO allies.

2. Our efforts to promote a political accommodation between Arabs and Israelis, as well as the genuine independence and non-alignment of the Arab States, can be seriously affected, positively or negatively, by the LAR's use of its wealth.

3. A combination of the LAR's geographic position and the possibility that Soviet military influence might spread westward from the UAR involves our strategic interests in the North African littoral, in the Mediterranean and in NATO's southern flank in general. Our strategic interests are essentially negative in Libya. It would be contrary to our interests for Libya to be utilized by a hostile power capable of effective military action against NATO.

4. An American community numbering approximately 3,900.

5. Private American investment of more than one billion dollars in the Libyan petroleum industry. The industry has been a major contributor to the U.S. balance of payments ($828 million in 1969).

6. The LARG's own economic development objectives make it a significant, if not a major, market for our capital goods and our technical, scientific and managerial services.

B. U.S. Objectives Over the Next Five Years

1. Maintenance of the flow of oil to Western Europe, preferably through US intermediaries.

2. Preservation of the US private interest in Libyan oil whether through present or transformed nondiscriminatory arrangements which would assure a continued return from the LAR to the US balance of payments.

3. A LARG tolerant of, if not confident in, U.S. objectives and policies not only vis-à-vis the regime but also vis-à-vis the Arab-Israeli dispute and the broader area of Pan-Arab nationalism. Accordingly, continued LARG interest in maintaining diplomatic relations and official contact with the USG.

4. A moderation of the LARG' s external policies, especially with respect to the Middle East.

5. Increased understanding on the part of the Libyan public of U.S. motives, objectives and policies regarding the LAR, the Arab World and global issues.

6. LARG facilitation of the security and working conditions of the resident American community.

7. A LAR prepared to turn to U.S. suppliers and service organizations for the implementation of its development plan, thus building a U.S. “presence,” of sufficient importance to Libya, to “cushion” us from politically inspired actions.

C. LAR Objectives Vis-a-Vis the United States

1. Continued nonalignment of the LAR as an independent entity and the non-alignment of any Arab union to which the LAR might adhere.

2. A change in U.S. policy on the Arab-Israeli issue, using whatever leverage is available without causing fundamental damage to the LARG's own vital interests to promote such a change.

3. Increased LAR control over the oil industry and its share of petroleum revenues to the fullest extent possible without risking a total disruption of current production or long-term loss of markets.

4. Continued limitation of US capacity to exercise political influence on LAR internal politics or indigenous groups.

5. Access to US technological resources, where clearly superior to competitive sources, provided that such relationships do not require unacceptable political costs.

6. Continued, even if limited, access to US military supplies and training.

D. Recommended Courses of Action

1. Coordinate with Western European allies contingency plans which would assure availability of LAR or alternative energy supplies in the event the LARG should begin to use oil as a political weapon or otherwise restrict exports to Europe beyond tolerable levels. (US Objective No. 1)

2. Restrain the LARG's inclination towards precipitate action by (1) identifying contentious issues as early possible and suggesting to the parties means by which they might be resolved cooperatively; (2) alternatively, promoting a LARG awareness of potential risks and costs to it (e.g. in oil) of such precipitate actions. (US Objectives Nos. 1, 2/LARG Objectives Nos. 1, 3).

3. Continue, whenever and however possible, efforts to foster a dialogue with the RCC and other elements of the LARG on bilateral, Middle Eastern, and world problems. (US Objectives Nos. 3, 4/LARG Objective No. 1)

4. Adopt a positive attitude toward, or at least avoid postures which could be construed as hostile to constructive moves by the LAR vis-à-vis Arab Unity (e.g. Tripartite/Quadripartite Unity), provided the collective components appear prepared to accept a peaceful settlement in the Middle East. (US Objectives Nos. 3, 4/LARG Objective No. 1)

5. Fulfill to the extent possible outstanding commitments under our bilateral military supply relationship and substitute for it, as quickly as possible, alternative commercial relationships. Continue to provide modest amounts of CONUS training in response to requests by the Libyan Air Force and maintain a small Military Liaison Section. Provide munitions export control clearances for reasonable amounts of material.

6. In areas where direct US influence is precluded, encourage an increased Western European interest and an interest by moderate Arab States in the LAR in order to moderate the LARG's foreign policy position and to provide alternatives to communist military and economic offers (US Objective No. 4/LARG Objective No. 1).

7. Expand VOA broadcasting in Arabic to North Africa, specifically to the LAR, both as a means of reaching the important local audience which cannot be contacted through necessarily low-profile USIS programs today, and as a hedge against the very real possibility that local programs might be further restricted in the future (US Objectives Nos. 3, 4, 5).

8. Conduct low-key USIS and exchange of persons programs aimed at gaining respect for and understanding of the US and, to the extent possible, support for US Government policies (US Objectives Nos. 3, 4, 5).

9. Encourage and cooperate with LARG programs for placing students in US educational institutions, utilizing when appropriate the resources of such organizations as AFME (US Objective No. 5/LARG Objective No. 5).

10. Insist LARG respect security and rights of American citizens and encourage it to make tolerable their working conditions (US Objective No. 6).

11. Make available to the LARG information about US capabilities in the development field and, in response to specific LARG requests, provide appropriate advice and assistance under the Transfer of Technology Program. Develop a more effective capability to promote the transfer of US Government and private technology to Libya, including further emphasis on developing the Washington capability to mobilize and publicize U.S. resources, both to the Libyan Embassy in Washington and to the LAR through the U.S. Embassy in Libya. (US Objective No. 7/LARG Objective No. 5).

12. Expand the national development libraries of publications, in Arabic and English, at the USIS centers in Tripoli and Benghazi to meet local demand for such materials (US Objective No. 7/LARG Objective No. 5).

13. Concentrate US export promotion efforts on encouraging American firms to participate in projects under the LARG's Five Year Plan (US Objective No. 7/LARG Objective No. 5).

14. Reduction of the official U.S. Government mission to levels consistent with diminished USG influence and access vis-à-vis Libya (US Objective 3/LARG Objective No. 4).

15. Insure that the LARG is aware of the advantages; both bilaterally and in Middle Eastern and international terms, of maintaining diplomatic relations with the US, preferably at the Ambassadorial level.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 1 LIBYA—US. Secret;Noforn. Covering airgram was drafted by Edward W. Holmes (AF/NSC) and approved by Carter. The annexes are not printed.

79. Memorandum From Secretary Laird to Secretary Rogers, December 2, 1971 79. Memorandum From Secretary Laird to Secretary Rogers, December 2, 19711

December 2, 1971

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON
2 DEC 1971

Honorable William P. Rogers
Secretary of State
Department of State
Washington, D. C. 20520

Dear Bill:

As you know, our Ambassador to Libya has asked for guidance in explaining the absence of a U.S. decision on Libya's requests for major military equipment (F-5s, C-130s and 175mm artillery). Concurrently, the Spanish Ambassador has asked Alex Johnson for a U.S. position on an export license for five F-5s from the Spanish plant (CASA) for delivery to Libya.

It seems to me the Spanish request might offer some promise for partially resolving our dilemma. We could instruct Joe Palmer to tell the Libyans quite frankly that (i) our decision on their requests is tied to our overall arms policy to the Mid-East; (ii) in view of the present situation, we wish to limit arms deliveries to all countries in the area, and we cannot, consequently, give an answer to their requests at this time; (iii) in deference to our relations with Libya we are prepared to approve a Spanish request for an F-5 export license for a limited number (up to eight) of F-5Bs (the trainer version); and, in the meantime, we will continue to review Libya's other requests against developments in the area.

While this may not be completely satisfactory to the Libyans, it would demonstrate some forthcomingness on our part. This would also allow us to release the aircraft we have had earmarked for the Libyans and avoid further storage costs. There is, of course, always the risk of some unfavorable publicity, particularly since the F-5Bs might be linked to training Libyans to fly the Mirages being delivered from France. I would think, however, that the non-combatant nature of the aircraft and the indirect role of the U.S. would tend to mitigate such criticism.

I appreciate that this is not an easy decision. I believe, however, that the course I have proposed would be least disruptive to our Mid-East posture while at the same time offering some promise of maintaining our considerable interests in Libya. I continue to believe those interests will be best served by avoiding the appearance of closing the door completely on their requests.

Sincerely,
[signed Melvin R. Laird]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret.

80. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Moore) to the Acting Secretary of State Irwin, Washington, December 7, 1971 80. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Moore) to the Acting Secretary of State Irwin, Washington, December 7, 19711

Washington, December 7, 1971

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
INFORMATION MEMORANDUM

To:

The Acting Secretary

From: AF - C. Robert Moore [CRM initialed]

Nationalization of British Petroleum in Libya

The Libyan Radio and Libyan News Agency announced December 7 the nationalization of British Petroleum's subsidiary in Libya, BP Exploration Company (Libya) Ltd. BP may have been nationalized because of Libya's intense dissatisfaction with what it believes is the UK role in the Iranian seizure of the Persian Gulf islands. The seizure may also have reflected LARG frustration over its inability to resolve a long-outstanding financial dispute with the UK centering around the aborted sale of a missile defense system by the UK to the former regime for which the monarchy had made a substantial down payment.

In seizing BP Libya, the LARG hits the British government as well as the company, since HMG owns nearly 50 percent of the parent company. Libya announced a new company will be formed, the Arabian Gulf Prospecting Company, to take over BP'S assets.

With production in Libya of 200,000 barrels per day, BP is one of the largest oil producing and exporting companies there. Its importance to us is that it operates in equal partnership with Nelson Bunker Hunt of Texas. There was no indication Libya intends to take over Bunker Hunt or to nationalize other companies. However, BP was the operator of the joint BP-Bunker Hunt concession. If BP withdraws its personnel, there may be temporary difficulties in finding technicians to carry out oil operations in that concession area. The Libyan action will also throw a fright into the other oil companies, chiefly American, regarding their future.

The British Embassy in Tripoli expressed fears December 4 that Libya might take some drastic move against British interest, including a break in diplomatic relations. As yet, there is no indication either side intends to break relations. However, earlier unconfirmed reports indicated Libya was transferring funds out of London. Its total funds there probably amount to over $2 billion. If confirmed, this transfer obviously might pose major financial problems, at least temporarily, for the UK.

AF/N:WClark, Jr:pw

12/7/71 x21774

Concurrences: E/ORF/FSE - Mr. Brown (draft)

EUR/BMI - Mr. Griffiths (subs)

AF/N - Mr. Blake (draft)

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, PET 15-2 LIBYA. Confidential. Drafted by Clark and cleared by E/ORF/FSE, EUR/BMI, and AF/N. Intelligence Note RAFN—60, December 9, described the nationalization as part of a long-term Libyan plan for resolving financial claims against the United Kingdom, but added that the timing was determined by Iran's recent occupation of Persian Gulf islands, for which Tripoli blamed London. (Ibid., POL LIBYA—UK)

81. Letter From Secretary of State Rogers to Secretary of Defense Laird, Washington, December 15, 1971 81. Letter From Secretary of State Rogers to Secretary of Defense Laird, Washington, December 15, 19711

Washington, December 15, 1971

THE SECRETARY OF STATE
WASHINGTON
December 15, 1971

COPIES TO:

S/S: RF

AF

EUR

NEA

L

PM

Dear Mel:

Thank you for your letter of December 2, 1971 recommending that we permit the Spanish firm (CASA) to sell five F-5's to Libya.

I recognize the need of maintaining our considerable interests in Libya. For that reason I have declined to shut the door completely on sales of major military equipment to Libya. However, I also do not believe it possible at this time to permit the Spanish to transfer F-5's to the Libyans for the following reasons:

Political reasons predominate. There have been no signs of any Libyan moderation in Middle Eastern affairs. On the contrary, Qadhafi still espouses armed conflict as the only means of settling Arab-Israeli problems; his behavior still remains erratic as shown by the December 7 nationalization of BP Petroleum; Libyan funds support the Fedayeen and there are now confirmed reports of the arrival in Syria of Libyan commandos to support the Fedayeen; only a few months ago the Libyans supported the coup in Morocco and still are causing difficulties for the Government of Chad and Eritrea. The F-5's, whether from the US or Spain, will be clearly identified as American aircraft and will be so regarded by Libya's neighbors, including Arab governments friendly toward the United States. I believe the political sensitivity of this sale is not diminished by the fact that deliveries would be of the F-5B trainer version, especially since the Libyans have told us they want these aircraft to train pilots to fly Mirage jets from France. All interested parties would know that US Government approval is required for sale of the F-5s from Spain to Libya. I do not believe we can or should appear to be enhancing Libyan combat capability by facilitating the Libyan transition to Mirages.

The Honorable
Melvin R. Laird,
Secretary of Defense.

There are legal aspects as well. In January, Congress passed an amendment to the Foreign Military Sales Act (Section 9) providing that consent to a third country transfer of defense articles should not be given unless the U.S. itself would transfer the defense article under consideration to that country. For policy reasons, we are not prepared to permit Northrop to provide F-5's to Libya at this time. Thus we are constrained under Section 9 from allowing the Spanish firm to do so.

I recognize the problems for Ambassador Palmer in continuing to tell the Libyans that this sale remains under review. However, having carefully considered the alternatives, including your suggestion, I believe we should continue to hold to the line. We will review this position, of course, should any major developments in the area or in our bilateral relations with Libya justify doing so.

I regret that I could not be more forthcoming to your recommendation.

With warm personal regards,

Sincerely,

[signed Bill]
William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret.

82. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Moore), the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Resources and Food Policy (Katz), and the Assistant Secretary for European Affairs (Hillenbrand) 82. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Moore), the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Resources and Food Policy (Katz), and the Assistant Secretary for European Affairs (Hillenbrand)1

18 December 1971

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
INFORMATION MEMORANDUM
18 December 1971

To:

The Secretary

Through:

U - The Under Secretary

From: AF- C. Robert Moore [CRM initialed]

R - Julius L. Katz [JLK initialed]

EUR - Martin J. Hillenbrand [MJH initialed]

British Request for US Support Regarding the Libyan Nationalization of British Petroleum (BP)

Background:

On December 7, the Libyan Government nationalized BP's Libyan subsidiary, but the decree did not include BP's 50 percent American partner, Bunker Hunt. Bunker Hunt is trying to cooperate with the Libyans to the extent of keeping production going but has refused a Libyan request that it market the ex-BP share of the oil as well as its own. The Department has agreed to support the request of the American oil companies operating in Libya for a business review letter from the Department of Justice that will allow them to act in concert in support of BP, which intends to take legal action against any purchasers of oil from its concession.

On December 10, the British Government requested US support for its demarches to major oil consuming countries, and for a press statement by us deploring the use of nationalization as a political weapon. The request for a press statement was subsequently withdrawn. The British intend to request governments of consuming countries not to purchase oil from the nationalized concession and further to use their influence to dissuade their oil companies from purchasing such oil.

Discussion:

Several considerations weighed against our supporting the British demarches. The Libyan action against BP occurred at a time of rising Libyan frustration over long unsettled claims against the British (former British base rights, a cancelled air defense system contract, non-delivery of Chieftain tanks) which were purely bilateral in nature and had nothing to do with the United States. It carefully avoided action against any US companies in Libya, including BP's American partner. Any US Government action in support of BP or the British which became known to the volatile and unpredictable Libyan Government could precipitate Libyan retaliation against American interests in Libya. Moreover, the American oil companies had not asked us to take any action with regard to the nationalization beyond supporting their request for a business review letter. The British, with no substantial interests left in Libya, would have little to lose in fighting the nationalization to the end; the United States would be risking a great deal in supporting such an all-or-nothing policy. It was also argued that our support for the British demarche would have very little if any real effect on consuming governments. Nor would any British or combined British-US action to foreclose the market ever induce the nationalistic Libyans to reverse their nationalization and return the concession to BP.

On the other hand, if the Libyans followed up their nationalization of BP with successful marketing of the oil to OECD members, it would inevitably weaken our own interests in Libya as well as other oil producing states. Failure by the OECD, and particularly the US, to support the British in this instance would compromise, perhaps fatally, the common front through which the consuming countries and the oil companies hope to blunt the OPEC drive for higher oil prices and eventual control of the companies. To the degree that the Libyans nationalization could be made difficult, it would serve to inhibit further such actions. By supporting the British and maintaining some measure of consumer state solidarity, we would in effect be supporting our own interests through the oil companies' joint front tactics vis-à-vis OPEC.

Conclusion and Action:

On balance, the long range consequences of not supporting the British seemed likely to be more serious than the immediate risk of provoking Libyan Government action against our interests there. Moreover, the Senior Review Group discussions on expropriation consistently favored steps to organize consumer state solidarity in resistance to nationalizations. Our maintenance of a common front now on Britain's behalf should also be useful to us in other future contexts, such as the Chilean nationalizations.

We have accordingly agreed to instruct our embassies in OECD capitals to support quietly the British demarches, urging the OECD governments to use their influence with their national oil companies and refineries not to accept BP's nationalized oil.

Drafted: AF/N:RHPelletreau:E/ORF/FSE:GSBrown:pw-12/17/71 x22622

Concurrences: AF/N - Mr. Odell

AF - Mr. Smith

E/ORF/FSE - Mr. Akins

L - Mr. Brower

EUR/BMI - Mr. Griffith

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, PET 15-2 LIBYA. Secret. Drafted by Robert Pelletreau (AF/N) and Gordon Brown (E/ORF/FSE); and cleared by AF/N, AF, E/ORF/FSE,L, and EUR/BMI.

83. Letter From the Ambassador to Libya (Palmer) to the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom), Tripoli, December 22, 1971 83. Letter From the Ambassador to Libya (Palmer) to the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom), Tripoli, December 22, 19711

Tripoli, December 22, 1971

EMBASSY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Tripoli, Libya
December 22, 1971

The Honorable
David D. Newsom
Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs
Washington, D.C.

Dear David:

I followed with great interest your recent trip and gather it was most successful. Numeiri's backtracking was disappointing, although he seems clearly to be moving in the right direction and the amount of time he devoted to you was most impressive.

During your absence, our military supply problems have continued to plague us. I had hoped to catch you in Europe on your way home to discuss my concerns, but the telegram I sent to Khartoum suggesting this missed you and I learned from Curt Moore that you would not be pausing long in London.

I am therefore taking this means of letting you know of my continuing—even increasing—concern with the accumulation of military supply problems we are facing. To make things easier for you, I am attaching the references.

1. F-5's

I know—and accept—that the “no decision” is the Secretary's decision. What I have difficulty in understanding, however, is why, when I propose a reply to YUNIS which is entirely consistent with the Secretary's line with only slight non-substantive embroideries, I get no answer at all from the Department. (See Tripoli 2167—para 2—TAB A)

Nor do I understand why, when I ask for some Washington approved language to explain our “no decision”, I again meet with the same silence. As you well know, Libyans, like everyone else, ask questions. I just cannot continue to face them, smile in a friendly manner, and say in effect that Washington has made no decision but that I (1) don't know; (2) can't say; 3) won't tell; (4) am too embarrassed to discuss/choose one/why!

I note that Mr. Laird in his memorandum of December 2 (TAB C) to the Secretary suggests that we explain our problem on the basis of our wish to limit arms deliveries to all countries in the area in the light of the general situation. I believe that this would be particularly dangerous: (a) Are we actually going to deliver the F-5's to Libya if we decide on further Phantom deliveries to Israel? (b) Are we going to deliver the F-5's if there should be some improvement in the area situation? I doubt that the answer would be affirmative on either score. Similarly, it has been informally suggested at various times in the past that the rationale might be tied to the incompatibility of various Libyan actions with US interests in the area. I think this would be even more dangerous and apt to provoke an even worse confrontation than a flat turn down.

The fact of the matter is the Department has left me for about 18 months now with no credible and presentable explanation for our failure, inability or unwillingness to take a decision. Perhaps the problem is that those responsible for answering our telegrams cannot come up with a satisfactory rationale either. I am frank to say that I can't, but it might help clear the air between Tripoli and the Department if we were told frankly that Washington can't either.

Meanwhile, because of the Department's failure to address specifically either of the two matters on which I requested guidance in paras. 2 and 3 of Tripoli 2167 (TAB A), I have lost the initiative with YUNIS and I am vulnerable once again to further importunings by him or by other RCC members pressing for some sort of a response, and I shall have to go all through the sorry charade again. I could understand the deafening silence if I had been pressing for a reconsideration of the “no decision” policy, But I was not pressing for such a reply. I was merely asking for an updated reiteration of “no decision” tailored to a particular approach, and for some additional guidance to explain the “no decision”. A month later I have received nothing other than the pear-shaped second paragraph of State 220238 (TAB B) which could equally as well have come by sea pouch as by Immediate telegram.

Incidentally, Mr. Laird's suggestion for licensing the F-5's from Spanish production (see Jim Blake's letter of December 6—TAB C) seems on the surface to offer a possibly attractive way out of our commitment. At the same time, the planes would presumably have to be built from scratch with a considerable delay in delivery time compared with the US model which the LARAF assumes are in storage and ready for delivery anytime the USG is prepared to release them. Since the LARAF's principal desire is to get the planes quickly for transition training to the Mirages, they are unlikely to be mollified by this offer. Moreover, from a Washington point of view, I remain dubious about circuitous ploys of this kind. If we are concerned about Congressional and public reaction to US F-5 deliveries to Libya, we certainly run the risk of being pilloried even more by resorting to what many would regard as a subterfuge in making the planes available through the less than popular Spanish! We tried this with Pakistan via Turkey several years ago and got clobbered!

2. C-130's

Enough on F-5's. Turning to the C-130's, let me first make clear my concern that our Lockheed friends are playing fast and loose with us. At least informally for the record, I would like to make several comments on Cowden's letter of December 1 to you (TAB D). In the first place, I have not seen or heard any sort of a satisfactory explanation from Lockheed as to how the quantum jump from 4 to 8 aircraft took place, and I cannot escape the suspicion that Lockheed itself may have encouraged this increase in the LARAF request to help solve the problem of its Marietta production line. Is there any reason why the Department should not press Lockheed for an explanation of this rather important new dimension of the problem? Secondly, I find it strange that Cowden never mentioned to me that Farjani had told him that failure to license the additional C-130's could result in a break in diplomatic relations with the US. (All Cowden told me was that Farjani had said that such failure could result in expulsion of the Lockheed team, the “burning” of the present 8 planes, and the acquisition of Soviet transport aircraft.) Again, I suspect that the “break in relations” bit has been added after the fact in an effort to influence the Department. Thirdly, I never told Cowden that I “did not anticipate any problem in regard to Lockheed's air drop equipment and training program.” I did tell him before he saw Farjani that I had recommended a favorable Department response to the licensing application for the air drop equipment, adding that I could not however say what the ultimate decision would be.

As you know, I was not in favor at the outset of permitting Lockheed to proceed with discussions with the LARAF for additional C-130's. I was wrong in permitting myself to be persuaded at that time that Lockheed explorations with the LARG, without commitment, would not do any harm. It has done harm and added another horn to our present dilemma. Nevertheless we started down the road and, if our objective is to avoid confrontation, it seems to me that the present logic of the situation is to permit Lockheed to go ahead with their contract and to face up to the licensing problem in 1973. Meanwhile, like the baseball team whose pitcher hasn't shown up, we can always pray for rain!

However, I agree with Jim Blake that we should not let Lockheed maneuver the USG into turning a blind eye on, thereby tacitly approving, a type of contract that is misleading and that will therefore give us even greater trouble with both the LARG and Lockheed. I refer particularly to paragraphs 2 c and d of Mr. Cowden's letter to Jim of December 3 (TAB E). Taken together they will lead, almost certainly, to a situation where the LARG has a claim against Lockheed for return of advance payments—due to the export licenses not being forthcoming from the USG. Again, we will be in the middle, where Lockheed wants us.

3. Air Drop Equipment

The next subject I would like to raise is air drop equipment, I simply do not understand the Department's reasoning in turning down this license. This decision has already badly undermined the credibility of our “no decision” on the F-5's and C-130's. (who will believe we will license 8 additional military C-130's if we won't license air drop equipment?) Although I continue to believe we should have approved the request, it seems to me that at the minimum we should have placed the item in limbo with the F-5's and C-130's.

4. Helicopters

Finally, I would like to raise once again the question of the Sikorsky helicopters which was the subject of our 2228 (TAB F), The only reaction we have had to this message has been Warren Clark's short note of December 7 to Charles Marthinsen (TAB G) saying that there has been “no approval by Sikorsky for the sale of helicopters to the LARG”, but that “We would certainly want to look very closely at any such request,” I do not know what “no approval by Sikorsky” means, but assume that “no application by Sikorsky” was intended. In any event, the intent of our telegram was to suggest that somebody contact Sikorsky, find out what they have in mind, tell them right from the beginning that they haven't got a Chinaman's chance of getting the necessary licenses, and urge them to lay off. In short, we should do now with Sikorsky what I wish we had done from the beginning with Lockheed. At least with Sikorsky there has not been, as far as I know, any approach to the LARG so we do have a chance to avoid the problem.

I regret the complaining tone which the foregoing recital of problems conveys, I know the clearance problem on formal communications on such sensitive and complicated problems, but informal channels are open to at least let us know why our requests for instructions, guidance, etc., can't be met, I would hope you will urge Jim, Harry and Warren to do better by us. It sometimes gets a little lonesome out here.

Sincerely,
[signed Joe]
Joseph Palmer 2nd

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret; Limdis; Official—Informal. The tabs are not printed.

84. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom) to the Ambassador to Libya (Palmer), Washington, January 7, 1972 84. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom) to the Ambassador to Libya (Palmer), Washington, January 7, 19721

Washington, January 7, 1972

January 7, 1972

Dear Joe:

Your letter of December 22 rings very sincerely with the frustration I am sure you are encountering in the absence of decisions or further instructions on the questions of military supplies to Libya.

As disappointing as it may be, I feel I have no alternative but to say that I see little likelihood of change. Having been at least four times up to the Secretary on this matter, Alex Johnson and I do not feel we are in a position to go again in the absence of some genuine change in the circumstances surrounding the problem.

The Secretary's reasoning is thus: The absence of a decision, while it has undoubtedly been difficult to live with in Tripoli, has not brought any marked reaction from the Libyans. No one is able to make a convincing case to him that the absence of a decision increases the risk of an adverse Libyan reaction. This feeling is accentuated by the impression that, if the Libyans for their own reason desire to move against the interests of the United States, they will find reasons to do so, no matter what we do. All of this is accompanied by a feeling that any initiative, such as one with Colonel YUNIS, would not be helpful and only tend further to aggravate the situation. The Secretary feels that a negative decision could on the other hand provoke a reaction which the absence of a decision will not.

The Honorable
Joseph Palmer 2nd,
American Ambassador,
Tripoli, Libya,

While, therefore, not wanting to make a negative decision, neither does he feel he can make a positive decision, givan various Libyan third country adventures, without running into serious public relations and Congressional problems here. NEA is convinced the Israelis would make a major issue of even symbolic shipments because of the active Libyan support for Palestinian extremism.

The Secretary feels that his instructions are clear and, for this reason has not been interested in further communications or instructions on the problem. We were, perhaps, remiss in not replying to 2167, but, as you can see, there was little more that could be said. There the matter stands. He knows that there are risks in this policy given Qadhafi's erratic character, and he knows very well of your concerns. In the absence of some major new development, however, or of some compelling argument for being more precise, he simply will not change his view that our best position is the one he has repeatedly adopted.

Insofar as the C-130s are concerned, you should by now have received the report of my conversation with Messars. Cowden and Monro of Lockheed. I believe they have no doubt regarding the Department's attitude toward a contract with the Libyans which the company almost certainly could not execute. Mr. Cowden, as a good salesman and representative of his company, is determined to get this sale because of the real threat to the existence of the Lockheed-Georgia plant unless its production line can be assured. He has promised, however, to convey the Department's views to the company's management and to let us know what its decision will be. If the decision is to go ahead with the contract, then we will seek the intervention of higher levels of the Department with Lockheed's top management.

You asked about air drop equipment. Our refusal to license it for export to Libya has nothing to do with the proposed additional eight C-130s for the LARAF since the equipment could be used on the C-130s that LARAF now possesses. I see no reason why the Libyans should conclude that the sale of the original C-130s implied a willingness on our part to sell everything else that could augment the capability of the planes.

Warren Clark received a representative of United Aircraft on January 4 in connection with the company's interest in selling helicopters to Libya. By now you should have our cable on that subject as well as that reporting my conversation with the Lockheed representatives. While I understand your desire that we tell United Aircraft or others that we are opposed to the sale to Libya of helicopters having a major military role, I am satisfied that Warren's exposition to the United Aircraft representative satisfactorily reflected for the time being our position regarding the sales in question.

I know how it is to receive a letter like this, but I have no choice. If you have further arguments either for some new initiative or for a new policy let us have them. Meanwhile, we here see little way out of the impasse.

David D. Newsom
Assistant Secretary for African Affairs

AF:DDNewsom/AF/N:JJBlake:crj

1/7/72 X22530 & X20455

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret; Official; Informal. The letter is an unsigned copy.

85. Memorandum From the Counsel to the President (Dean) to the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig), Washington, February 3, 1972 85. Memorandum From the Counsel to the President (Dean) to the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig), Washington, February 3, 19721

Washington, February 3, 1972

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
February 3, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR:

AL HAIG

FROM:JOHN DEAN [JD initialed]

SUBJECT:

Possible Libyan Funding of the Nation of Islam

The Central Intelligence Agency has forwarded a report to us on the above subject which I believe should be brought to your attention. This report indicates that a preliminary agreement has been reached by which the Libyan Government will loan approximately three million dollars without interest to the Nation of Islam (NOI), more commonly known as the Black Muslims.

NOI is a radical black organization which advocates the establishment of an independent black nation in the United States, preaches hatred of the white man while teaching strong puritanical self-disciple for its black followers, and purports to follow the Moslem religion. Founded in the 1930's by Elijah Muhammad, the self-styled “Messenger of Allah,” NOI has established temples throughout the country and a lavish headquarters in Chicago. Its most prominent follower, until a split led to his assassination, was Malcolm X. More recently, younger dissident elements have started open warfare with the NOI leadership and sparked violent confrontations such as the recent incident in Baton Rouge, La. which resulted in four deaths.

In mid-December Herbert Muhammad, the son of Elijah Muhammad, met in Tripoli with Libyan Prime Minister Colonel Mu'ammar Qadhafi to request aid. Prime Minister Qadhafi agreed to lend NOI one million Libyan pounds (about three million dollars) without interest on the assumption that the money would be used to establish church facilities for teaching the Arabic language and the Islamic religion. The loan was to be consummated through the Libyan Ambassador to the United States, Abdullah Suisi.

Investigations by Ambassador Suisi and Minister of Religious Affairs Bashir Al Saghir Al Hawadi have convinced them that NOI is not a Moslem organization in the true sense of the word and that any financial assistance received by them would go toward the personal betterment of Black Muslim leaders. Both Suisi and Hawadi have recently attempted to persuade Prime Minister Qadhafi that no loan should be made. As of January 25, the Ambassador had not yet released the funds to NOI.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Secret. The Libyan Government gave its grant to the Nation of Islam on May 8. (Ibid.)

86. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Eliot) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, February 8, 1972 86. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Eliot) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, February 8, 19721

Washington, February 8, 1972

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington. D.C. 20520
February 8, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR

MR. HENRY A. KISSINGER THE WHITE HOUSE

Subject:

Termination of Agreements in Libya

By an exchange of notes in Tripoli February 5, we have terminated nine bilateral agreements with Libya, including the military base agreement of 1955. Most of these agreements were related to our presence at Wheelus Air Force Base and had no longer served any useful purpose following evacuation of the base in June 1970. Included in the exchange of notes was an agreement we had sought to a mutual washout of financial claims arising from the agreements.

At the request of the Libyan Government, we have also agreed to withdraw the Military Liaison Staff (MLS) from our Embassy in Tripoli by March 15. The mission of the MLS was to assist the Libyan armed forces in procurement of military supplies, which has recently covered items such as spare parts for existing equipment purchased from the US prior to the coup in 1969. The request for withdrawal of the MLS may be connected with our reluctance to approve exports of major military equipment to Libya such as F-5s and C-130s. Libya also recently requested withdrawal of British military and naval missions.

[signed James Larson for]
Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.
Executive secretary

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Confidential.

87. Letter From Secretary of Defense Laird to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, March 1, 1972 87. Letter From Secretary of Defense Laird to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, March 1, 19721

Washington, March 1, 1972

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON
1 MAR 1972

Honorable William P. Rogers
Secretary of State
Department of Stat
Washington, D. C. 20520

Dear Bill:

The imminent termination of the F-5A production line reduces and complicates the possible options open to us in handling the Libyan F-5 question.

Since June 1971, when we released the six F-5As from storage, we have relied on earmarking aircraft from future production for Libya in order to avoid storage costs. The last aircraft from the production line, earmarked for Libya, will be completed at the end of March. One RF-5 is currently in storage, and one F-5B is on 30-day recall.

We must now consider whether we want to continue to defer a decision on delivery and place the aircraft in storage, or choose from the other options that have been proposed in the past, e.g., agree to deliver eight F-5Bs (trainers) or agree to a delivery from the Spanish facility.

Storage costs (about $1850 for each aircraft a month) will become increasingly difficult to fund and, while adding to unit costs, diminish the possibility of selling them to other recipients. Consequently, we need to resolve this matter at an early date and, in any event, before the end of March.

The legal restriction raised in your letter of 15 December—that we are constrained by Section 9 of the Foreign Military Sales Act from agreeing to third-country transfers of equipment that the U.S. itself is not willing to transfer—only applies to equipment sold under FMS or provided under grant MAP. I understand that the U.S. Air Force has determined that the Spanish F-5 facility is supported entirely from commercial sources. Consequently, the constraints under Section 9 would not arise.

I believe our considerable interest in Libya can best be promoted by offering to deliver the trainer version, preferably from the U.S. but alternatively from Spanish production (similar to the proposed Italian M-113 sale). Despite the nil practical effect of such deliveries on the Mid-East arms balance, I recognize the potential for a publicity effort to argue the contrary. Juxtaposed against our recent substantial and highly publicized aircraft sales to Israel, I can only conclude that an effort to ballyhoo the sale of eight trainers would fall flat. A decision to provide F-5Bs ourselves, however, would have to be made before April 1, in order to avoid a significant break in the production line and the associated much higher costs.

Sincerely,
[signed Melvin R. Laird]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files, FRC 75-0125, Box 14, Libya 000.1---1972. Secret.

88. Action Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs (Spiers) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, April 7, 1972 88. Action Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs (Spiers) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, April 7, 19721

Washington, April 7, 1972

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
ACTION MEMORANDUM
April 7, 1972

To:

The Secretary

From: PM - Ronald I. Spiers [RS initialed]

Sale of F-5s to Libya

Now that you have decided to hold in abeyance the sale of F-5 aircraft to Libya, replies can be made to letters from Mr. Laird and the Spanish Foreign Minister.

Mr. Laird recommended sale of the F-5B either from US or Spanish production. He also asked you to resolve the problem raised by storage costs for the aircraft. We propose that you inform Mr. Laird that: (a) the sale of F-5s to Libya is being held in abeyance; (b) if our policy changes in the future we plan to offer F-5B trainers and (c) we therefore agree to the sale to other countries of the F-5As presently in storage but we wish to keep available for delivery to Libya the one F-5B.

The Spanish Foreign Minister requested US approval to sell Spanish assembled F-5Bs to Libya. The proposed reply informs him that you desire to hold in abeyance for now a decision on delivery of F-5s to Libya from the US and that we thus cannot agree at this time to the sale from Spanish production.

Recommendation:

That you sign the attached letters to Mr. Laird and to the Spanish Foreign Minister. (TAB A)

Attachments:

TAB A - Letters to Mr. Laird and Spanish Minister

TAB B - Letters from Mr. Laird and Spanish Minister

Drafted:PM/MAS:Cpappas:bmh

X22571 4/6/72

Concurrences: PM/MAS:CChapman

AF/N:Mr. Odell

NEA/PA:COL Mundy

EUR/SPP:Mr. Landau

AF: Mr. Moore

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA. Secret. Drafted by Chris C. Pappas, Jr. (PM/MAS); and cleared by PM/MAS, AF/N, NEA/PA, EUR/SPP, and AF. The attachments are not printed, but Rogers sent the letters to Laird and Minister of Foreign Affairs Gregorio Lopez Bravo on April 13. (Ibid.)

89. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom) to Acting Secretary of State Richardson, Washington, May 31, 1972 89. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Newsom) to Acting Secretary of State Richardson, Washington, May 31, 19721

Washington, May 31, 1972

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
INFORMATION MEMORANDUM
May 31, 1972

To:

The Acting Secretary

From: AF - David D. Newsom [DN initialed]

Reduction of US Mission in Libya

The Libyan Ministry of Unity and Foreign Affairs told Ambassador Palmer May 30 that the Libyan Government considers it necessary to limit the US Mission to seven diplomatic and seven administrative American members in Tripoli and Benghazi. There are now 35 Americans at the two posts in Libya.

Ambassador Palmer was told there were no political reasons for the reduction. The Note from the Ministry said the reductions were because of the prevailing conditions in the two countries; the imbalance of the number of members of the Libyan mission in the US and the US mission in Libya; and the lack of resources (including human resources) at the Ministry of Unity and Foreign Affairs which makes it impossible to undertake the necessary coordination.

We are not sure what connection there may be between this and the recent reductions in the US Interests Section in Cairo. The UK Mission was reduced to the same number of positions. We understand the French and Soviet Embassies may also be reduced. It may be that the Libyans view this reduction as some sort of first step towards their cherished goal of consolidating the Foreign Ministries and foreign policies of the three members of the Confederation of Arab Republics.

We are awaiting recommendations from Ambassador Palmer before taking further action. Press guidance has been prepared.

Drafted: AF/N:WClark:rjp

5/31/72 x21774

Concurrences: AF/N: JJBlake

AF/EX: WGBradford

NEA/EGY: GNAnderson

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 19-8 US—LIBYA. Confidential.

90. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State (Irwin) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, July 28, 1972 90. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State (Irwin) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, July 28, 19721

Washington, July 28, 1972

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
ACTION MEMORANDUM

To:

The Secretary

From:The Deputy Secretary [JI initialed]

Libya

We are submitting the attached memorandum to the President without a recommendation. We would like your guidance on how you wish us to proceed.

Joe Sisco feels we should not make a recommendation to the President.

David Newsom, while recognizing that each of the three options presents risks, tends toward option two. He would recommend that we try clearly to separate the oil question from the arms question and talk to the companies about an approach to the Libyans which would emphasize the need to avoid abrupt and hostile action against the companies when they may be moving toward participation.

I tend to favor fulfilling our contract on the F-5 aircraft without seeking a specific quid pro quo on the oil company matter. This would remove an obvious irritant in our relations with Libya and might clear the way for less hostile discussions of our overall relations in the future. The rationale of proposing to begin the delivery of the aircraft could be the changed situation in the area, as well as our desire to improve relations with Libya.

Drafted: AF:DDNewsom:crj

X22530 7/28/72

THE SECRETARY OF STATE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM FOR

THE PRESIDENT

Subject:

US-Libyan Relations

We have several indications suggesting that Libya may be seriously contemplating the partial (51%) or complete nationalization of one or more of the 13 U.S. companies which currently account for 90% of Libya's production.

Senior executives of the companies were summoned to Libya June 9 and were urged by Major JALLUD, currently the Libyan Prime Minister, to urge the U.S. Government to change its policy in the Middle East and its policy on arms supply to Libya. A threat to move against the companies was implied.

Major al-Huni, another high ranking member of the regime, coupled the arms supply question with our Middle East policy in telling Ambassador Palmer on July 10 why he saw little prospect for cooperation between the United States and Libya.

Intelligence reports indicate that Libya may be preparing to nationalize some or all of the companies on or about September 1, the third anniversary of the military coup. Although such reports have been current in the past, these appear to have more substance to them. Libyan nationalization of the industry would be consistent with what we know of the aim of the Libyans to control their oil, the intense Libyan dissatisfaction with our policy in the Middle East and Colonel Qadhafi's desire to use oil as a political weapon against the United States.

The Libyan regime also resents our refusal to supply it with certain fighter aircraft which were contracted for by the former government and for other military equipment (C-130's, howitzers, and possibly Sidewinders) which were not contracted for but which they have requested over the past two years. Particularly at issue are eight F-5 aircraft sold to the old regime in 1969 before the coup but not yet delivered and eight additional C-130's offered to them by Lockheed. We have been unwilling to give assurances that we would issue export licenses for these aircraft in 1973. The fact that we have continued to license spare parts for the F-5's and other military equipment we sold to them and that we have authorized the Italians to sell Libya armored personnel carriers, howitzers, recoilless rifles and ammunition which we control through production licenses has not lessened the Libyan Government's resentment against our restrictive arms policy.

Nationalization of the Libyan oil industry would be a severe blow to American interests. The industry represents a billion dollars (book value) of U.S. private investment, although some of it (Esso) has apparently already been largely written off. The industry returns as much as $400 million annually to our balance of payments. It produces about two million barrels of oil a day, chiefly for Western European markets, which would be irreplaceable. Loss of the oil, coupled with the shutdown of the Iraq Petroleum Company, would almost certainly force European consumers to come to terms with both Iraq and Libya, possibly bypassing the U.S. companies and discounting any U.S. official opposition. The position of those in the Arab world and elsewhere who wish to nationalize American assets would be strengthened. The move toward nationalization has already gained momentum in the Persian Gulf area and elsewhere in OPEC.

Deputy Secretary Irwin has recently discussed the Libyan situation twice with oil company executives at the senior vice-presidential level, reviewing for them what we might do to head off nationalization. The executives expressed the hope that the U.S. might find some symbolic gesture it would make, at least to buy time.

We believe we have three options: 1. We could offer to deliver the eight F-5's for which we signed a contract in 1969 (in the trainer version now desired by Libya). As a symbolic gesture we might offer to deliver two planes by the end of the year and the rest within a year. The purpose of this action would be two-fold: to buy time during which perhaps the Libyans would not take any precipitate action against our companies, and to buy enough time for Saudi Arabia and the Gulf States to negotiate with the oil companies a reasonable settlement of the “participation” issue. We believe the chances of a reasonable settlement would be diminished if the Saudis and the other moderates were confronted by a total Libyan takeover of the American companies; in such circumstances they would find themselves under pressure to nationalize completely as well.

Even if the Libyans were to respond positively to our offer and we were to obtain a few months time, the basic problem would not be solved. There can be no guarantee that this or any other offer to Libya of a modest arms supply relationship will be effective, even in the short term. We believe Libya will move against the companies whenever it believes it can extract the maximum political and economic advantage. Arms deliveries will not permanently deflect Libya from such a move; at best, they may delay it. Such a delay should make a satisfactory settlement of the oil companies in Iraq more probable and should make the move toward total nationalization throughout OPEC less likely over the near to mid-term. One of the serious disadvantages of this option is that it would link arms supply and oil in the Libyan mind, thereby opening us to Libyan blackmail.

We must recognize nevertheless that the Libyans are attaching importance to obtaining some arms from us despite their extensive acquisitions from the French and the Russians. This is the only action they have hinted could lead to improved relations with the U.S. or at least to a less hostile attitude toward the oil companies. Under this option we would make clear to the Libyans that we expect improved relations would follow this gesture. If at any time during the period of the delivery of the aircraft Libya moved against the companies, shipments could be stopped and so could shipments of spare parts for the aircraft and other equipment of American origin that Libya now has in its inventory. Although Libya could assume that its ploy of linking arms and oil had worked and could ask for more sophisticated equipment (such as Sidewinders and C-130's), each new case could be discussed for a long period and deliveries prolonged over an extended period of several years. Libyan oil will decline in relative importance during the next decade, and any additional time the companies might have to operate in Libya would be valuable.

Although Israel could be mollified by an advance warning of our action and an explanation of it, any supply of arms to Libya would present grave problems both domestically and with more moderate countries in the Mediterranean area. Libya has intervened in the internal affairs of Morocco, has supported extreme Palestine groups, and has supported dissidents in numerous countries.

2. We could support orderly nationalization. The greatest threat in Libya is that of an abrupt and hostile nationalization which would cut off oil supplies and jeopardize the payment of compensation to the companies.

Under this option, subject to consultation with the companies, we would indicate to the Libyans that we recognize their desire for increased participation and that we will not oppose participation along lines agreed upon between Saudi Arabia and Aramco. At the same time we would urge the Libyans not to undertake any sudden or preemptive nationalizations since this would obviously create difficulties for the kind of smooth transition which is in the interest of all parties. We would emphasize that we continue to believe that future production rests on arrangements between the companies and Libya in which the U.S. Government and its official policies are not involved.

Saudi Arabia and Aramco are currently negotiating a partial nationalization which would begin with a 20% participation by the government in Aramco increasing to 51% probably over a period of five years. At least two of the American Aramco partners and probably a third are resigned to accepting such an arrangement with the most serious bar to agreement probably residing in the terms for compensation. The settlement reached in Saudi Arabia is to apply also to Libya in accordance with the OPEC arrangements. Most of the American companies in Libya are prepared to accept this fact, but their willingness to do so has not been communicated by them to the Libyans who may, in any event, want more than 51% and want it sooner than five years.

If the U.S. were to accept the option of orderly nationalization and indicate its acceptance to the Libyans, it would be taking a step less palatable to the oil companies than a “symbolic” political or military gesture. Also, it could put the U.S. in the position of appearing to support nationalizations. The option could not be exercised without further high level consultations with the companies.

The main advantage of this option would be its separation of the oil and arms supply issues from each other. Having received from us an indication that we accepted the principle of nationalization, Libya would know that it could not use the threat of nationalization to force military supply or political concessions.

3. Take no action. On the assumption that the Libyans will proceed to nationalize on their own timetable and that any intervention on our part is not likely to be effective, we could take no action.

While there are signs of a clear Libyan intention to move at some point against some or all of the companies, we have no firm evidence that they have made such a decision. We have no certainty that the interventions proposed under options 1 or 2 would achieve the purpose of buying time or deterring nationalization. We have made clear to the Libyan Government and to the companies our current policy of not supplying arms to Libya. Although the companies would like to have us make a symbolic gesture, they understand the difficulties we face in doing so. The Libyans probably do not expect further moves from us.

Under these circumstances we could continue to talk with the Libyans along the lines of our present policy but take no action specifically with respect either to the planes or to the question of nationalization.

The disadvantages of this are that it leaves us open to charges that we have not been sufficiently active in protecting the major American interests involved. The advantage would be that it would not draw us further into the efforts by Libya to use the companies to extract arms and changes in policy from us.

We are submitting the foregoing for your review and for such guidance as you desire to give the Department in this matter.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL LIBYA—US. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Newsom. According to a memorandum to Irwin from Robert Smith, the agreement between Egypt and Libya involved a plan for political unification of Egypt and Libya by September 1, 1973. (Ibid.)

91. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, August 9, 1972 91. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, August 9, 19721

Washington, August 9, 1972

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL ACTION
August 9, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR:

DR. KISSINGER

FROM: HAROLD H. SAUNDERS [Hal signed]

SUBJECT:

Our Relationship with Libya

The purpose of this memorandum is to share with you an inside view of the situation in Libya as it may affect our oil companies there over the next month or so. Those companies live under the constant threat of cutbacks in their production, and now we have reports that the government is planning to nationalize three of them on September 1, the anniversary of the Libyan revolution. The US government has been brought into this situation — ostensibly because of our arms policy toward Libya but actually because of our policy toward the Arab-Israel problem.

The event which led to the present situation took place in mid-June when Libyan oil negotiator and now Prime Minister JALLUD called in the heads of the oil companies doing business in Libya and told them that their position is jeopardized because of the US government policy of refusing to provide arms to Libya. He exaggerated in describing Libya requests to the US which he said had been turned down, but as you know there are still 8 F-5 aircraft dating from a commitment made prior to Qadhafi's takeover which have never been delivered. We agreed to sell them at a time when we were working with the Libyan air force as a means of holding our position at Wheelus Airbase. After the revolutionary command deposed King Idris, we held the remaining eight aircraft under that contract “under review,” and that is still their status. Another dimension of this problem for the future is that the Libyans have ordered 8 C-130s through commercial channels for delivery next year, and the issue of licensing them will come up at some point.

The situation within Libya provides the reason why we have been as reluctant to say “no” as we have to say “yes” on the F-5s. We have not said “yes” because of the problem of appearing to support the radical Libyan regime. However, among those people working most closely with Dick Helms on this problem there is a view that failure to release those planes is a major irritant. They feel that whatever moderation exists in Libya today — particularly toward our oil companies— is the work of one very strong faction headed by Al Houni, who is the Minister of the Interior and the head of the intelligence and security services. He is third in power to Qadhafi, although he lacks Qadhafi's charisma and does not have a popular base. He does have a substantial in-government following among those who feel that Libya should maintain its relationships with Western Europe and the US. It is CIA's judgment that Qadhafi's more radical instincts would dominate if it were not for Al Houni and his faction.

Here is where the aircraft come in. Apparently Al Houni has argued [text not declassfied] that the issue is not so much the aircraft in themselves because the Libyans have more than they can handle in the French Mirages but the fact that the US appears to be applying some sort of double standard to Libya by refusing to honor a previous contract. Al Houni points out that the nationalization of British petroleum interests in Libya was the result of a flash reaction to British arms policy. He feels the same could happen to the US companies.

No one argues that fulfilling the terms of the original contract would buy us a significantly different situation in Libya. Our basic problem is that we are dealing with a government that has no time for us because of our Arab-Israeli policy. Libyan attitudes toward us are not likely to change until the Arab-Israeli situation changes, if then. However, one school of thought argues that releasing the aircraft would remove the one specific bilateral bone of contention between our governments. There would be plenty of continuing issues in the Arab-Israeli dispute, but there would be no remaining bilateral evidence that the US was somehow treating Libya differently. The oil companies have not pressed us to release those aircraft, but if some of them are nationalized after the approach that has been made to them on pressing our government to change its arms policy, there will be some room for criticism.

This is one of those situations where there seems to be no answer. It is difficult to see us releasing even 8 F-5s to Libya now — and equally difficult to believe that it would change the Libyan attitude toward us significantly. At the same time, it is not difficult to see further moves against the oil companies, although that is not certain in the immediate future. The only steps one can envision in this situation are small and may not do much good. [text not declassified]

The purpose of this memo is to check the above views against yours. The main question I would put to you for my own guidance is: Do you sense such potential pressure from the oil companies as to warrant serious consideration of releasing at least a couple of the 8 F-5s now with a tentative promise to release the rest next year?

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action.

92. Memorandum From Samuel M. Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, September 1, 1972 92. Memorandum From Samuel M. Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, September 1, 19721

Washington, September 1, 1972

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION
Follow-on #1 (Revised)
7 September 1, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR:

DR. KISSINGER

FROM:SAMUEL M HOSKINSON [SH initialed]

SUBJECT:

Arms for Libya

You have indicated that you thought we “should consider” releasing the eight F-5 aircraft which the Libyans want and asked how we would proceed.

We could begin by asking State for its views. As it turns out, however, Secretary Rogers has just completed a review of our arms policy toward Libya and has concluded that “any modification of the present arms supply policy would not buy much, if any, security for American oil companies.” This was based on the view that the Libyans are probably bent on nationalizing the entire oil industry and will do so no matter what we do whenever it best suits their political and other purposes. It was also concluded that the major, and probably overriding, factor determining U.S.-Libyan relations, and probably also the future of the oil companies, is the intense Libyan hostility towards our policy on the Arab-Israeli conflict.

As a result, the Secretary has decided that there should be no change in our present policy of providing no new weapons to Libya, but attempting to avoid a direct “Yes-No” confrontation over the F-5s. Spares for previously supplied equipment, including aircraft, will continue to be sold and the U.S. approval of the Italian sale of U.S. origin APCs and artillery will remain in effect. Deputy Secretary Irwin has informed the oil companies.

The problem, therefore, boils down to whether or not you wish to override State on this one or ride along with the actions they have just taken to revalidate the present policy. If you did want to go ahead, it would probably mean selling all eight aircraft, since dribbling them out would not reduce and might even raise Libyan sensitivities. This could be done in a low-key way but, given the situation in the Middle East, could not be kept secret.

My own feeling is that this is not a particularly good time to change our Libyan arms policy. For one thing, Qadhafi is an anathma to the Israelis because of his strong support of the fedayeen, financial subsidizing of Egypt and tending to push Sadat toward radical solutions. He is also opposed to Arab friends like Kings Hussein, Hassan and Faisal and has made contributions to radical groups in the U.S. like the Black Panthers. But more important is the fact that the hostile Libyan attitude toward the U.S. is not likely to change until the Arab-Israeli situation changes, if then. As for the oil companies, from all indications they are living on borrowed time in Libya no matter what happens, so long as the present regime remains in power.

Recommendation: That we stick with the present arms policy toward Libya subject to later review if the situation changes.

Approve [HK initialed]
Other

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 739, Country Files, Africa, Libya, Vol. II. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. Kissinger approved the recommendation. In an October 18 memorandum, Newsom asked whether, given Libya's interventionism in other countries and merger with Egypt, stricter controls should be imposed on the sale of U.S. spare parts. Irwin agreed. (Ibid.,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 12-5 LIBYA)

93. Telegram 189100 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Libya, October 17, 1972, 2114Z 93. Telegram 189100 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Libya, October 17, 1972, 2114Z1

Libya, October 17, 1972, 2114Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State 189100
17 OCT 72 2114Z

USUN:POL:MR. CONNOR 10/17/72

S/S - MR. HABIB

AF - MR. NEWSOM

S - MR. BREMER

S/S - MR. BARNERS

ROUTINE TRIPOLI

ROUTINE CAIRO, TEL AVIV, USUN NY

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION:

FM KIKHIA (LIBYA)

OCTOBER 12, 1972, 10:15 AM,

WALDORF 35A

1. PARTICIPANTS:

LIBYA - FM KIKHIA; MR. KARNAL MAGHUR, PERM-REP US - THE SECRETARY, MR. NEWSOM, MR. CONNORS (REPORTING OFFICER)

2. FM KIKHIA SAID MAJOR PROBLEM IN US-LIBYAN BILATERAL RELATIONS IS FAILURE OF US TO DELIVER F-5 AIRCRAFT COVERED BY ESTABLISHED CONTRACT. SECRETARY INDICATED CONDITIONS HAVE CHANGED SINCE CONTRACT MADE AND THAT US IS FRANKLY CONCERNED ABOUT APPARENT LIBYAN INVOLVEMENT IN AFFAIRS OF OTHER STATES. HE PROMISED, HOWEVER, THAT USG WILL CONTINUE TO STUDY QUESTION OF F-5'S. IN DISCUSSING MID-EAST, SECRETARY EMPHASIZED THAT TERRORISM CAN ONLY HARM ARAB CAUSE. SECRETARY ALSO NOTED THAT VITRIOLIC STATEMENTS BY LIBYA ARE NOT HELPFUL TO ANYONE.

3. SECRETARY EXPRESSED CONGRATULATIONS TO KIKHIA ON HIS RECENT APPOINTMENT AS FM. HE SAID HE WAS PLEASED TO HAVE OPPORTUNITY TO TALK TO LIBYAN LEADERSHIP NOTING THAT HE REGRETS THAT THERE ARE NOT MORE SUCH OPPORTUNITIES.

4. F-5 AIRCRAFT: FM SAID QADHAFI HAS ASKED HIM TO PURSUE QUESTION OF F-5 CONTRACT. FM SAID GOL HAS SIGNED CONTRACT AND ALREADY PAID $22 MILLION OF $40 MILLION STIPULATED. NEVERTHELESS, US CONTINUES TO REFUSE TO DELIVER ALL F-5'S. HE STRESSED THAT GOL HAS TRIED UNSUCCESSFULLY FOR THREE YEARS TO SETTLE THIS MATTER. GOL BELIEVES THAT F-5's POSE MAJOR ISSUE BETWEEN US AND LIBYA ASIDE FROM PALESTINE PROBLEM. NOTING THAT US IS PROVIDING ISRAEL WITH PHANTOMS, KIKHIA ASKED WHY LIBYA CANNOT RECEIVE EIGHT OR NINE F-5'S.

5. SECRETARY POINTED OUT THAT CONDITIONS HAVE CHANGED SOMEWHAT SINCE CONTRACT SIGNED. HE ASKED HOW MANY MIRAGE AIRCRAFT LIBYA NOW HAS. FM SAID INVENTORY IS SUPPOSED TO REACH 100 BUT NOW STANDSAT ABOUT 30. SECRETARY EXPRESSED US CONCERN ABOUT WHAT LIBYA APPEARS TO BE DOING IN OTHER COUNTRIES. FM REPLIED THAT LIBYA IS FIGHTING AGAINST COLONIALISM. SECRETARY ASKED WHAT GOL WOULD DO WITH ADDITIONAL F-5's. FM REPLIED THEY WOULD BE USED FOR DEFENSE. SECRETARY ASKED AGAINST WHOM. FM STRESSED THAT LIBYA NEEDS AIR FORCE FOR ITS DEFENSE AND SEES US STANCE ON DELIVERIES OF F-5's AS PRESSURE AGAINST IT. SECRETARY SAID THAT THERE IS NO QUESTION THAT LIBYA SHOULD HAVE ARMED FORCES TO ENSURE ITS DEFENSES. HOWEVER, US IS CONCERNED ABOUT SIZE OF LIBYAN MILITARY FORCE. KIKHIA POINTED OUT THAT IT WILL BE MANY YEARS BEFORE LIBYA HAS ENOUGH PILOTS TO FLY ITS AIRCRAFT. MOREOVER, THERE IS NO QUESTION OF LIBYAN AIR FORCE PLAYING OFFENSIVE ROLE. LIBYA NEEDS GOOD AIR FORCE BECAUSE IT IS VERY LARGE COUNTRY, WITH VERY LONG BORDERS. NEWSOM SAID THAT US IS CONTINUALLY CONSIDERING QUESTION OF F-S'S BUT GOL SHOULD KNOW THAT ISSUE INVOLVES PHRASE IN CONTRACT LIMITING, AIRCRAFT TO DEFENSIVE PURPOSES AND PROHIBITING THEIR TRANSFER TO OR USE BY COUNTRIES OTHER THAN LIBYA. FOR EXAMPLE, SOMETIME AGO LIBYAN F-5's WERE SENT TO PAKISTAN. THIS POSED DIFFICULT LEGAL PROBLEMS FOR US. NEWSOM STRESSED THAT US MUST BE SURE THAT F-S'S WILL BE USED FOR PURPOSES STIPULATED IN CONTRACT.

6. KIKHIA SAID THAT WHEN GOL WORKED OUT AGREEMENT ON WHEELUS, IT CONCLUDED THAT THERE SHOULD BE NO REMAINING COMPLICATIONS IN ITS RELATIONSHIP WITH US. ON PURELY BILATERAL SIDE, MORE THAN 80 PERCENT OF PETROLEUM ACTIVITY IN LIBYA IS BY US COMPANIES. US SHOULD NOTE THAT LIBYA IS ONLY COUNTRY IN AREA WHICH FIGHTS SO HARD AGAINST COMMUNISM. LIBYA MAY DISAGREE WITH US ON MID-EAST ISSUE, BUT THAT IS MID-EAST MATTER. SECRETARY SAID US DOES NOT MIND DISAGREEING WITH LIBYA ON MID-EAST; IT ALSO DISAGREES WITH SOME OTHER ARAB STATES. HOWEVER, WHAT DOES CONCERN US ARE VITRIOLIC ATTACKS WHICH COME FROM LIBYA. CERTAIN LIBYAN STATEMENTS HAVE SUGGESTED GOL INTERFERENCE IN AFFAIRS OF OTHER COUNTRIES. KIKHIA ASKED WHETHER SECRETARY WAS REFERRING TO IRELAND. SECRETARY SAID HE WAS REFERRING TO LIBYA'S NEIGHBORS, WHICH HAVE EXPRESSED CONCERN ABOUT LIBYA'S ATTITUDES. SECRETARY SAID US WANTS GOOD RELATIONS WITH LIBYA. THIS WAS PROVEN WHEN US VACATED WHEELUS WHEN GOL ASKED, EVEN THOUGH LEASE HAD NOT YET EXPIRED. KIKHIA SAID LIBYA HAS NO REAL QUARREL WITH US BUT IS DEEPLY CONCERNED THAT US CONTINUES TO SIDE WITH LIBYA'S ENEMY, ISRAEL.

7. NEWSOM REMARKED THAT US WONDERS WHY GOL ATTACHES SUCH GREAT IMPORTANCE TO F-5 CONTRACT. ECONOMIC RELATIONSHIP SEEMS MUCH MORE IMPORTANT TO BOTH LIBYA AND US. MOREOVER, IT MAY BE IN BEST INTERST OF US AND LIBYA TO END MILITARY RELATIONSHIP. LIBYA'S POSITION ON MID-EAST AND OTHER ISSUES FRANKLY MAKES IT VERY DIFFICULT FOR US TO CONTINUE THAT RELATIONSHIP. KIKHIA AGREED THAT LIBYA WISHES TO PRESERVE CULTURAL TIES WITH US, ESPECIALLY PROGRAMS TO SEND LIBYANS TO US UNIVERSITIES. HE SAID, HOWEVER, THAT F-5 PROBLEM LOOMS LARGE. SECRETARY TOLD FM THAT US WILL CONTINUE TO EXAMINE QUESTION. (IN A BRIEF MEETING FOLLOWING SESSION WITH SECRETARY, MAGHUR TOLD NEWSOM LIBYANS WOULD BE PREPARED RETURN ALL PRESENT F-5's TO US AND WIPE OUT CONTRACT IF US SO WISHED. NEWSOM SAID HE WOULD SO INFORM SECRETARY BUT REPEATED THAT SECRETARY DESIRED TAKE FURTHER LOOK AT QUESTION OVER NEXT SEVERAL WEEKS.)

8. MID-EAST: SECRETARY SAID THAT US IS EAGER TO FIND SOLUTION TO MID-EAST PROBLEM. US HAS NO QUARREL WITH ARABS AND MOST OF THEM SEEM TO LIKE US BETTER THAN COMMUNISTS. THIS MAY BE BECAUSE ARABS KNOW THAT US IS NOT UP TO ANYTHING. GOL SHOULD KNOW THAT US RECOGNIZES JUSTICE OF PALESTINIAN CLAIM. PROBLEM IS HOW TO SETTLE IT FAIRLY. SECRETARY NOTED THAT ARABS DO NOT HELP PROBLEM BY SPEAKING WITH SO MANY VOICES. SECRETARY POINTED OUT THAT US HAS ALSO HAD ITS PROBLEM WITH ISRAEL WITH CERTAIN US PROPOSALS TAKING CRITICISM FROM BOTH SIDES. IT SEEMS CLEAR THAT FINAL SETTLEMENT CANNOT MEET ALL DEMANDS OF BOTH SIDES. HOWEVER, IT IS ESSENTIAL TO MAKE FIRST STEP TOWARDS SETTLEMENT BY GETTING MEANINGFUL DISCUSSIONS UNDERWAY. SECRETARY EMPHASIZED THAT ACTS OF TERRORISM CAN ONLY HARM ARAB CAUSE. FM REPLIED THAT PALESTINIANS ARE FRUSTRATED, DISPERSED, AND DIFFICULT TO SPEAK WITH. LIBYANS KNOW HOW THEY FEEL. UNDER ITALY'S CONTROL 40 PERCENT OF ARAB POPULATION OF LIBYA WAS EXTERMINATED. LIBYANS UNDERSTAND WHY PALESTINIANS FIGHT WITH ALL MEANS THEY HAVE. SECRETARY ASKED WHETHER GOL BELIEVES THAT TERRORISM WILL ACHIEVE ARAB GOALS. KIKHIA REPLIED THAT TERRORISM COULD SERVE TO DRAW ATTENTION TO ARAB CAUSE. SECRETARY COUNTERED AGAIN THAT TERRORISM CAN ONLY HARM THEIR CAUSE.

9. FM SAID THAT US CAN PLAY USEFUL ROLE BY NOT CONTINUING ITS EXAGGERATED SUPPORT FOR ISRAEL. US PROVIDES ISRAEL WITH MAJOR MILITARY AND ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE BUT REFUSES TO DELIVER SMALL NUMBER OF F-5's TO LIBYA. ARAB WORLD HAS SEEN CLEARLY THAT US GIVES TOP PRIORITY TO ISRAEL. ONE NEED LOOK ONLY AT WHAT US HAS DONE IN LEBANON AND JORDAN TO PROVE THIS POINT. SECRETARY SAID FM IS ONLY ARAB THAT HAS EXPRESSED THOSE SENTIMENTS TO HIM. KIKHIA SUGGESTED THAT OTHERS ARE PERHAPS MORE DIPLOMATIC. NEWSOM REMARKED THAT LIBYA WAS ONE OF FEW ARAB COUNTRIES TO REJECT SC RES 242. SECRETARY SAID THAT IN HIS TRAVELS TO OTHER ARAB STATES, IN ALL HIS CONVERSATIONS WITH ARAB LEADERS AND COMMON PEOPLE, THESE SENTIMENTS HAVE NOT BEEN EXPRESSED. HE SAID THAT LIBYA DOES NOT SPEAK FOR ARAB WORLD. SECRETARY SUGGESTED LIBYA TAKE MORE PRAGMATIC APPROACH, CALM ITS HARSH STATEMENTS AND DROP ITS SUPPORT OF TERRORISM. SECRETARY SAID BEST HOPE FOR MID-EAST SETTLEMENT PROBABLY LIES IN INDIRECT DISCUSSIONS. KIKHIA ASKED WHAT SHOULD BE CONSIDERED IN DISCUSSIONS. SECRETARY SAID THAT RE-OPENING OF CANAL SHOULD BE FIRST PRIORITY, FOLLOWED BY MOVEMENT OF EGYPTIANS TO SOME POINT ACROSS CANAL. NEXT STEP COULD BE TO ADOPT SC RES 242 AND SEEK WORK OUT SOLUTION FOR PALESTINE PEOPLE. KIKHIA ASKED HOW PROBLEMS OF PALESTINIANS WOULD BE RESOLVED THROUGH SUCH A PROCEDURE. SECRETARY REPLIED THAT AMBASSADOR JARRING COULD PURSUE MATTER AFTER SC RES 242 WAS ADOPTED. SECRETARY CONCLUDED CONVERSATION BY ASKING THAT HIS BEST REGARDS BE CONVEYED TO PRESIDENT QADHAFI AND THAT FM TELL HIM THAT US WANTS TO SETTLE MID-EAST PROBLEM SO THAT COMMUNISTS WILL NOT BE ABLE TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF TROUBLED ENVIRONMENT. GDS

YY

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL LIBYA—US. Secret;Exdis. It was repeated to Cairo, Tel Aviv, and USUN. Drafted by CONNOR (USUN); cleared by AF; and approved by Michael Habib (S/S).

94. Telegram 1699 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, October 30, 1972, 1600Z. 94. Telegram 1699 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, October 30, 1972, 1600Z.1

October 30, 1972, 1600Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AEMBASSY TRIPOLI 1699
P 301600Z OCT 72

11

ACTION AF-18

INFO OCT-01 NEA-10 EUR-20 CIAE-00 DODE-00 PM-08 H-02 INR-09 L-03 NSAE-00 NSC-10 P-03 RSC-01 PRS-01 SS-14 USIA-12 OMB-01 I-03 IO-12 RSR-01 GAC-01 ACDA-19 EB-11 COM-08 COME-00 INT-08 DEP-41 AID-20/197 W 065876

P 301600Z OCT 72

FM AEMBASSY TRIPOLI

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9344

DEPARTMENT PASS USINT CAIRO, OTHER INTERESTED POSTS

SUBJECT:

FAREWELL CONVERSATION WITH QADHAFI

REF:

TRIPOLI 1666

SUMMARY: I MET WITH QADHAFI (WHO WAS ACCOMPANIED BY JALLUD AND KIKHYA) OCTOBER 28; YUNIS AND HAMZA JOINED US LATER IN MEETING, BUT DID NOT ACTIVELY PARTICIPATE. WIDE-RANGING, FRANK EXCHANGE WAS, BY AND LARGE, REPLAY OF EARLIER TALKS WITH QADHAFI. HE STRESSED LAR'S NON-ALIGNMENT; HIS PERPLEXITY AT USG'S “TOTAL COMMITMENT” TO ISRAEL; LARG'S NEED FOR ARMS (ESCALATED TO PHANTOMS); HIS AVERSION TOWARDS COMMUNISM, BUT CONVERSELY HIS FEAR THAT GROWING PRESSURES MAY FORCE HIM TO ACCEPT “SOVIET OPTION”; AND ARABS' CONTROL OF OIL IN CONTEXT GROWING US IMPORT REQUIREMENTS. I SENSED HE UNEASY ABOUT MOSCOW-CAIRO RAPPROCHEMENT AND DEVELOPMENTS IN CAIRO, FACTORS THAT PERHAPS ACCOUNTED FOR HIS AVOIDING MENTION OF PET PROJECT, UNION WITH EGYPT. HIS FRUSTRATION OVER US ME POLICY LED HIM TQ ASK IF JEWISH-CHRISTIAN PACT AGAINST ISLAM EXISTS. HE WAS PERSONALLY VERY CORDIAL AND APPEARED TO BE IN EXCELLENT HEALTH. HIS EASY, INFORMAL RELATIONSHIP WITH HIS COLLEAGUES WAS IMPRESSIVE; WHILE ALL WERE RELAXED, THEY HUNG ON HIS EVERY WORD. THAT HE FAILED TO TAKE UP JALLUD'S OCTOBER 24 “ICE BOX” ALTERNATIVE RE MF IMBROGLIO (PARA 2 REFTEL) SUGGESTS JALLUD WAS NOT REALLY FLOATING SERIOUS NEW IDEA AFTER ALL.

1. IN RESPONSE MY REQUEST, I HAD ONE AND ONE-HALF HOUR FAREWELL TOUR D'HORIZON WITH RCC CHAIRMAN QADHAFI EVENING OCTOBER 28 AT HIS ALIZIYA BARRACKS OFFICE. PRIME MINISTER JALLUD SAT IN THROUGHOUT SESSION AND TOOK PART IN DISCUSSION, AS DID FONMIN KIKHYA. COS ABU BAYR YUNIS AND RCC MEMBER 'ALIAWAD HANZA DRIFTED INTO OFFICE DURING THE MEETING, CASUALLY PULLED UP CHAIRS, BUT DID NOT TAKE PART IN EXCHANGES. ATMOSPHERE WAS FRIENDLY EVEN WHEN DISCUSSION TOUCHED ON QADHAFI'S BETE NOIRE, US ME POLICY AND RELATED LAR ARMS REQUESTS. JALLUD, YUNIS, HAMZAD AND, BY IMPLICATION THEIR MISSING COLLEAGUES, OBVIOUSLY CONTINUE TO ENJOY CLOSE RAPPORT AND EASY COMRADESHIP WITH QADHAFI. YET THEIR DEFERENCE TO HIM WAS STRIKING. JALUD AND YUNIS LOOKED GUILTILY AT THEIR NOW-SMOKING CHIEF BEFORE LIGHTING CIGARETTES. ALL THREE HUNG ON HIS EVERY WORD. KIKHYA DID INTERPRETING WITH JALLUD TAKING COPIOUS NOTES.

2. QADHAFI BEGAN SESSION WITH MUCH TOO GENEROUS REFERENCES TO MY “PERSONAL UNDERSTANDING AND APPRECIATION” OF GOALS OF SEPTEMBER 1 REVOLUTION VIS-A-VIS LAR AND ARABS IN GENERAL WHICH HE SARDONICALLY CONTRASTED WITH “ATTITUDE OF USG”. WHILE USG AND LARG HAD RESOLVED MAJOR PROBLEMS, ESPECIALLY EVACUATION OF WHEELUS, MORE EASILY THAN HAD BEEN EXPECTED, IMPROVEMENT IN RELATIONSHIP HAD NOT TAKEN PLACE TO EXTENT LARG HAD HOPED. FOR EXAMPLE, “USG FAILED TO FULFILL SOME OF ITS CONTRACTS.”

3. IN THANKING QADHAFI FOR RECEIVING ME, I DESCRIBED MY DEPARTURE PLANS AND REASONS FOR MY RESIGNATION AND RETIREMENT. I THEN VIGOROUSLY DENIED ANY LACK OF UNDERSTANDING ON PART USG OF NEW SITUATION CREATED BY LIBYAN REVOLUTION POINTING OUT WE COULD NOT HAVE ACHIEVED WHAT WE HAVE IF WASHINGTON AND I HAD NOT SEEN FACTS OF LIBYAN SITUATION IN SAME PERSPECTIVE. STRESSING THAT I TOO HAVE BEEN DEEPLY DISAPOINTED THAT AREAS OF AGREEMENT WHICH WE HAVE ACHIEVED HAVE NOT RESULTED IN GREATER IMPROVEMENT IN OVERALL RELATIONSHP, I ASKED QADHAFI FOR HIS MOST RECENT ASSESSMENT OF U.S.-LARG RELATIONSHIP SO THAT I COULD REFLECT IT TO MY GOVERNMENT WHEN I RETURN. WHEN QADHAFI INTERRUPTED TO ASK IF I WOULD SEE PRESIDENT NIXON, I ASSURED HIM THAT PRESIDENT WOULD BE APPRISED OF ANY THOUGHTS HE MIGHT ENTRUST TO ME.

4. QADHAFI TOOK THIS OPENING TO SAY THAT LAR DETERMINATION TO ACHIEVE COMPLETE INDEPENDENCE AND FOSTER INTERNAL DEVELOPMENT MEANT THAT IT MUST STEER CLEAR OF TIES TO MAJOR POWERS (THIS WAS SAME THEME HE HAD PURSUED PREVIOUS DAY AT INTELLECTUALS' SEMINAR IN TRIPOLI—SEE 271657z OCT 72). LAR'S NONALIGNED COURSE, HOWEVER, DOES NOT MEAN ENMITY FOR EMMITY'S SAKE AGAINST EITHER U.S. OR OTHER POWERS. LAR HAD LOOKED TO U.S. FOR ASSISTANCE, AND, INDEED, HAS BEEN ACCUSED OF BEING U.S. PUPPET BY OTHER STATES, BUT LAR HAS GAINED LITTLE THEREBY. LAR, LIKE NASSER'S EGYPT HAD TURNED IN VAIN TO U.S. FOR ARMS “FOR SELF DEFENSE”; USG HAD FAILED TO DELIVER, THOUGH IT HAS OPENED ITS ARSENALS TO ISRAEL. LIBYA, HE SAID, IS THUS UNDER “GREAT PRESSURE” TO SEEK ACCOMMODATION WITH USSR. WHILE LAR FORTHRIGHTLY AND CONSISTENTLY HAS OPPOSED COMMUNISM IN ARAB WORLD, AMERICA'S PRO-ISRAEL STANCE COULD DRIVE LAR, LIKE EGYPT BEFORE IT, TO TURN TO SOVIETS, LIBYA NEEDS ARMS AND WOULD LIKE TO OBTAIN THEM FROM THE US: “WE TOO WANT PHANTOMS”. I NOTED THAT EGYPT AND LIBYA HAVE OBTAINED SUBSTANTIAL QUANTITIES OF WAR MATERIEL FROM OTHER SOURCES, INCLUDING USSR AND FRANCE, AND ASKED HIM WHY LARG WANTED FURTHER SUPPLIES FROM US. QADHAFI REPLIED THAT “MY COUNTRY FEELS THREATENED” AND THAT WEAPONS WOULD ONLY BE USED DEFENSIVELY. ALTHOUGH HE WAS NOT EXPLICIT, CLEAR IMPLICATION WAS ONE OF CONCERN ABOUT AN ISRAELI ATTACK. I REMINDED QADFAFI THAT USG HAS NOT MADE NEGATIVE DECISION RE LAR'S ARMS REQUESTS. FOREBEARING TO INQUIRE ABOUT HOW HE DEFINED “HIS COUNTRY”, I REMARKED THAT I APPRECIATED QADHAFI'S CANDOR AND THAT I WISHED TO RECIPROCATE IN SAME SPIRIT. I PICKED UP HIS EARLIER ASSERTION THAT USG HAD FAILED TO FULFILL CONTRACTS BY WHICH HE “MUST HAVE MEANT ADDITIONAL F-5'S”. I REMINDED HIM USG HAD NOT REFUSED TO SELL THE AIRCRAFT. RATHER, NO DECISION HAD BEEN MADE. THIS WAS DUE TO A NUMBER OF FACTORS, INCLUDING LARG'S FAILURE TO RESPOND TO FORMAL US INQUIRIES REGARDING MOVEMENT OF LARAF'S F-5'S TO PAKISTAN. THIS MOVEMENT HAD RAISED QUESTION OF WHETHER LARG WOULD ADHERE TO SALES CONTRACT STIPULATIONS REGARDING USE AND DISPOSITION US-SUPPLIED ARMS. QADHAFI OBJECTED THAT USG HAD “REFUSED” — I INTERRUPTED TO CORRECT THIS TO “HAD NOT DECIDED” — TO PROVIDE ADDITIONAL AIRCRAFT “TWO YEARS AGO”, LONG BEFORE INDO-PAKISTANI WAR. DURING THAT WAR, HE ADDED,USSR HAD ESTABLISHED “BRIDGE OF PLANES” TO PROVIDE WAR MATERIAL TO INDIA WHILE US, DESPITE TREATY TIES, FAILED TO SUCCOR PAKISTAN. I REPLIED THAT TO THE EXTENT WE THOUGHT PAKISTAN WAS RIGHT, THE USG HAD PROVIDED STRONG MORAL SUPPOPT TO PAKISTANIS, A FACT TO WHICH PRESIDENT BHUTTO COULD ATTEST. BUT, I SAID, QADHAFI WAS IN EFFECT NOT SPEAKING TO THE POINT: THE FACT WAS THAT LAR HAD SENT PLANES OFF, HAD FAILED TO CONSULT WITH USG AS AGREEMENTS REQUIRED, AND HAD FAILED TO RESPOND TO OUR SUBSEQUENT INQUIRIES. THE ISSUE WAS NOT PAKISTAN. IF CIRCUMSTANCES AROSE IN WHICH HE SIMILARLY SENT PLANES TO THE UK, WE WOULD HAVE TO TAKE ISSUE WITH HIS DECISION INSOFAR AS HIS LEGAL UNDERTAKINGS WITH THE US ARE CONCERNED. QADHAFI OBSERVED THAT “IN ANY EVENT” PLANES ARE NOW BACK IN LIBYA AND THEN, RATHER QUICKLY AND LIGHTLY, HE DISMISSED THE SUBJECT BY SUGGESTING THAT LARAF TRAINEES IN PAKISTAN HAD NEED OF F-5 AIRCRAFT.

11

ACTION AF-18

INFO OCT-01 NEA-10 EUR-20 CIAE-00 DODE-00 PM-08 H-02 INR-09 L-03 NSAE-00 NSC-10 P-03 RSC-01 PRS-01 SS-14 USIA-12 OMB-01 I-03 IO-12 RSR-01 GAC-01 ACDA-19 EB-11 COM-08 COME-00 INT-08 DEP-41 AID-20/197 W 058998

P 301600Z OCT 72

FM AEMBASSY TRIPOLI

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9344

DEPARTMENT PASS USINT CAIRO, OTHER INTERESTED POSTS

SUBJECT:

FAREWELL CONVERSATION WITH QADHAFI

REF:

TRIPOLI 1666

5. I SAID THAT I WOULD, OF COURSE, REPORT TO WASHINGTON HIS INTEREST IN FURTHER ARMS ACQUISITIONS FROM THE US. AT THE SAME TIME, I WISHED AGAIN TO BE FRANK. THE PAKISTANI ASPECT OF THE PROBLEM WAS ONLY ONE ELEMENT. THE MAIN PROBLEM IS THAT ARMS SUPPLY IS A HIGHLY SENSITIVE SUBJECT THAT CAN ONLY BE DEALT WITH WITHIN THE CONTEXT OF THE OVERALL RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN COUNTRIES. WE HAD TO FACE THE FACT THAT THE PRESENT RELATIONSHIP IS DEFICIENT - CERTAINLY NOT GOOD ENOUGH TO MAKE EXTENSIVE MILITARY COOPERATION A PROMISING FIELD UNDER PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES. EVEN WITH STRONG ASSURANCES REGARDING DEFENSIVE USE, THEREFORE, I WOULD NOT WISH TO ENCOURAGE HIM TO BELIEVE ADVANCED WEAPONRY COULD REALLY BE FORTHCOMING.

6. I WENT ON TO SUGGEST THAT WE OUGHT TO CONSIDER TOGETHER WHAT IS WRONG WITH OUR OVERALL RELATIONSHIP AND SUGGESTED FOR OPENERS THAT WE WHAT LACK IS A CONTINUING DIALOGUE. OUR CONTACTS TEND TO BE INTERMITTENT MOST OF THE TIME. WHEN DIALOGUE HAS BEEN IN PROGRESS, MAJOR PROBLEMS—E.G. EVACUATION, TERMINATION OF AGREEMENTS, SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS, RELATIONS WITH OIL COMPANIES, ETC.—HAVE BEEN SMOOTHLY RESOLVED. WHAT WE NEED IS FAR BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF EACH OTHERS POINTS OF VIEW. FOR EXAMPLE, I POINTED OUT, QADHAFI HAD SEVERAL TIMES EARLIER REFERRED TO THE USG'S “TOTAL COMMITMENT” TO ISRAEL. THE US HAS NO SUCH COMMITMENT. THE US, I SAID, IS “TOTALLY COMMITTED” ONLY TO ITS OWN NATIONAL INTERESTS. SO FAR AS ME IS CONCERNED US STRONGLY SUPPORTS INDEPENDENCE OF UN MEMBER ISRAEL, BUT IT EQUALLY SUPPORTS THE INDEPENDENCE AND TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY OF ARAB NEIGHBORS, A PEACEFUL SOLUTION TO ARAB-ISRAELI DISPUTE, AND JUSTICE FOR PALESTINIANS, ALL WITHIN THE PARAMETERS OF UNSC RESOLUTION 242. PERHAPS, I SUGGESTED, THE USG IS ALSO AT FAULT IN MISUNDERSTANDING LIBYAN POINTS OF VIEW. FOR EXAMPLE, WE HEAR LIBYA SAYING THAT IT IS “TOTALLY OPPOSED” TO A PEACEFUL SOLUTION TO THE MIDDLE EASTERN PROBLEM. I COULD NOT BELIEVE THIS IS TRUE. BUT, THIS IS WHAT I HEARD MAJOR JALLUD SAYING ONLY THE OTHER DAY. PEPHAPS IF WE SPENT MORE TIME IN TALKING TO ONE ANOTHER WE WOULD DISCOVER THAT FACILE GENERALIZATIONS ARE INCORRECT AND THAT THERE ARE IMPORTANT AREAS OF COMMON INTEREST AND OVERLAP. I THEREFORE URGED ON COL. QADHAFI AND HIS COLLEAGUES IN THE RCC A FAR MORE CONTINUOUS DIALOGUE WITH MY SUCCESSOR THAN I HAVE BEEN ABLE TO ACHIEVE.

7. JALLUD INTERVENED TO ASK HOW COULD USG EXPECT TO CONDUCT DIALOGUE “ABOUT MY LIFE?” REPEATING HIS EARLIER AVOWAL THAT PALESTINE CAUSE IS MATTER OF “LIFE AND DEATH” FOR ARABS (REFTEL), HE WENT ON TO MAINTAIN THAT SITUATION IN AREA HAS CHANGED SINCE 1956 AND 1967. EARLIER, US HAD BEEN ABLE TO PROVIDE OIL TO EUROPEAN CONSUMERS WHEN WAR BROKE OUT IN ME. NOW HE SAID, U.S. COULD NOT DO SO AND, INDEED, U.S. WILL ITSELF REQUIRE, INCREASINGLY, IMPORTS OF ARAB OIL.TAKING UP THRUST OF JALLUD'S REMARKS, QADHAFI ASKED WHY DOES USG ADHERE TO ITS COMMITMENT TO ISRAEL IN FACE OF THESE FACTS OF LIFE? U.S. INTERESTS IN ARAB WORLD, HE SAID, FAR OUTWEIGH ITS INTERESTS IN ISRAEL. HE SAID HE COULD NOT UNDERSTAND WASHINGTON'S SPECIAL TIE TO TEL AVIV; COULD THERE RE A “JEWISH-CHRISTIAN” PACT DIRECTED AGAINST ISLAM? U.S. HE CAUTIONED IS MAKING ERROR IN BASING ITS ME POLICIES ON ISRAEL, JUST AS IT ERRS IN RELYING ON POLITICAL ('ARAB') PERSONALITIES “WHO MAY CHANGE OR WHO MAY DISAPPEAR AT ANY TIME.”

11

ACTION AF-18

INFO OCT-01 NEA-10 EUR-20 CIAE-00 DODE-00 PM-08 H-02 INR-09 L-03 NSAE-00 NSC-10 P-03 RSC-01 PRS-01 SS-14 USIA-12 OMB-01 I-03 IO-12 RSR-01 GAC-01 ACDA-19 EB-11 COM-08 COME-00 INT-08 DEP-41 AID-20/197 W 121836

P 301600Z OCT 72

FM AEMBASSY TRIPOLI

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9344

DEPARTMENT PASS USINT CAIRO, OTHER INTERESTED POSTS

SUBJECT:

FAREWELL CONVERSATION WITH QADHAFI

REF:

TRIPOLI 1666

8. AFTER FIRMLY REJECTING ANY SUGGESTION OF ISLAMOPHOBIA, I SAID USG IS COMMITTED TO A JUST PEACEIN THE ME, A FAIR COMPROMISE THAT RECOGNIZES RIGHTS OF PALESTINIANS, OTHER ARABS, AND ISRAELIS. (JALLUD AT THIS JUNCTURE REMARKED TO QADHAFI THAT I EARLIER HAD TOLD HIM THAT ME PROBLEM, LIKE VIET NAM AND KOREA, COULD BE RESOLVED PEACEFULLY THROUGH NEGOTIATIONS; QHADHAFI SMILED AGREEMENT WITH JALLUD'S GRIMACE OF INCREDULITY AT THIS IDEA.) REVERTING AGAIN TO QADHAFI'S REPEATED USE OF TERM “TOTAL COMMITMENT” TO DESCRIBE OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH ISRAEL, I STRESSED THAT WE OFTEN FIND OURSELVES AT ODDS WITH THAT COUNTRY. FOR EXAMPLE, I POINTED OUT OUR BASIC MOTIVATION IS TO MAINTAIN AN ARMS BALANCE IN THE AREA IN THE INTERESTS OF PEACE. WE HAVE NO INTEREST IN GIVING ISRAEL A CLEAR COMPETIVIVE ADVANTAGE. THIS SOMETIMES GIVES RISE TO STRONG DIFFERENCES OF OPINION BETWEEN THE U.S. AND ISRAEL OVER LEVELS OF ASSISTANCE AND THERE HAVE BEEN IMPORTANT INSTANCES IN WHICH WE HAVE HAD TO REFUSE OR DEFER ISRAELI REQUESTS. AT THIS POINT, QADHAFI ASKED “WHAT, FOR EXAMPLE"? I AFFIRMED THAT IT WAS WELL KNOWN THAT THE USG HAD AT VARIOUS TIMES TURNED DOWN ISRAELI REQUESTS FOR ADDITIONAL PHANTOMS AND FOR OTHER, MORE ADVANCED AIRCRAFT IN ORDER TO ENSURE BALANCE. (QADHAFI AND JALLUD DID NOT COMMENT, BUT THEIR ELOQUENTLY RAISED EYEBROWS LED ME TO CONCLUDE THAT THEY THOUGHT I WAS TALKING THROUGH MY HAT.)

9. SEEKING TO DIVERT CONVERSATION, I STRESSED THAT US, WHICH UNDERSTANDS AND SYMPATHIZES WITH LAR'S DEVELOPMENT NEEDS AND WHICH HAS WIDE EXPERIENCE IN DEVELOPMENT, HAS PREVIOUSLY OFFERED EVERY FACILITY TO LAR ON REIMBURSABLE BASIS. THIS OFFER STANDS, THOUGH THE USG WILL NOT IMPORTUNE THE LAR TO ACCEPT OUR ASSISTANCE. SHOULD LARG UNDERSTAND THAT IT NEED ONLY ASK FOR OUR HELP; IT CAN RELY ON U.S. UNDERSTANDING AND COOPERATION.

10. DISCUSSION DREW TO CLOSE WITH QADHAFI STRESSING IMPORTANCE LARG ATTACHES TO HAVING ACCESS TO U.S. TECHNOLOGY THROUGH LARG STUDENTS IN U.S. AS ALMOST AN AFTER-THOUGHT BUT WITH SOME EMPHASIS, HE STATED THAT LARG TOO ATTACHES IMPORTANCE TO DIALOGUE AS MEANS OF SOLVING PROBLEMS, (I WOULD LIKE TO THINK THAT I DETECTED A SLIGHT NOTE OF “MEA CULPA” IN THIS PROTESTATION.) SESSION ENDED WITH MORE EXCHANGES OF GREETINGS AND HANDSHAKES ALL AROUND.

11. COMMENT: WE BROKE LITTLE NEW GROUND, BUT I BELIEVE QADHAFI IS DEEPLY CONCERNED ABOUT THE CURRENT EFFORTS ON THE PART OF CAIRO TO REACH NEW UNDERSTANDING WITH MOSCOW. HE UNDERSTANDS SADAT'S DILEWMA BUT HAS NOT YET, AT LEAST, BEEN ABLE TO ACCEPT EGYPT'S—MUCH LESS LIBYA'S—RESORT TO “SOVIET OPTION”. HIS FAILURE TO MENTION, EVEN IN PASSING, HIS PET PROJECT - MERGER WITH EGYPT -REINFORCES MY BELIEF IN THIS REGARD. INTERESTING TOO WAS FACT THAT HE DID NOT MENTION, AS JALLUD HAD IN OUR SESSION EARLIER, POSSIBILITY THAT ME PROBLEM MIGHT BE SHELVED OR PUT ON ICE FOR FUTURE TO RESOLVE; I WOULD JUDGE THAT QADHAFI IS NOT ENAMORED OF THIS IDEA. FINALLY, QADHAFI'S SUGGESTION THAT “JEWISH-CHRISTIAN” PLOT AFOOT WAS MORE THAN HALF SERIOUS AND WAS CLUE TO DEPTH OF HIS MUSLIM SENSITIVITIES. IN SUM, CONVERSATION WAS YET ANOTHER REMINDER (AS IF WE NEEDED ONE!) THAT PIVOTAL FIGURE OF LIBYAN REVOLUTION IS AN OBSESSED MAN, A CURIOUS MIX OF 7TH CENTURY ISLAMI, BEDOUIN WARRIOR AND MODERN IDEALISTIC NATIONALIST. HIS JUDGEMENTS ARE SIMPLISTICALLY SHARP: HE PERSISTS IN SEEING EVERYTHING AS EITHER COMPLETELY RIGHT OR COMPLETELY WRONG. UNFORTUNATELY HE PERCEIVES THE U.S. AS WRONG. BUT WE CAN PERHAPS DERIVE SOME CONSOLATION - AND EVEN PROTECTION - FROM FACT THAT VIRTUALLY EVERYONE ELSE FALLS IN SAME CATEGORY AND EVEN QADHAFI IS SUFFICIENTLY PRAGMATIC TO KNOW HE CANNOT TOTALLY ALIENATE EVERYBODY. GDS.

NOTE BY OC/T: NOT PASSED CAIRO.

PALMER

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 LIBYA. Secret; Priority.

95. Telegram 1849 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, December 7, 1972, 1456Z 95. Telegram 1849 From the Embassy in Libya to the Department of State, December 7, 1972, 1456Z1

December 7, 1972, 1456Z

Department of State
TELEGRAM 1849
R 071456z DEC 72

42

ACTION SS-25

INFO OCT-01/026 W 106402

R 071456Z DEC 72

FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 9449

AMEMBASSY LAGOS

LAGOS FOR NEWSOM

SUBJECT:

TDCS DB-315/10058-72 OF NOV 30

SUMMARY: SUBJECT TDCS IS IMPORTANT AS POSSIBLE INDICATION LARG WILL TAKE STEPS SOON AGAINST AMERICAN INTERESTS IN LIBYA. WHILE THIS HAS OCCURRED BEFORE UNDER COVER OF IMPARTIAL TREATMENT APPLIED TO OTHERS TOO, NEW ELEMENT FORESHADOWED IS OVERT DISCRIMINATION AGAINST US BASED SQUARELY ON OUR SUPPORT FOR ISRAEL. MY ESTIMATE IS THAT THIS IS LIKELY TO BEGIN IN FIRST HALF OF 1973. THERE IS LITTLE WE CAN DO ABOUT, BUT AT MINIMUM WE SHOULD REMOVE UNNECESSARY OBSTACLES TO USG/LARG UNDERSTANDING OF EACH OTHER'S POSITION. END SUMMARY.

1. ATTENTION CALLED TO THIS TDCS BECAUSE OF ITS PLAUSIBILITY AS A SUMMARY OF FONMIN KIKHYA'S VIEWS AND THEIR POTENTIAL SIGNIFICANCE TO US/LIBYAN RELATIONS IF TRUE. PLAUSIBILITY SUGGESTED BY [text not declassified] PRESENCE OF SOME INCONSISTENCIES IN KIKHYA'S APPARENTLY SPONTANEOUS REMARKS— E.G. “ARABS MUST DO THEIR BEST” To INFLUENCE AMERICANS AND YET THE U.S. ESTABLISHMENT IS “ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE TO CHANGE.” AS TO SIGNIFICANCE HIS REMARKS, THEY CONVEY CONVICTION THAT LARG WILL SOON ATTEMPT TO SWAY USG/ME POLICY BECAUSE ARABS CONTROL PRESSURE POINTS TO WHICH USG SHOULD BE SENSITIVE IN ITS OWN INTERESTS.

2. I DOUBT THAT KIKHYA WAS REFERRING TO RCC DECISIONS ALREADY TAKEN WHEN HE SAID LARG WOULD SOON BE FORCED TO ADOPT A NEW POLICY TOWARD THE UNITED STATES. THAT STATEMENT IS ONLY A PREDICTION OF WHAT WOULD HAVE TO BE A DECISION BY OTHERS, NAMELY RCC. QUESTION FOR US IS WHETHER KIKHYA PREDICTED RIGHTLY OR, FOR INSTANCE, WAS MERELY VENTING LARG FRUSTRATIONS OVER FAILURE OF ARABS TO AGREE ON UNITED ACTION AS AT RECENT KUWAIT MEETING. AM SKEPTICAL THAT ANYTHING SPECIFIC AS FAILURE OF KUWAIT MEETING WOULD ACCOUNT FOR KIKHYA'S FORECAST — HE IS NOT THAT NEW TO THE GAME OF ARAB POLITICS. ON OTHER HAND, THE PERSISTENT PATTERN OF ARAB DISARRAY WAS ONE OF HIS EXPRESS PREMISES IN ARRIVING AT HIS CONCLUSION THAT LARG WOULD ACT AGAINST U.S. GIVEN ALL OF QADHAFI'S EXHORTATIONS TO NATIONALIZE THE BATTLE AGAINST ISRAEL, AND THEREFORE ITS MAJOR ALLY, PLUS HIS REPEATED HEAD-ON ATTACKS AGAINST OBSTACLES FRUSTRATING THE ARABS, IT SHOULD NOT BE SURPRISING IF HE TOOK THE NEXT STEP AND LASHED OUT AT AMERICAN INTERESTS IN A FRANKLY POLITICAL, DISCRIMINATORY MANNER. THE NOTABLE THING NOW IS THAT KIKHYA PREDICTS THIS WILL OCCUR SOON. HE MAY NOT BE IN A POSITION TO INFLUENCE RCC DECISIONS, EXCEPT MARGINALLY, BUT HE IS IN AN EXCEPTIONALLY GOOD POSITION TO PREDICT THEM.

3. FROM LARG VIEWPOINT ITS PREVIOUS ACTIONS AFFECTING US INTERESTS HERE WERE NON-DISCRIMINATORY. MOST QUESTIONABLE INSTANCE OF POSSIBLE DISCRIMINATION WAS LARG DEMAND FOR EVACUATION WHEELUS AIR BASE, BUT EVEN HERE LARG WOULD ARGUE IT INSISTED ON NATIONAL PREROGATIVES THAT APPLIED ALSO TO BRITISH AT EL-ADAM AND WOULD HAVE APPLIED TO ANY OTHER NON-ARAB BASES. IT WOULD THEREFORE BE A DEPARTURE, IN THE LARG'S OWN EYES, IF RCC DECIDED TO APPLY DISCRIMINATORY MEASURES AGAINST U.S. FOR POLITICAL REASONS.

4. IF SUCH A DECISION IS TAKEN, PROBABLY THE MEASURES ADOPTED WOULD BE SELECTIVE AT FIRST. POSSIBLE TARGETS INCLUDE OUR OIL INTERESTS HERE, OUR COMMERCIAL INTERESTS, AND OUR DIPLOMATIC PRESENCE. MEASURES MIGHT INCLUDE A SPECIAL TAX ON AMERICAN OIL COMPANIES IN LIBYA, A PARTIAL BOYCOTT OF AMERICAN GOODS AND SERVICES (OVER AND ABOVE WHAT MAY ALREADY EXISTS AS A PREFERENCE FOR NON-AMERICAN ITEMS, OTHER THINGS BEING EQUAL), OR A FURTHER REDUCTION OF THIS EMBASSY'S STAFF (WHICH IS STILL LARGER THAN THE LIBYAN EMBASSY IN WASHINGTON SO FAR AS NOTIFIED “WHITE LIST” PERSONNEL APE CONCERNED). IF ADOPTED, SUCH MEASURES WOULD PUSH US/LIBYAN RELATIONS ONTO A SLIPPERY SLOPE. MOREOVER, WE CAN BE SURE LARG WOULD PRESS OTHER ARAB GOVERNMENTS TO FOLLOW SUIT AND TRY TO START A CAMPAIGN AGAINST U.S. INTERESTS IN ARAB WORLD.

42

ACTION SS-25

INFO OCT-01/026 W 091097

R 071456Z DEC 72

FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 9450

AMEMBASSY LAGOS

LAGOS FOR NEWSOM

SUBJECT:

TDCS DB-315/10058-72 OF NOV 30

5. UNINVITING AS SUCH PROSPECTS ARE, IT SEEMS TO ME THERE IS RELATIVELY LITTLE WE CAN DO TO HEAD THEM OFF. I DO SUGGEST, HOWEVER, THAT WE SHOULD TRY TO ELIMINATE SOME UNNECESSARY MISUNDERSTANDINGS IN THE AREA OF ARMS SUPPLY. SOME OF KIKHYA'S REMARKS UNDERLINE ONCE AGAIN THE IMPORTANCE RCC ATTACHES TO MILITARY SUPPLY RELATIONSHIPS. THE PRINCIPAL SOURCE OF CONFUSION IS OUR DECISION TO MAKE NO DECISION ON FOLLOWING THROUGH ON THE 1969 LETTER OF OFFER FOR F-5'S. IN MY VIEW THIS POSITION, WHICH WAS SUPPOSED TO BE TEMPORARY, IS NO LONGER CREDIBLE. AFTER TWO OR MORE YEARS IT IS TANTAMOUNT TO A REFUSAL TO DELIVER. I PERSONALLY STILL RECOMMEND WE DELIVER 8 F-5B'S AND THUS FULFILL THE CONTRACT SATISFACTORLY. BUT I CANNOT SAY THIS WOULD DO MORE THAN POSSIBLY KEEP US OFF THE SLIPPERY SLOPE: NO MORE SHOULD BE EXPECTED OF IT. IF HOWEVER WE CANNOT DECIDE TO DELIVER, I BELIEVE WE SHOULD DECIDE NOT TO DELIVER AND TELL THE LARG WHY. THERE ARE ADEQUATE GROUNDS IN THE LETTER OF OFFER'S ESCAPE CLAUSE ABOUT “UNUSUAL AND COMPELLING CIRCUMSTANCES,” A CLAUSE PARALLELED BY THE PURCHASER'S RIGHT TO WITHDRAW ALSO. I DO NOT THINK THAT SAYING SO WOULD SURPRISE THE LARG OR PRECIPITATE ANYTHING WORSE THAN WE ARE LIKELY TO FACE ANYWAY — AND IT WOULD BRING OUR DIALOGUE CLOSER TO REALITY.

6. IF NEVERTHELESS WE ARE STILL NOT PREPARED TO REACH A YES OR NO DECISION ON OUR LETTER OF OFFER, IT WOULD REMAIN DESIRABLE IN OUR VIEW TO CLEAR UP KIKHYA'S MISIMPRESSION THAT LARG HAS ALREADY PAID $22 MILLION FOR THE F-5'S IN QUESTION. THIS MAY REQUIRE AMENDMENT OF INSTRUCTIONS CONTAINED IN STATE 199168. GDS.

JOSIF

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL LIBYA—US. Secret;Exdis. Repeated to Lagos. In telegram 199168, November 2, the Department instructed the Embassy not to broach the topic of the F—5s, but observed that Tripoli had neither been asked for, nor made, payments for the F—5s. (Ibid., DEF 12-5 LIBYA)

96. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Ross) to Armin H. Meyer of the Office of the Secretary, Washington, December 13, 1972 96. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Ross) to Armin H. Meyer of the Office of the Secretary, Washington, December 13, 19721

Washington, December 13, 1972

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington, D.C. 20520

TO:

S/CCT - Armin H. Meyer

FROM: AF - Claude G. Ross [CGR initialed]

SUBJ:

Libyan Ambassador's Involvement with Terrorism

REF:

Your Memorandum of November 28

I share your concern with the FBI report which indicates the Libyan Ambassador is connected with potential terrorist activities in the US. We believe Qadhafi was initially reluctant to support terrorism outside the Middle East, believing that Arabs should concentrate on guerilla activities aimed directly against Israel and the occupied territories. However, as you point out, there is growing evidence Qadhafi is willing to support terrorism outside the Middle East which, in his view, may have become a necessary if temporary expedient. As Embassy Tripoli has pointed out in a recent airgram (A-176 of 23 November, attached) Qadhafi's approach towards terrorism in general has not been unambiguous.

Unfortunately, I am afraid there is nothing we can say now directly to the Libyan Ambassador about proper diplomatic conduct which would not possibly risk compromising the FBI report. We may, however, have occasion to talk with the Libyan Ambassador in the near future on another subject. If so, we may be able to make some general remarks deploring terrorism which is so often directed against innocent third parties.

Attachment:

A-176

Department of State
AIRGRAM
A-176

TO:

Department of State

INFO:

USINT Algiers Amembassy Amman Amembassy Beirut Amembassy Bonn Amembassy Cairo Amembassy London Amembassy Tel Aviv

DEPT PASS: Other Interested Posts

FROM:Amembassy, Tripoli

SUBJECT:

LARG Reservations About Terrorism

SUMMARY: The Tripoli daily newspaper, al-Faji al-Jadid, on November 14, 1972 featured a news report heavily larded with editorial content regarding terrorism. The substance of the reportage is that the LARG, while it must defend and justify terrorist operations mounted by Palestinians and their sympathizers, sees little benefit to the Arab Cause accruing as a result of those operations and would strongly prefer that Fedayeen operations be confined to Israel and the surrounding Arab countries. Al-Fajr may be regarded, in our view, as an authoritative mouthpiece for the Qadhafi regime. Lamentable, the paper gave no indication that the LARG is prepared to use its moral and financial influence with the Fedayeen to reflect its reservations about “unlimited terrorism.”

Al-Fajr Report

Under the headline, “Secret Decisions of the American Government against Arabs Residing in the United States,” Tripoli's daily al-Fajr al-Jadid November 14, 1972 reported that the “huge wave of anti-Arab propaganda now sweeping Europe and the United States is directed in general against the Arab States and in particular against LAR.” Al-Fajr said that the release of their “comrade commandos” from “enemy prisons” by the Lufthansa hijackers and the fact that all the commandos sought asylum in LAR sparked this propaganda and the “violent, anti-Arab measures by governmental and semi-official authorities in Europe and the United States” directed against Arab students and laborers.

Al-Fajr reproduced part of an article published recently by the Washington Star and headlined, “Secret Memo of the State Department Restricts Arab Visits to the United States.” The Star reported that secret USG decisions “against the Arabs” were implemented beginning October 19. Al-Fajr also referred to the resolve of Secretary of State Rogers to “protect every Zionist in the United States, liquidate, all elements supporting the Arab Cause, confiscate all Arab publications concerning the Arab Cause and silence every voice supporting that Cause, particularly among Arab students in American Universities.” The US aims at making Arabs in America feel that everyone moving and speaking in favor of that Cause is subject to surveillance by American Intelligence, and at subduing and humiliating the national feelings of Arab students while bolstering Zionists feelings of pride that they enjoy American support of their State, the paper said.

Moreover, Al-Fajr charged, at the University of North Carolina “Arab students—including eight Libyans—were subject to ridiculous questions such as, 'Why does Libya help the Commando Organizations? What do you know about these Organizations? Do you know any Palestinian student here? Do you promise not to talk about the Palestinian Problem? Do you have any circulars or pictures or statements regarding the Palestinian Cause?'”

LAR Position?

Al-Fajr in commenting on the above, asserted that the United States and Britain were “motivated by Zionist Intelligence to take advantage of what they call 'Terrorism', in order to justify the committing of more acts of aggression. “It is strange that they forgot that the Zionists were the first people to use terrorism through their terrorist bands of Irgun, Stern, and Hagana.” The paper asked, “What benefits accrue to the Arabs as a result of these acts of terrorism? Are the Arabs getting any benefits?” “Of course not. In fact, the Arabs are the only ones harmed by these terrorist operations.”

“In fact” Al-Fajr concludes the Arab States, particularly the LAR, bear with deep conviction their responsibility towards the just Cause of the Palestinian Arab People whose home has been usurped by Terrorism; their struggle to restore their homeland cannot be described as 'acts of terrorism'. Based on that conviction, the LAR received the Munich commandos.

Comment: Al-Fajr's editorializing reveals the quandry the LAR is facing on the issue of terrorism. On the one hand, Qadhafi disapproves of terrorist operations in foreign countries outside the “proper field of battlet"—Israel and the surrounding Arab countries: Qadhafi believes that the fighting against Israel should be carried out by unified commando organizations on the basis of “the nationalization of Commando activities”. He sees acts of terrorism against Zionists in foreign countries as harmful to the Palestinian Cause because they provoke hostility against the Arabs and tend to increase disunity among the several Commando organizations. Moreover, the behavior of the LAR's top leadership towards terrorists over the last several months tends to confirm RCC displeasure with their operations. Tripoli's media made quite a point of the fact that the LARG did not itself ask for the return of the corpses of the commandoes killed in Munich. Rather, private Libyan citizens reportedly initiated and financed the arrangements for the funeral in Tripoli and no RCC member took part in the attendant ceremonies. Also, it was noteworthy that during the time the Lufthansa hijackers were in Tripoli, including the occasion of their press conference, no RCC members were on hand. Indeed, there was no public mention of any contacts between them or members of the RCC or the LARG.

On the other hand, foreigners' suggestions that the LARG take steps to “punish or extradite” such terrorists—described locally as “Commando heroes"—excites the scorn of LARG spokesmen, e.g. Foreign Minister KIKHYA's statement at Damascus (reported by Beirut press November 2) to the effect that the LARG regards any request for extradition or trial of commandoes as “absurd and unreasonable…anyone believing that such is possible is silly”. Similarly, Qadhafi himself, most recently in his October 7 speech at Tripoli, went out of his way to praise the Japanese perpetrators of the Lod Airport massacre for having displayed the “true Fedayeen spirit”; he also claimed that the LARG is backing morally and financially “all the Fedayeen” (Tripoli 1615).

As is his wont, Qadhafi would like to have his cake and eat it too; he ipso facto abets Fedayeen terrorist activities with Libyan funds and defends their operations anywhere, even though he would prefer that a unified commando movement, in tandem with a progressive Arab bloc, confine its operations to occupied Palestine, including Israel. Unfortunately there is no indication in the Al-Fajr article that Qadhafi is considering the use of moral and financial influence to limit Fedayeen operations.

JOSIF

classfied by charles E. Marthinsen

automatically declassified on

19 november 1973

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8 LIBYA. Secret.

Ch. 4. MoroccoCh. 4. Morocco

97. Airgram A-34 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, February 17, 1969

February 17, 1969

The report assessed the impact on U.S. interests of the recent increase of Soviet influence in Morocco. The influx of Soviet arms and technicians into Algeria were of prime concern to Morocco's national security and economic well-being at the same time the Arab-Israeli dispute placed pressure on King Hassan to align Morocco with Arab extremists. This report goes on to outline the strategic importance of Morocco and to analyze U.S. policies and conditioning factors toward the GOM.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL MOR-US. Secret. Drafted by Earle Russell, Jr.; cleared by Edward Dow, Jr., Gordon Schraeder, Phillip Birnbaum, and Col. Gahl; and approved by Dwight Dickinson.

98. Telegram 2481 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, May 18, 1969, 1626Z

May 18, 1969, 1626Z

This telegram transmitted an account of Ambassador Tasca's conversation with General MOHAMED MEDBOUH, in which Tasca expressed U.S. concern that Morocco's warming relations with the Soviets could damage confidence between Washington and Rabat.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL MOR-US. Secret. It was repeated to Moscow, Paris, Casablanca, and Tangier. According to telegram 75955 to Rabat, May 13, King Hassan had been dropped from the 1969 list of official visitors to Washington following the visit of Soviet President Podgorny to Morocco. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1967-69,POL 7 MOR)

99. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 7, 1969, 11:30 a.m.

Washington, October 7, 1969, 11:30 a.m.

In response to the request of King Hassan's envoy Mamoun Tahiri, President Nixon invited suggestions for greater U.S.-Moroccan cooperation, emphasizing his regard for Morocco as a strong anchor in the Mediterranean.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 740, Country Files, Africa, Morocco, Vol. I. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Newsom. The conversation took place at the White House. On September 17, Kissinger had conveyed King Hassan's wish to send a special emissary to discuss the recent Libyan coup and the upcoming Islamic Summit meeting in Rabat (see North Africa Regional section). Kissinger recommended that Nixon accept the envoy in order to make clear his desire for a fair settlement to the Arab-Israeli crisis and his understanding of Arab and Muslim concerns. (Ibid., Box 1243, Saunders Files, Morocco, 1/20/69-12/31/69)

100. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, January 7, 1970

Washington, January 7, 1970

Kissinger notified Nixon of a recent message from King Hassan, urging that Washington exercise influence in the Maghreb to offset the danger posed by the new radical regime in Libya.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 740, Country Files, Africa, Morocco, Vol. I. Secret; Limdis. Sent for information. Tab B, telegram 21 from Tasca in Rome, January 4, is not published. In a covering letter to Kissinger, January 5, Saunders observed that Hassan's “analysis is overstated and simplistic but reflects an understandable nervousness about the future of his throne since the Libyan coup. Thus far we have tended to look at the North African situation on a pragmatic country and crisis basis. I think the time has come now, however, for a systematic review of the entire situation. I will be sending you a suggested NSSM to give us a grip on the problem.” (See the North Africa Regional section for more on the resultant NSSM 87, “Trends and Options in North Africa,” January 22, 1970)

101. Telegram Secto 27/727 From Secretary of State Rogers in Morocco to the Department of State, February 10, 1970, 1545Z

February 10, 1970, 1545Z

This telegram transmitted an account of Rogers' February 9 meeting with Prime Minister Laraki in Rabat. At this meeting, participants focused their discussion on the Spanish Sahara, Algeria, and, especially, peace in the Middle East.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, ORG 7 S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. It was repeated Priority to Rabat and to Algiers, Tripoli, and Madrid. Rogers was in Morocco from February 7 to 9.

102. Telegram Secto 27/727 From Secretary of State Rogers in Morocco to the Department of State, February 10, 1970, 1545Z.

February 10, 1970, 1545Z

This telegram transmitted an account of Rogers' February 9 meeting with Prime Minister Laraki in Rabat. At this meeting, participants focused their discussion on the Spanish Sahara, Algeria, and, especially, peace in the Middle East.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, ORG 7 S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. It was repeated Priority to Rabat and to Algiers, Tripoli, and Madrid. Rogers was in Morocco from February 7 to 9.

103. Telegram 30004 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Sierra Leone and Guinea, February 28, 1970, 0017Z

February 28, 1970, 0017Z

In the Moroccan section of an African round up for Assistant Secretary Newsom, the Department of State reported that a military plot had been discovered against King Hassan's regime, that Moroccan terrorists had been apprehended in Spain, and that Moroccan student unrest continued.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, ORG 7 AF. Secret; Priority. Drafted on February 26 by Virginia Montague (AF/I); cleared in draft by Hare (AF/N), Marianne Cook (AF/C), Thomas McNamara (EUR/FBX), Gordon Beyer (AF/E), and Harvey Nelson (AF/S); cleared by Donald Spigler (AF/I), and Robert Brown (S/S); and approved by Moore.

104. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, June 3, 1970

Washington, June 3, 1970

Kissinger provided the President with briefing material for his upcoming June 4 meeting with Foreign Minister AHMED LARAKI to discuss the Middle East crisis. In this memorandum, Kissinger presented possible requests by Laraki and underscored the need to bolster the U.S. relationship with Moroccan leadership and use the meeting as a forum for conveying to other Arab leaders the message that the United States was genuinely interested in assisting in a peace settlement.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 740, Country Files, Africa, Morocco, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for information. A stamped notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. The attached memorandum and talking points from Secretary Rogers are not printed. The summary of the President's conversation with Laraki is printed as Document 106.

105. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 8, 1970

Washington, June 8, 1970

Saunders forwarded for Kissinger's approval a summary of the June 4 conversation between Foreign Minister AHMED LARAKI and President Nixon.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 740, Country Files, Africa, Morocco, Vol. I. Secret; Exdis. Sent for action. Saunders wrote the following postscript: “The angle to be especially considered is whether in this form this summary could be given to Laraki for his record since he was alone and did not take detailed notes. H.S.” Kissinger eliminated the last sentence in paragraph 3 and substituted the word “just” for “favorable” in the first sentence of paragraph 4. With these changes, Kissinger approved the summary, and agreed that it could be passed on to Laraki. On June 5, Laraki also had urged Secretary Rogers to consider seriously Nasser's peace appeal as a step towards easing the worsening Middle East situation. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL MOR-US)

106. Intelligence Note RAFN-29 Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Washington, July 14, 1970

Washington, July 14, 1970

The note reported that King Hassan was preparing to end the “state of exception” he had ruled under since 1965, and allow elections to a new unicameral parliament.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-5 MOR. Confidential; Noforn; Controlled Dissemination. Drafted by Mattson and cleared by Harrop. In a subsequent political summary, Airgram A-209, December 8, the Embassy reported, “The new constitution under which the King enjoys the same prerogatives approximating his powers under the State of Exemption [sic?] won approval so unnecessarily overwhelming (97.8%) in the July 24 referendum as to cast doubts on the credibility of that consultation of the popular will. Nonetheless, the referendum exposed the weakness of the opposition's popular grass-roots support and its inability to compete against the well-oiled political apparatus of the regime.” (Ibid., POL 2 MOR)

107. Intelligence Note RAFN-49 Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Washington, November 3, 1970

Washington, November 3, 1970

The 6 page report analyzed King Hassan's past and likely future use of U.S. military facilities in Morocco as leverage for political and economic advantage.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15 MOR-US. Secret; Noforn; Controlled Dissemination. Drafted by Mattson and approved by Harrop.

108. Telegram 4828 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, November 4, 1970, 1755Z

November 4, 1970, 1755Z

The Prime Minister asked Ambassador to Morocco Stuart Rockwell if Washington considered the U.S. facilities in Morocco to be a base, which required agreements to govern its usage.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15 MOR-US. Secret; Priority; Limdis. The hearings of the Senate Subcommittee on U.S. Overseas Commitments, chaired by William “Stuart” Symington, met in July and November, 1970. In telegram 182605 to Rabat, November 5, the Department replied that the base at Kenitra was under full Moroccan sovereignty and control, and agreed that Rabat might have raised the issue to obtain increased compensation. (Ibid.)

109. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, November 30, 1970

Washington, November 30, 1970

Saunders recommended that the administration yield to King Hassan's wish for an emissary to discuss U.S. facilities in Morocco, complete a review of the need for the facilities, and possibly ratify new arrangements with the GOM.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 740, Country Files, Africa, Morocco, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for action. Kissinger approved the recommendation and wrote on the memorandum, “Ok with Saunders changes and delete last [paragraph] HK.” Attached but not printed at Tab A telegram 195658 to Rabat, December 1. It confirmed that the U.S. Government did not regard Kenitra as a U.S. base. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15-MOR-US) Attached but not printed at Tab B is telegram 5136 from Rabat, November 25.

110. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, January 25, 1971

Washington, January 25, 1971

Saunders summarized for Kissinger a copy of Robert Murphy's report of his discussion with King Hassan. According to Murphy, it all boiled down to Hassan's desire for additional U.S. aid.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 740, Country Files, Africa, Morocco, Vol. I. Secret; Exdis. Sent for information. The attachment, dated December 17, is not printed. Rockwell's report on the same conversation was sent in telegram 5409 from Rabat, December 15, 1970. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15 MOR-US)

111. Telegram 51970 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Morocco, March 27, 1971, 2034Z.

March 27, 1971, 2034Z

In this 9 page telegram, Secretary of State Rogers notified the Embassy that the U.S. Government would seek to retain access to Kenitra as long as the political and economic costs were manageable, but it hoped to avoid a quid pro quo.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15 MOR-US. Secret; Exdis. It was repeated to USCINCEUR. Drafted on March 18 by Blake and G. Bader (DOD/ISA); cleared by PM/ISO, USIA, CIA, OSD/ISA, Navy, S/PC,AID, PM/MAS, OSD/Admin,INR, AF, JCS, S/S, and the White House; and approved by Johnson

112. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 29, 1971

Washington, March 29, 1971

Kissinger provided Nixon with background information on U.S. communications facilities in Morocco and proposed an approach towards the Kenitra facilities negotiations with King Hassan.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 740, Country Files, Africa, Morocco, Vol. I. Secret; Exdis. Sent for action. A stamped notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. Nixon approved the recommendation.

113. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 15, 1971, 11 a.m.

Washington, April 15, 1971, 11 a.m.

Prime Minister Laraki explained that King Hassan wished to postpone his visit to the United States in order to attend the upcoming Arab Summit.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1025, Presidential/HAK Memcons, Mem Con-The President, Prime Minister Laraki, April 15, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. The meeting took place in the Oval Office. The Department's draft memorandum of the conversation is located in Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 7 MOR.

114. Airgram A-117 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, June 9, 1971

June 9, 1971

In this 4 page airgram, the Embassy commented on the proposal for a reorientation of U.S. policy in Morocco submitted by Foreign Service Officer Edward Djerejian posted in Casablanca. The bulk of the discussion focused on Djerejian's two fundamental assumptions that the United States was overcommitted and that radical change was inevitable.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 1 MOR-US. Secret. Drafted on June 7 by Parker and approved by Rockwell. The Embassy sent the original proposal to the Department as Rabat A-97, May 19. (Ibid.)

115. Airgram A-43 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Morocco, June 16, 1971

June 16, 1971

The Department forwarded an official statement of U.S. policy toward Morocco, approved by the National Security Council Interdepartmental Group for Africa, that outlines U.S. interests and objectives in Morocco over the next five years, as well as Morocco's objectives vis-à-vis the United States. It then goes on to outline a 20 part recommended course of action that the U.S. Government should take over the course of the next 5 years.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 1 MOR-US. Secret; Noforn. Drafted on June 8 by Holmes and approved by Carter.

116. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon, Washington, July 10, 1971

July 10, 1971

Haig alerted the President to the apparent failure of a coup attempt against King Hassan by disaffected members of the Moroccan military.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Morocco, Attempted Coup d'état, 10 July 1971. Confidential. A stamped notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it.

117. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon, Washington, July 11, 1971

Washington, July 11, 1971

Haig reported that sporadic fighting continued in Rabat, that King Hassan was unharmed, and that General Oufkir had been charged with restoring order.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Morocco, Attempted Coup d'état, 10 July 1971. Secret. A stamped notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. The congratulatory message, not published, was sent as telegram 124513 to Rabat, July 11. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 MOR)

118. Intelligence Note RAFN-39 Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Washington, July 15, 1971

Washington, July 15, 1971

This 4 page report speculated that, in the long term, the King's throne remained in jeopardy from civilian and military discontent.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-9 MOR. Secret; Noforn; Controlled Dissemination; Limdis. Drafted by Mattson and cleared by Rives.

119. Telegram 3745 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, July 23, 1971, 1115Z.

July 23, 1971, 1115Z

Ambassador to Morocco Stuart Rockwell speculated on the prospects for King Hassan's regime. While the situation in Morocco seemed to be returning to normal, Rockwell noted that Hassan was trying to rationalize events rather than analyze the causes. Unless Hassan embraced reform, his long term prospects looked dim.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-9 MOR. Secret. It was repeated Priority to Soto Grande, and to CINCEUR, Madrid, Paris, COMNAVTRACOM, Algiers, Tunis, Tripoli, Casablanca, and Tangier. In telegram 3815 from Rabat, July 27, the Embassy suggested that one consequence of the coup might be an attempt by the Moroccan regime to draw closer to the United States. (Ibid., POL MOR-US)

120. Telegram 134263 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Spain, July 23, 1971, 2259Z.

July 23, 1971, 2259Z

In response to a query by Spanish Foreign Minister Lopez Bravo, Under Secretary Johnson offered assurances that the CIA had not been behind the plot to King Hassan.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 MOR. Secret; Flash; Nodis. It was repeated Flash to Rabat and Soto Grande. Drafted and approved by Johnson; cleared in substance with Rogers and with Newsom and Eliot. In telegram 101 from Madrid, July 23, Ambassador Robert Hill had transmitted the message from Lopez Bravo that King Hassan suspected the CIA of complicity in the plot against him. (Ibid.) Also on July 23, CIA Director Richard Helms replied to Ambassador HILL: “You may tell Lopez Bravo categorically that neither CIA nor any other element of U. S. Government had anything whatsoever to do with recent plot against King Hassan.” (Ibid.)

121. Telegram 4204 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, August 19, 1971, 1605Z.

August 19, 1971, 1605Z

The Embassy reported that Minister of Defense Oufkir had informed the Moroccan-U.S. Liaison Office that he intended to promote closer cooperation and coordination with Washington.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 1 MOR. Secret; Limdis; Noforn. It was also sent to SECDEF and USCINCEUR. In telegram 153823 to Rabat, August 20, the Department agreed that while Washington should be helpful, it did not want to increase the U.S. security posture or political identification with the Moroccan regime. (Ibid.)

122. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 29, 1971, 10 a.m.

Washington, September 29, 1971, 10 a.m.

New Prime Minister Mohamed Karim-Lamrani asked Secretary of State Rogers for assistance in enacting crucial reforms in Morocco to restore stability.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 7 MOR. Secret. Drafted by Robert H. Pelletreau (AF/N); and approved in S on October 13.

123. Telegram 186454 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Morocco, October 12, 1971, 1549Z.

October 12, 1971, 1549Z

The Joint State/Department message provided guidance for handling requests from the Moroccan Minister of Defense for closer ties with the United States. It included U.S. strategic interest in Morocco, guidance on handing requests from General Oufkir dealing with issues of military organization, command and control systems, civic action, and increased advisory effort.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 19-8 US-MOR. Secret. It was also sent to USCINCEUR and repeated to CHMUSLO Rabat. Drafted on October 7 by Blake and Bader (OSD/ISA); cleared by DOD/ISA, JCS, PM/MAS, AF/RA, AF/N, and PM/ISP; and approved by Odell. In telegram 4283 from Rabat, August 25, the Embassy had supplied a more detailed list of Oufkir's subsidiary requests for assistance in improving communications with units and assigning civic tasks to military forces. (Ibid., DEF 19-8 US-MOR)

124. Telephone Conversation Between President Nixon and King Hassan of Morocco, via a French Interpreter, October 23, 1971, 11:59 a.m.-12:08 p.m.

October 23, 1971, 11:59 a.m.-12:08 p.m.

Nixon asked for the King's support regarding the upcoming United Nations vote on a U.S. resolution to designate the expulsion of Taiwan an “important question” which would require a two-thirds majority vote.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Tapes, Oval Office, Conversation 12-106. Secret. The editor transcribed the portion of the tape recording published here specifically for this volume. Morocco was instrumental in the defeat of Washington's proposal to retain Taipei as a UN member, by abstaining on the “important question” resolution. With the U.S. defeat, a simple majority successfully voted for Taiwanese expulsion. In telegram 198650 to Rabat, October 30, the Department sent a record of Newsom's discussion with the Moroccan Chargé expressing U.S. disappointment. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Files, 1970-73, POL MOR-US.)

125. National Intelligence Estimate 61-72, Washington, June 15, 1972

Washington, June 15, 1972

Examining the outlook for Morocco, this 11 page report concluded that it was unlikely that King Hassan would give up any of his political authority and, although he could probably continue in power for years, his long-term failure to reform would likely radicalize the political scene.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 361, Subject Files, National Intelligence Estimates. Secret; Controlled Dissemination. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, Defense, and NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. The Director of CIA submitted this estimate with the concurrence of all members of the USIB with the exception of the representative of the FBI who abstained on the grounds that it was outside his jurisdiction.

126. Telegram 3761 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, August 17, 1972, 0020Z.

August 17, 1972, 0020Z

Ambassador to Morocco Stuart Rockwell gave a preliminary assessment on the failure of another attempt to assassinate King Hassan.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 MOR. Confidential; Niact; Immediate. It was repeated Immediate to Paris, Rome, Madrid, Tunis, Tripoli, Algiers, and London, and to USCINCEUR and COMNAVTRACOM.

127. Intelligence Note RAAN-36 Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Washington, August 17, 1972

Washington, August 17, 1972

This 3 page report observed that the General Oufkir's suicide removed an irreplaceable pillar of support to the Hassan regime as Oufkir's total devotion to the monarch, coupled with his ruthlessness and organization, had enabled the monarchy to maintain control of the military in spite of attempts to overthrow the regime. As the loyalty of the military was critical to the survival of Hassan's regime, the report noted that a purge of the Moroccan forces was likely and that the United States might possibly be assigned responsibility for supporting the opposition.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 MOR. Confidential. Drafted by Hoffman; cleared by Godfrey Summ (INR/Africa).

128. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Rush) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Moorer), Washington, August 29, 1972

Washington, August 29, 1972

Following the August 16 coup attempt in Morocco, Rush requested recommendations on how the United States could reduce its military dependence on the communications facilities there.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files, FRC 75-0125, Box 15, Morocco 000.1, 1972. On September 22, Vice Director of the Joint Staff Martin Colladay responded to the request for alternatives to U.S. communications facilities in Morocco. He reported the Joint Chiefs of Staff's conclusion that “No precipitate action be taken to reduce US personnel assigned to NAVTRACOM Morocco which supports the Kenitra Air Force Base” but that “current US Navy plans to reduce telecommunications operations at Sidi Yahia complex in late FY 1975 continue as planned.” The Joint Chiefs also recommended that “When a Fleet Satellite Communications System is operational in the Atlantic and the Mediterranean Basin, approximately FY 1977, and lack of dependency on Moroccan-registered frequencies has clearly been established, the United States then inform the Government of Morocco of its intent to close C [text not declassified] facilities entirely.” (Ibid., OASD Files, (C) (A), FRC 77-0094, Box 65, Morocco 1972)

129. Memorandum From the Secretary of State (Rogers) to President Nixon, Washington, September 5, 1972

Washington, September 5, 1972

Rogers summarized Hassan's position in the wake of the failed coup against him by the Moroccan Air Force and noted that another assassination attempt could create a dangerously unstable and unpredictable situation in Morocco. Rogers' outlined U.S. actions following the assassination attempt and presented 3 options for the future.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 MOR. Secret. For the draft NSSM as approved, see Document 133.

130. Telegram 4147 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, September 8, 1972, 1600Z.

September 8, 1972, 1600Z

In this 8 page telegram, Ambassador Stuart Rockwell reported on his September 7 meeting with King Hassan. Hassan analyzed the coup attempt and described his future plans for restoring order.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 MOR. Secret. It was repeated to Paris, Madrid, Tunis, Tripoli, Algiers, Casablanca, Tangier, USCINCEUR, and COMNAVTRACOM.

131. Special National Intelligence Estimate 61-1-72, September 14, 1972

September 14, 1972

This 7 page estimate examined the prospects for the Moroccan monarchy and concluded that Hassan's position had been seriously weakened. Another attempt against him was liable to succeed.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 361, Subject Files, National Intelligence Estimates. Secret; Controlled Dissemination. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, Defense, and NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. The Director of CIA submitted this estimate with the concurrence of all members of the USIB with the exception of the representatives of the FBI and the Treasury who abstained on the grounds that it was outside their jurisdiction.

132. National Security Study Memorandum 160, Washington, September 14, 1972

Washington, September 14, 1972

Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Kissinger delivered President Nixon's request for a study of U.S. policy toward Morocco, which would examine U.S. interests and options for protecting them.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 365, Subject Files, National Security Study Memoranda (NSSM's), Nos. 104-206. Secret.

133. Telegram Secto 80/3838 From Secretary of State Rogers to the Department of State, October 12, 1972, 1744Z.

October 12, 1972, 1744Z

The telegram transmitted a memorandum of a conversation between Rogers and Behima, in which they discussed a range of issues, notably the need to reconsider U.S. bases in Morocco in order to placate the Moroccan opposition.

Source: National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15 MOR-US. Confidential; Exdis. It was repeated to Rabat and Madrid.

134. Analytical Summary, Washington, November 28, 1972

Washington, November 28, 1972

This 8 page summary examined the paper on U.S. Policy Toward Morocco produced in response to National Security Study Memorandum 160.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-66, National Security Study Memoranda, NSSM 160. Secret. The full NSSM 160 study, dated October 25, is not printed. (Ibid., NSC Files, Box 100, Senior Review Group Meeting, Morocco, NSSM 160) The Special NIE is printed as Document 132.

135. Minutes of a Senior Review Group Meeting, Washington, November 30, 1972, 3:38-3:55 p.m.

Washington, November 30, 1972, 3:38-3:55 p.m.

The Senior Review Group concluded that it was strategically important for the United States to maintain friendly relations with Morocco; that King Hassan, still the focal point of authority, deserved support; and that the U.S. military should reduce its presence at Kenitra.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-66, National Security Study Memoranda, NSSM 160. Secret. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room. The CIA statement is ibid., NSC Files, Box 100, Senior Review Group Meeting, Morocco, NSSM 160.

136. Memorandum From Harold Saunders and William Quandt of the National Security Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, December 29, 1972

Washington, December 29, 1972

Saunders and Quandt reported that King Hassan hoped to send an emissary shortly to improve U.S.-Moroccan relations and indicated that Hassan continued to believe that the United States was involved in the coup attempts against him.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, National Security Decision Memoranda, NSDM 200. Secret. Sent for action. Tabs A and B are attached but not printed. The minutes at Tab C are printed as Document 136. The NSDM at Tab C is printed as Document 138. Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Kissinger approved all recommendations and indicated that he wanted Saunders to meet with Canton.

137. National Security Decision Memorandum 200, Washington, January 5, 1973

Washington, January 5, 1973

Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Kissinger forwarded President Nixon's approval of the conclusions reached at the Senior Review Group meeting on Policy Toward Morocco.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, National Security Decision Memoranda, NSDM 200. Secret.

97. Airgram A-34 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, February 17, 1969 97. Airgram A-34 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, February 17, 19691

February 17, 1969

AIRGRAM
Department of State
A-34

TO:

Department of State

FROM :Amembassy RABAT

INFO:

ALGIERS, AMMAN, BONN, BEIRUT, BRUSSELS, DAKAR, JIDDA, KHARTOUM, KUWAIT, LONDON, MADRID, MOSCOW, PARIS, ROME, TRIPOLI, TUNIS, UNCINCEUR, USAFE, US MISSION NATO, CASABLANCA, TANGIER

DATE:

February 17, 1969

SUBJECT :

US Policy Assessment for Morocco

REF :

11 FAM 212.3-5; RABAT 722

I. SUMMARY

Soviet drive into Western Mediterranean and defection of France from NATO underline importance of strategic US presence and facilities in Morocco and their integral role in Western defense system. Excellent relations with GOM have kept US presence intact, but Soviet influence has grown rapidly. In face of massive influx of Soviet arms and technicians into Algeria as part of Soviet policy of cut-rate arms sales to create exploitable areas of tension, national security and economic development are Morocco's prime concerns. US and Western economic and military aid have not been fully responsive to these concerns. At same time, Arab-Israel confrontation generates pressures on King Hassan to adopt more neutral posture and to align Morocco with Arab extremists. In this connection, concern that Middle East tensions could provoke major conflagration has created nascent receptivity in Morocco to Yugoslav, Spanish and French proposals for neutralization of Mediterranean through withdrawal of US and Soviet fleets. USSR is prepared to help King economically and, in difficult years ahead, to exploit threats to Moroccan stability to detriment of US. In these circumstances, US also may face return to grant military assistance or prospect of concessionary Soviet military aid to Morocco. Clear mark of Soviet interest in Morocco is Podgorny visit scheduled in March 1969. Strategic importance and economic potential of Morocco warrant special effort to blunt Soviet drive. Higher levels of US-inspired multilateral and bilateral economic aid supplemented by grant military assistance would go far toward giving King greater sense of security within context of improving economy. Morocco is Western-oriented and King would prefer association with West. Like most leaders, however, he feels bound to act according to his view of Morocco's vital interests.

II. CURRENT ASSESSMENT

A. Strategic Importance of Morocco

Primary importance of Morocco is its strategic location commanding entrance to Mediterranean. US presence in Morocco helps assure against harassment of Sixth Fleet use of Straits of Gibraltar and lines of supply and communications to southern NATO and CENTO countries. Morocco also provides site for vital military communications and VOA relay station. Thus, continued US presence in Morocco is integral part of Western defense system. French defection from NATO, Soviet naval buildup in Western Mediterranean and growing Soviet military and economic presence in Algeria further enhance strategic importance of Morocco to US.

B. Gains and Losses

1. In absolute terms, US achieved most of its 1968 policy objectives in Morocco. Excellent relations with GOM safeguarded US presence in Morocco which helps protect southern flank of NATO and assisted in assuring free access to Mediterranean for US military forces. Important US military communications facilities needed for effective air and sea operations in Atlantic and Mediterranean and VOA transmitter to Eastern Europe continued to operate in Morocco without impediment. Morocco played constructive, moderating role in Arab and African councils, e.g. a)GOM supported Jarring Mission and advocated peaceful solution to Arab-Israel confrontation, despite growing pressures from Palestine resistance movement, and b) GOM called for end to arms race with Algeria, and end to civil strife in Nigeria. GOM made progress toward resolving major differences with Algeria, Spain and France. King Hassan took initiative to improve relations with Algeria by downplaying sensitive arms and border issues and agreed to cooperative regional economic effort to build greater Maghreb. High level bilateral contacts with Spain resulted in “retrocession” of Ifni to Morocco. Resumption of limited French economic assistance helped set stage for eventual normalization of Moroccan-French diplomatic relations. Internal stability contributed to assuring progress on King's economic development effort.

2. In relative terms, however, US position in Morocco deteriorated. While US presence remained intact, Soviet influence grew rapidly. Following opening of Soviet Consulate General in Casablanca in 1967, significant mile-stones included a) Soviet agreement to build Jerada thermal electric power plant, b) signature of five year Soviet trade agreement, and c) first Soviet naval visit. Other illustrations of success of communist efforts to expand influence in Morocco were a) Bulgarian contract to fly Moroccan pilgrims to Mecca in 1969, b) communist victory in Rabat student union (Union Nationale des Etudiants Marocains) election, c) tacit GOM approval of establishment of PLS (Parti de la Liberation et du Socialisme) which is legal cousin of proscribed Moroccan Communist Party, and d) steady flow of visitors to and from Soviet Union and Eastern European countries. At same time, price of Algerian agreement on economic cooperation reportedly is that Morocco should assume more non-aligned posture. Soviet support of Arab cause in Arab-Israel confrontation and failure of West to meet sufficiently Moroccan needs for foreign economic and military assistance and for new markets have been major factors in success of rapid Soviet military build-up in Mediterranean and communist economic penetration of Morocco.

C. Analysis of Policies and Conditioning Factors 1. Measure of US success or failure in achieving its objectives in Morocco depends on degree to which US policies contribute to Morocco's security and economic development, both prime concerns of King Hassan. While King appreciates US power, values long association with US, and believes US global aims of peace through firm opposition to communist subversion and aggression are in Mococco's long-term best interest, he prizes tangible assets above all. Substantial US economic assistance has been of major importance to Morocco and has helped to counteract Moroccan concern about US supply of arms to Israel, and frustration at what Moroccans consider preferential US treatment of Israel in Arab-Israel confrontation. US inability despite February 1967 presidential commitment to deliver arms requested by King early in 1966 until 1969 and later, however, cast doubt upon US willingness to help ease concerns of King about security. At same time, US and Western European economic assistance have not met Morocco's trade and economic development needs and IBRD assistance remains uncertain. Similarly, with little prospect of adequate Western military help, Morocco continues to face massive arms imbalance with Algeria whose growing military capability is assured by presence of Soviet technicians.

2. King and GOM are aware that Western Mediterranean, including Morocco, has become major target of Soviet influence. Much as he recognizes threat, he considers that Soviet presence in Mediterranean is big power problem, beyond Morocco's capabilities to handle. While wary of Soviet intentions in Morocco, King is confident he knows his people and can handle dangers inherent in dealings with USSR. Ties with USSR and communist countries appear to him to offer certain political, economic and military advantages, e.g. a) badly needed additional capital for economic development,

b) added outlets for Moroccan citrus and phosphates,

c) greater access to East European arms supplies,

d) counterpoise to arms imbalance with Algeria and deterrent to possible hostile actions of GOA,

e) tangible answer to internal critics who oppose close association with US because of its support for Israel, and

f) improved Moroccan position with non-aligned third world countries.

In brief, Morocco is Western-oriented and King would prefer association with West. Like most leaders, however, he feels bound to act according to his view of Morocco's vital interests.

3. Achievement of US objectives in Morocco depends on understanding nature of Soviet drive into Western Mediterranean, as well as Moroccan reaction to it. USSR seeks to expand its influence through exploitation of three causes of instability in Middle East and North Africa, namely a) Arab-Israel dispute, b) struggle for dominance between traditional and socialist Arab regimes, and c) economic underdevelopment of Arab World. Soviet policies endeavor to a) polarize area along Soviet-Arab vs US-Israel lines, b) strengthen pro-Soviet Arab socialist regimes by massive military and economic support, and c) weaken Western ties with traditional Arab regimes through attractive economic aid offers and prepare ground for change of leadership at opportune later date.

4. Economic and military aid to key Arab countries, such as Morocco, are required to defend US and Western interests in area. Soviet selection of Algeria as strategic bridgehead into North Africa, similar to UAR in Near East and Somalia in East Africa, vitally affects security of Morocco, and political climate arising from Arab-Israel confrontation facilitates Soviet economic and military drive. Moreover, concern that Middle East tensions could provoke major conflagration has made certain elements in Morocco receptive to Yugoslav, French and Spanish proposals for neutralization of Mediterranean through withdrawal of US and Soviet fleets.

III. FUTURE PROJECTION

A. US world power, and its successes and failures elsewhere, will condition US influence in Morocco somewhat, but determining factor will be extent to which US can help Morocco in its quest for security and economic development. Fact that twenty-year Moroccan-Algerian treaty of January 15, 1969, forswears resort to force to settle differences may have eased somewhat King Hassan's concern over massive inventory of Soviet arms in Algeria and growing military capabilities of Soviet trained Algerian forces. While apparently prepared to await fulfillment of Algerian declarations of intent to cooperate economically, he and other senior GOM officials are under no illusion that treaty assures Moroccan security. Inherent hostility of socialist regime in Algeria to Moroccan monarchy has impelled King to maintain adequate deterrent force which will involve acquisition of additional military equipment, particularly transport and fighter aircraft. Current JSOP Force Guidelines project major Moroccan military materiel requirements that will total nearly $57 million by FY 1974. Credit sale of this equipment would impose mounting debt burden that GOM will find increasingly difficult to carry given demands on foreign exchange reserves imposed by accelerating tempo of economic development program. In these circumstances, GOM will find it increasingly difficult to refuse attractive Soviet aid offers, and US may face choice between return to grant military assistance and prospect of concessionary military aid to Morocco from Soviet Union or its satellites. Since growing Algerian military capabilities are measure of potential threat to security of Morocco, long term projection of Moroccan military requirements indicates need for an increase in military assistance for foreseeable future. Should Moroccan-Algerian relations again sour, GOM military force no doubt would, increase substantially.

B. While Five Year Economic Development Plan is a soundly conceived and necessary program, time frame is too short to resolve long-term problems of assuring adequate local food production, employment and education for burgeoning population of Morocco. In next three to five years, therefore, Morocco may require more rather than less foreign economic assistance, and economic and military aid may become more important of US and Western interests. Prospect is that to extent US and West are unable to meet Moroccan economic needs through bilateral and multilateral arrangements, opportunities for Soviet Union and communist satellite states to increase their influence will grow. Next foreseeable step is visit of Podgorny in March 1969 and logical sequel is further offer of Soviet economic aid, perhaps to be financed through Nazi-type clearing agreement favored by USSR and satellites and attractive to GOM.

C. Concomitant of foreseeable economic and social problems is increased danger to stability of Morocco. In event that economic development effort and social progress should fall seriously short of popular aspirations, influence of forces for political change with accompanying insecurity and instability (e.g. Istiqlal, UMT and UNFP) would increase sharply, as would ability of local communists, abetted by Soviet Union, to exploit deteriorating situation. Students and urban unemployed are predictable sources of unrest GOM is aware of this prospect and efforts are underway to accelerate social and economic progress and educational reform. Meanwhile GOM is prepared to contain dissatisfaction of political opposition, students and labor by force if necessary. Tradition of monarchy is deeply ingrained, and loyalty of rural population, military and security forces, and civil government establishment, as well as elements of opposition, make it unlikely that forces for political change could create nationwide disturbance in immediate future.

D. Since USSR would profit at expense of US in case of disturbances, Soviet incitement and covert support of discontented elements in such circumstances appears certain. Resulting unrest would provide environment ideal of Soviet-inspired and supported propaganda and subversion against US presence in Morocco. Given pro-Israel image of US in Arab World, King would find it difficult to defend close association with US against internal and external criticism. Pressure to dismantle existing US communications facilities and remove US military presence would follow. In these circumstances, unless US efforts to resolve Arab-Israel dispute change US image in Arab World, regional political climate that facilitated into Soviet drive Mediterranean and North Africa also would facilitate intensified Soviet effort to get US out of Morocco.

IV RECOMMENDATIONS

Foregoing future projection stresses dangers to vital US interests in Morocco, but, we believe, accurately portrays forces at work inside and outside Morocco and direction of their thrust. US faces difficult period ahead when conjunction of Moroccan domestic economic problems, expanding Soviet influence, uncertain relations with Algeria, and Arab-Israel problem could seriously damage US position in Morocco. Judicious and adequate response to Moroccan concerns about security and economic development, however, would enable US to take maximum advantage of existing assets such as pro-Western orientation of King Hassan and his people and King's determination to carry out far-reaching economic development program. Moreover, Morocco, unlike many African and Middle Eastern countries, has human and material resources necessary for successful transition from underdevelopment to economic viability in modern world. Strategic importance of Morocco, its economic potential and manageable size and nature of its development problems argue that US consider Morocco intensive aid target. Higher levels of US-inspired multilateral and bilateral economic aid supplemented by small, but continuing grant military assistance program would go far toward counteracting effect of predictable anti-US forces in immediate future and safeguarding long-term US position in Morocco by assuring eventual success of Moroccan economic development effort. Specifically, Embassy recommends:

A. Early invitation to King Hassan to visit US. As indication of continuing US interest in Morocco, prompt response to King's desire to meet President Nixon would have positive psychological effect on GOM attitude toward new administration and could affect Moroccan reception of Podgorny.

B. Review of adequacy of US economic and military aid levels in Morocco in light of increased importance of Morocco as an asset in US struggle against growth of Soviet presence in area.

C. Continued provision of PL-480 assistance to Morocco in volume dependent on needs of economy and contingent on continuation of Morocco's current vigorous self-help efforts in field of agricultural production.

D. Increased development loans, both sector and project, in cooperation with IBRD and Consultative Group of western aid donors to Morocco, over next four years to help finance balance of Moroccan Five Year Economic Development Plan.

E. Encouragement of Export-Import Bank and private investors to participate in Moroccan development effort.

F. Encouragement to NATO allies to seek bilateral and multilateral means to increase assistance to Morocco in security and economic development fields.

G. Regional development loan assistance for greater Maghreb projects after resumption of US-Algerian diplomatic relations.

H. Additional local currency and dollar support for University of North Africa Association (UNAA) Project at Tangier. King is keen on this and GOM prepared put up large share of financing. Allocation of $2 million of PL-480 local currency should assure launching of project. Long-run benefits to Morocco in terms of education for economic development and to US in terms of cultural and political influence in North Africa justify continuing effort to assure private and USG financing.

I. Continued US technical assistance in high priority aspects of agricultural and food production; education and training; family planning; and water resource development.

J. Consistent with JSOP Force Guidelines and economic capability of GOM, provision of grant military assistance amounting to $57 million over next five years. Also, return to a higher force level of US military advisory personnel to permit rapid improvement in capabilities of Moroccan military forces.

GP-2

DICKINSON

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL MOR-US. Secret. Drafted by Earle Russell, Jr.; cleared by Edward Dow, Jr., Gordon Schraeder, Phillip Birnbaum, and Col. Gahl; and approved by Dwight Dickinson.

98. Telegram 2481 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, May 18, 1969, 1626Z 98. Telegram 2481 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, May 18, 1969, 1626Z1

May 18, 1969, 1626Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY RABAT 2481
R 281626Z MAY 69

47

ACTION AF 18

INFO OCT 01, EUR 17, CIAE 00, DODE 00, JPM 04, H 02, INR 07, L 03, NSAE 00, NSC 10, P 04, RSC 01, SP 02, SS 20, USIA 12, AID 28, E 15, ARA 08, GA 00, ACDA 16, IO 13, RSR 01,/184 W 107802

R 281626Z MAY 69

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 7280

FM AMEMBASSY RABAT

INFO

AMEMBASSY MOSCOW

AMEMBASSY PARIS

AMCONSUL CASABLANCA UNN

AMCONSUL TANGIER UNN

SUBJ:

TOUR D'HORIZON WITH GENERAL MEDBOUH

1. BRIGADIER GENERAL MOHAMED MEDBOUH, DIRECTOR OF ROYAL MILITARY HOUSEHOLD, CALLED ON ME AT HIS REQUEST MAY 27 FOR WHAT TURNED OUT TO BE A TOUR D'HORIZON. ALONG WITH GENERAL OUFKIR, MEDROUH ENJOYS UTTER CONFIDENCE AND CLOSEST ASSOCIATION WITH KING HASSAN. VIEWS OF MEDBOUH THEREFORE LIKELY REFLECT THOSE OF KING WHO MAY INDEED BE PRESUMED TO HAVE GIVEN HIM GUIDANCE FOR HIS DISCUSSION WITH ME ON FOLLOWING SUBJECTS: A) WHEN I RAISED MATTER OF MOROCCAN RELATIONS WITH USSR, MEDBOUH STRESSED THAT APPARENTLY IMPROVED RELATIONS OF MOROCCO WITH SOVIET UNION SHOULD IN NO WAY BE INTERPRETED TO AFFECT WESTERN ORIENTATION OF MOROCCO. I REPLIED THAT WHILE INFORMED US OFFICIALS UNDERSTOOD THAT MOROCCAN-SOVIET RAPPROCHEMENT WAS NOT AT EXPENSE OF INCREASINGLY CLOSE MOROCCAN-US RELATIONS, MANY AMERICANS WERE PERPLEXED AND WONDERED ABOUT ITS ULTIMATE EFFECT ON MUTUAL CONFIDENCE AND ESTEEM THAT CHARACTERIZE RELATIONS RETWEEN OUR TWO COUNTRIES. I LISTED IMPRESSIVE SERIES OF ACHIEVEMENTS OF USSR IN ITS DRIVE TO ESTABLISH POSITION OF STRENGTH IN MOROCCO, E.G. 1) OPENING OF CONSULATE GENERAL IN CASABLANCA, 2) ESTABLISHMENT OF CULTURAL CENTER IN RABAT, 3) SOVIET NAVAL VISIT TO CASABLANCA, 4) PODGORNY VISIT TO MOROCCO, 5) INAUGURATION OF RABAT-HAVANA AEROFLOT FLIGHTS, AND LASTLY 6) PROSPECTIVE VISIT OF GENERAL DRISS TO USSR. I NOTED THAT COMING ON HEELS OF PODGORNY VISIT TO MOROCCO DESPATCH OF MOROCCAN MILITARY MISSION TO MOSCOW WOULD CREATE ERRONEOUS, BUT UNFAVORABLE IMPRESSION THAT MOROCCO HAD LITTLE REGARD FOR SENSITIVITIES OF US AND AMERICAN PUBLIC.

B) ELABORATING ON AEROFLOT-HAVANA FLIGHTS I POINTED OUT THAT MOST LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES HAD CONDEMNED CUBAN SUBVERSIVE ACTIVITIES AND THAT GOM WAS AWARE OF EARLIER CUBAN ATTEMPTS AT SUBVERSION IN MOROCCO AND ELSEWHERE IN AFRICA. I SPECULATED ON HOW MOROCCO WITH ITS DEDICATION TO MODERATION COULD HAVE FALLEN INTO THIS SOVIET TRAP. MEDBOUH FULLY AGREED AND EVEN NOTED EARLIER INSTANCE OF ATTEMPTED CUBAN SUBVERSION AGAINST MOROCCO DURING ALGERIAN CONFLICT.

C) REFERRING TO RECENT SUDANESE COUP I RECALLED THAT EXTREMIST ELEMENTS IN SUDAN HAD MADE STARTLING PROGRESS FROM RELATIVELY INSIGNIFICANT BEGINNINGS. THEIR HIGHLY EFFECTIVE ACTION IN SOWING CONFUSION AT TIME OF GENERAL ABBOUD's FALL APPARETLY STILL PAYING OFF AS COMPOSITION OF NEW PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT SEEMS TO INDICATE. I STRESSED IN DETAIL GREAT SOVIET EXPERTISE IN EXPLOITING NUMERICALLY SMALL COMMUNIST BASE.

D) ON US MILITARY ASSISTANCE TO MOROCCO, MEDBOUH TOLD ME KING WAS PLEASED WITH AID FOR FY 1969 AND SINCERELY HOPED PROGRAM OF CONTINUING AID COULD BE ENVISAGED. HE STRESSED THAT AIR DEFENSE WAS TOP PRIORITY. I REPLIED US FAVORABLY DISPOSED TOWARD HELPING MOROCCO MILITARILY, AND IMPRESSED WITH GOM ASSIGNMENT OF PRIORITIES. BUT YEARLY PROGRAM WOULD DEPEND UPON CONGRESSIONAL APPROPRIATIOINS. MEDBOUH CONTINUED THAT WHILE GOV WAS PURSUING POLICY OF DETENTE WITH ALGERIA, MOROCCO HAD TO LOOK TO FUTURE WHEN AN ALGERIA FULLY ARMED AND TRAINED BY USSR MIGHT CHANGE ITS MIND AND REVERSE ITS FIELD. ACCORDING TO MEDBOUH, PROBLEM OF MEETING MINIMUM MOROCCAN DEFENSE AND SECURITY REQUIREMENTS WAS CRTICIAL. I SAID I APPRECIATED THIS AND NOTED US VIEWED MOROCCAN EFFORTS TOWARD MAGHREB DETENTE APPROVINGLY, PARTICULARLY SINCE IT WAS IMPORTANT TO DIVERT ALGERIAN ENERGIES FROM SOVIET ASSISTED MILITARY BUILD-UP FAR IN EXCESS OF ITS DEFENSE NEEDS TO ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT. FURTHER MOROCCAN OR MAGHREB ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT WOULD ALSO BE ENCOURAGED AS A RESULT. I MENTIONED IN THIS CONNECTION WARM US APPROVAL OF THE KING'S EFFORTS TO PROMOTE A MAGHREB ARMS LIMITATION AGREEMENT.

2. GENERAL MEDBOUH APPEARED CLEARLY IMPRESSED BY MY COMMENTS ON “BALANCING ACT IN RELATIONS BETWEEN SOVIET UNION AND US” AND, WITHOUT ANY PROMISES OF SUCCESS, SAID HE WOULD TRY TO HAVE DRISS VISIT TO MOSCOW POSTPONED. HE ALSO EXPRESSED COMPLETE AGREEMENT WITH MY POSITION ON AEROFLOT AND SAID HE COULD NOT UNDERSTAND HOW THIS HAD COME ABOUT (SIC). GP-3

TASCA

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL MOR-US. Secret. It was repeated to Moscow, Paris, Casablanca, and Tangier. According to telegram 75955 to Rabat, May 13, King Hassan had been dropped from the 1969 list of official visitors to Washington following the visit of Soviet President Podgorny to Morocco. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1967-69,POL 7 MOR)

99. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 7, 1969, 11:30 a.m. 99. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 7, 1969, 11:30 a.m.1

Washington, October 7, 1969, 11:30 a.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE:

October 7, 1969

Place:

White House

SUBJECT:

Time: 11:30 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS:

U.S.

The President

Dr. Henry Kissinger

Mr. David D. Newsom, AF

Mr. Harold Saunders, NSC Staff

Morocco

Mr. Mamoun Tahiri, Minister of Finance

Ambassador AHMED OSMAN

COPIES TO:

AID

Amembassy RABAT

AF

AF/N

WH

S/S

After a brief private meeting with the President, Mr. Tahiri made a formal presentation of his message from King Hassan stressing that the King's interest was in preserving the spiritual and moral bond with the U.S. He expressed the King's sincere and profound friendship. The King, said Mr. Tahiri, regards President Nixon as the spiritual son of President EISENHOWER for whom the King had such a high regard. President EISENHOWER was outstanding in faithfulness which he showed to friends of the U.S. whom he supported without reservations.

Mr. Tahiri said that the present political situation in North Africa was a source of great concern to the King of Morocco. He cited recent developments in Libya and in Tunisia. The Moroccan reaction was to see the progress of extremism and subversion across North Africa. The King wondered to what extent the leader of the free world would follow passively these developments. The King asked the question before Mr. Tahiri left “Where does the U.S. plan to establish its last defense against subversion?”

Morocco, said Mr. Tahiri, has set its path and is on its way to the difficult goal of bringing a good life to its people. It is also seeking to make its contribution to peace in the Middle East as well as in the Mediterranean area. The King brought together the leaders of the Moslem world in a constructive fashion at the Islamic Conference. Morocco can in the future play a significant role.

The King wished by his mission to show that his only concern was a constructive relationship with the United States and the internal strength of Morocco. Military strength was not a problem. The primary problem was economic.

At a level to be decided by the President, the King hoped that a new basis for cooperation “outside normal paperwork” could be established. This would involve new procedures and a new policy.

In reply the President said he would welcome concrete suggestions from Mr. Tahiri as to what procedures needed changing. The U.S. considers Morocco a strong anchor in the Mediterranean and wants to keep it that way.

(In a subsequent conversation with Mr. Newsom, Minister Tahiri was more specific about what the King had in mind. He said the King wished to lay this groundwork for a possible visit in the future at which time he and the President could map out the level of cooperation. Mr. Newsom told Mr. Tahiri that the Department would consider the approach made to the President and would send further comments to the Moroccan Government.)

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 740, Country Files, Africa, Morocco, Vol. I. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Newsom. The conversation took place at the White House. On September 17, Kissinger had conveyed King Hassan's wish to send a special emissary to discuss the recent Libyan coup and the upcoming Islamic Summit meeting in Rabat (see North Africa Regional section). Kissinger recommended that Nixon accept the envoy in order to make clear his desire for a fair settlement to the Arab-Israeli crisis and his understanding of Arab and Muslim concerns. (Ibid., Box 1243, Saunders Files, Morocco, 1/20/69-12/31/69)

100. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, January 7, 1970 100. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, January 7, 19701

Washington, January 7, 1970

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
INFORMATION
January 7, 1970

MEMORANDUM

FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM: Henry A. Kissinger [HK initialed]

SUBJECT:

Message from King Hassan to You

Ambassador Tasca, who is in Rome en route to his new post in Athens, has been asked by King Hassan's most intimate confidant, to transmit a personal message from the King to you. Tasca, you will recall, served last in Morocco and was warmly regarded by King Hassan.

King Hassan wants you to know that he is deeply concerned with the dangers to the Maghreb states stemming from the new radical military regime in Libya. He feels that Nasser's subversive capabilities have been greatly improved by access to Libyan financial resources. According to the King, the young and inexperienced leader of the Libyan military regime is only a “straw man” for Nasser who has inserted Egyptian troops into Libya to protect against the possibility of a “counter revolution.” King Hassan fears that Nasser's next step will be to eliminate President Boumedienne of Algeria in favor of someone more willing to accept his leadership in the Arab world. The elimination of Boumedienne, according to the King, would greatly increase the subversive potential of both Nasser and the Soviets in Tunisia and Morocco.

The King would like the U.S. to use whatever appropriate influence is available to prevent Nasser's and Soviet plans in the Maghreb countries from succeeding. He feels that unless we take a positive interest in this matter, there is a real danger that the entire littoral of the southern Mediterranean, from the UAR to Morocco, is likely to fall to Communist domination.

King Hassan has been understandably nervous since the Libyan coup. Nasser's growing influence in Libya has contributed further to his agitation, even though there is no immediate organized threat to his throne. The lining up of Morocco, Tunisia and Algeria against Nasser's demands at the recent Arab summit—and Hassan's moderating influence there—have probably also contributed to his fear that Morocco may be close to the top of Nasser's list for reprisal.

Another interesting point in Ambassador Tasca's report is King Hassan's impression during the Arab summit that Nasser would like to conclude an agreement with Israel but fears overthrow if he did. Hassan feels that the Palestinians—not Nasser—are the key to a settlement now.

All of this indicates the need for a systematic review of the North African situation. I shall provide you shortly with a recommendation on how to do so.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 740, Country Files, Africa, Morocco, Vol. I. Secret; Limdis. Sent for information. Tab B, telegram 21 from Tasca in Rome, January 4, is not published. In a covering letter to Kissinger, January 5, Saunders observed that Hassan's “analysis is overstated and simplistic but reflects an understandable nervousness about the future of his throne since the Libyan coup. Thus far we have tended to look at the North African situation on a pragmatic country and crisis basis. I think the time has come now, however, for a systematic review of the entire situation. I will be sending you a suggested NSSM to give us a grip on the problem.” (See the North Africa Regional section for more on the resultant NSSM 87, “Trends and Options in North Africa,” January 22, 1970)

101. Telegram Secto 27/727 From Secretary of State Rogers in Morocco to the Department of State, February 10, 1970, 1545Z 101. Telegram Secto 27/727 From Secretary of State Rogers in Morocco to the Department of State, February 10, 1970, 1545Z1

February 10, 1970, 1545Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY TUNIS 0727
P 101545Z FEB 70

85

ACTION SS-45

INFO OCT-01 NSCE-00 SSO-00 CCO-00 FILE-01/047 W 087633

P 101545Z FEB 70

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1751

FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS

INFO

AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY

AMEMBASSY ALGIERS

AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

AMEMBASSY MADRID

TUNIS 0727
SECTO 27
CORRECTED COPY (SHOULD READ SECTO 27 AND ADD ALGIERS, TRIPOLI, AND MADRID AS INFO ADDRESSEES PER ORIGINATOR)
FOL MSG RECEIVED FROM RABAT REPEATED FOR YOUR INFO WITH ADDITION TO PARA 4.

QUOTE
RABAT 0602
EXDIS
TUNIS FOR S/S GLEYSTEEN

SUBJECT:

SECRETARY'S BILATERAL MEETING WITH PRIME MINISTER LARAKI

1. PARTICIPANTS - SECRETARY, ACCOMPANIED BY PEDERSEN, NEWSOM, CHARGE, AND TOUMAYAN AS INTERPRETER, CALLED ON FOREIGN MINISTER AHMED LARAKI AT 1130 HOURS FEB. 9. ALSO PRESENT WERE AMBASSADOR OSMAN, AMBASSADOR NEKROUF, AND ABDEL HAMID KRIEM, DIRECTOR OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS IN THE PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE.

2. INTRODUCTION - AFTER COMPLIMENTARY REMARKS BY LARAKI, SECRETARY SAID PRESIDENT NIXON HAD GREAT PERSONAL INTEREST IN MOROCCO AND HIGH REGARD FOR IT. USG LOOKED TO MOROCCO AS PIVOT IN THIS PART OF THE WORLD. HE HOPED THE FONMIN WOULD SPEAK FRANKLY TO HIM, SINCE HE WANTED TO BE ABLE TO REPORT REALISTICALLY TO PRESIDENT IN ORDER THAT US POLICY IN AFRICA BE AS PRODUCTIVE AS POSSIBLE.

3. SPANISH SAHARA - PRIME MINISTER SAID KING HASSAN SOUGHT TO IMPROVE RELATIONS WITH HIS NEIGHBORS. HE HAD THEREFORE MUTED CERTAIN CLAIMS, HOWEVER JUST THEY MIGHT HAVE BEEN. THE ONLY OUTSTANDING POINT STILL IN LITIGATION WAS SPANISH SAHARA. AS EVERYONE KNEW, THIS TERRITORY WAS ARAB IN POPULATION. UN RESOLUTION ADVOCATING SELF-DETERMINATION FOR THE PEOPLE OF SPANISH SAHARA HAD BEEN INTRODUCED BY MOROCCO. THIS SHOWED THAT MOROCCO WAS NOT INTERESTED IN EXPANSION OR ANNEXATION. HOWEVER, MOROCCO'S APPROACHES TO SPAIN, INCLUDING KING HASSAN'S VISIT TO MADRID IN 1969, HAD NOT BORNE FRUIT. IT WAS THE STRATEGIC, NOT ECONOMIC SIDE OF SPANISH SAHARA WHICH INTERESTED MOROCCO. ISSUE OF SAHARAN PHOSPHATES HAD BEEN BLOWN UP OUT OF ALL PROPORTION. THERE WAS A RESERVE OF ONLY ONE AND A HALF BILLION TONS OF PHOSPHATE IN SPANISH SAHARA, WHEREAS THE MOROCCAN RESERVE WAS 20 BILLION. THE COST OF PRODUCING SAHARAN PHOSPHATES WOULD BE LESS THAN IN THE USA OR MOROCCO. HOWEVER, PHOSPHATE PRODUCTION IN MOROCCO WAS A STATE MONOPOLY. THE STATE COULD MAKE THE NECESSARY SACRIFICES OVER A TWO OR THREE YEAR PERIOD IF IT WISHED TO OVERWHELM SAHARAN PHOSPHATES. POPULATION OF SPANISH SAHARA WAS VERY SMALL AND MIGHT EASILY FALL PREY TO COMMUNIST OR CHINESE INFLUENCE, MAKING POSSIBLE THE REALIZATION OF OLD DREAM OF A COMMUNIST OPENING TO THE ATLANTIC. MOROCCO HAD NOT GIVEN UP HOPE OF REACHING AN AGREEMENT WITH SPAIN. IT WAS SURPRISED, HOWEVER, THAT US, WHICH HAD ALWAYS SUPPORTED UN RESOLUTION, HAD ABSTAINED THIS YEAR.

4. SECRETARY NOTED THAT US WAS INVOLVED IN DELICATE NEGOTIATIONS WITH SPAIN. NEWSOM CONFIRMED THIS AND POINTED OUT THAT IT WAS OFTEN NECESSARY, WHEN US HAD FRIENDS ON OPPOSITE SIDES OF A QUESTION, TO ABSTAIN. PEDERSEN OBSERVED THAT THIS DID NOT MEAN ANY CHANGE FROM US POSITION ON SELF-DETERMINATION. PRIME MINISTER SAID MOROCCO ALSO FAVORED SELF-DETERMINATION AND BELIEVED THAT IF THIS WERE CARRIED OUT UNDER UN AUSPICES, PEOPLE OF SPANISH SAHARA WOULD CHOSE UNION WITH MOROCCO. IN RESPONSE TO QUESTION FROM SECRETARY WHEN THIS PROCESS MIGHT TAKE PLACED LARAKI REPLIED THAT HE DOUBTED IT WOULD BE WHILE FRANCO WAS ALIVE. HOWEVER, MOROCCO WAS WILLING TO ASSIST IN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF THE AREA, WITH SPAIN AS WELL AS WITH OTHERS.

(ADDITION)

(SUBSEQUENT DISCUSSIONS THIS SUBJECT WITH MOROCCAN OFFICIALS DISCLOSED THEIR BELIEF THAT US POSITION DICTATED BY INTERESTS US COMPANIES IN SPANISH SARAHAN PHOSPHATES. WE ASSURED GOM THIS NOT FACTOR IN DECISION ON RESOLUTION. DISCUSSIONS ALSO DISCLOSED SPANISH FOREIGN MINISTER BRAVO VISITING MOROCCO, PROBABLY IN MARCH.)

5. ALGERIA - WHEN SECRETARY NOTED THAT US HAD RECENTLY RENEWED RELATIONS WITH MAURITANIA, PRIMIN ADDED THAT HE HOPED US RENEWAL OF RELATIONS WITH ALGERIA WOULD SOON FOLLOW. HE SAID HIS MAJESTY HAD TRIED TO LEAD ALGERIAN REGIME TOWARD MAGHREB COOPERATION RATHER THAN TOWARD MIDDLE EAST AND BEN BELLA HAD DONE. THIS HAD BEEN SUCCESSFUL AND ISLAMIC AND ARAB SUMMITS HAD SHOWN CERTAIN CONCURRENCE OF VIEWS BETWEEN ALGERIAN AND MOROCCAN GOVERNMENTS. SECRETARY NOTED DESIRE OF BOUTEFLIKA FOR BETTER RELATIONS WITH US, WITH RESULTANT UPGRADING OF INTEREST SECTIONS IN BOTH COUNTRIES. RELATIONS WERE IMPROVING, AS INDICATED BY LARGE EL PASO CONTRACT. US WOULD BE HAPPY RENEW RELATIONS WHENEVER ALGERIANS WISHED. IT AGREED ALSO THAT MAGHREB UNITY SHOULD BE STRENGTHENED. HE WAS GLAD THEREFORE THAT HIS MAJESTY WAS TAKING LEAD.

6. MIDDLE EAST - LARAKI EXPRESSED VIEW THAT PEACE WAS INDIVISIBLE. IF MIDDLE EAST PROBLEM WERE NOT RESOLVED, IF GREAT POWERS DID NOT SUCCEED IN IMPOSING PEACE, THERE WAS RISK OF WORLD-WIDE CONFLAGRATION. TO IMPOSE A NEGOTIATED PEACE WAS ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE IN VIEW OF HATRED AND DISTRUST BETWEEN ARABS AND ISRAELIS. HE FEARED SC RESOLUTIONS WOULD SOON BE BYPASSED BY EVENTS. US HAD AT LEAST AS SUBSTANTIAL AN INTEREST IN ARAB COUNTRIES AS IN ISRAEL. MOROCCO WAS CONCERNED OVER INCREASING INFILTRATION OF SOVIETS IN THE AREA, FIRST IN SYRIA, THEN IRAQ, SUDAN, AND LIBYA. THE SCREW WAS BEING TIGHTENED. THE TREND WAS NOT YET IRREVERSIBLE BUT IT SOON WOULD BE. KING HASSAN THOUGHT THAT ANY SOLUTION WHICH DID NOT TAKE ACCOUNT OF THE PALESTINIAN PROBLEM WAS DOOMED TO FAILURE. A SOLUTION ACCEPTABLE TO THE PALESTINIANS WHO WERE REALISTIC, AS MOROCCO HAD OBSERVED AT THE ARAB SUMMIT, WOULD BE A JUST SOLUTION. IT WAS ADMITTEDLY DIFFICULT TO ASK SUCH PIONEERS OF ZIONISM AS GOLDA MEIR AND DAYAN TO ACCEPT SUCH A SOLUTION BUT THE NEW GENERATION MIGHT. IN THIS CONNECTION HE CITED A DECLARATION BY MAPAI SECRETARY ELIA (SP?) THAT AN ARRANGEMENT WITH THE PALESTINIANS WOULD BE BEST FOR ALL CONCERNED.

85

ACTION SS-45

INFO OCT-01 NSCE-00 SSO-00 CCO-00 FILE-01/047 W 087633

P 101545Z FEB 70

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1751

FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS

INFO

AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY

AMEMBASSY ALGIERS

AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

AMEMBASSY MADRID

TUNIS 0727
SECTO 27
CORRECTED COPY (SHOULD READ SECTO 27 AND ADD ALGIERS, TRIPOLI, AND MADRID AS INFO ADDRESSEES PER ORIGINATOR)

7. SECRETARY AGREED RESOLUTION OF ME PROBLEM WAS IN US INTEREST. HOWEVER, GREAT POWERS COULD NOT IMPOSE A SOLUTION IF THEY WANTED TO. IF US HAD LEARNED ONE THING, THAT WAS THAT IT COULD NOT IMPOSE ITS WILL AND IT HAD NO INTENTION OF TRYING TO DO SO. IT WOULD DO WHAT IT COULD, HOWEVER, TO ENCOURAGE PARTIES TO RESOLVE THEIR PROBLEMS. HE HAD MADE US POSITION CLEAR IN DECEMBER 9 SPEECH, KNOWING IT WOULD NOT SATISFY EVERYONE. US POSITION WAS NEVERTHELESS A BALANCED ONE. JUST AS MOROCCO HAD GIVEN UP CERTAIN CLAIMS IT THOUGHT JUST, US THOUGHT PARTIES TO ME CONFLICT MUST SUBORDINATE CERTAIN DEMANDS. LARAKI NOTED THAT ARABS HAD NOT REJECTED US PROPOSALS. US DIPLOMACY MUST CONVINCE MRS. MEIR ISRAEL WAS LOSING WHAT MIGHT BE UNIQUE OPPORTUNITY TO BRING ABOUT JUST SOLUTION. SECRETARY SAID US APPRECIATED WHAT KING HASSAN HAD ACCOMPLIISHED AT SUMMIT CONFERENCES. HE REALIZED THAT MOROCCO AND MOST OTHER REASONABLE ARAB COUNTRIES DID NOT REJECT US PROPOSALS. HOWEVER, WE SAW NO INDICATION NASSER DOING ANYTHING TO HELP GET NEGOTIATIONS STARTED. ISRAEL ALSO HAD NOT SHOWN DISPOSITION TO NEGOTIATE ON BASIS OUR PROPOSALS, BUT IF NASSER WERE TO INDICATE HIS READINESS, IT PROBABLY WOULD.

8. US AID - LARAKI NOTED THAT A STRONG MOROCCO REQUIRED DEVELOPMENT AID. HE HOPED US AID WOULD BE BETTER ADAPTED TO MOROCCAN NEEDS, HOWEVER. AT PRESENT, US AID TENDED TO DEPEND ON CLIMATE. IN BAD YEARS PL-480 WHEAT AND COUNTERPART FUNDS WERE AVAILABLE FOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS. IN GOOD YEARS THEY WERE NOT. MOROCCO HOPED TO SEE MORE PROJECTS SUCH AS LOWER MOULOUYA, WHICH US HAD FINANCED ALMOST ENTIRELY, AND NOUASSEUR AIR BASE CONVERSION. HOWEVER, HE WOULD LEAVE THIS SUBJECT TO DIRECTOR GENERAL SLAOUI WHO HAD REQUESTED SECRETARY MAKE UNSCHEDULED CALL ON HIM. (SEE SEPTEL.) GP-2.

DICKINSON CALHOUN

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, ORG 7 S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. It was repeated Priority to Rabat and to Algiers, Tripoli, and Madrid. Rogers was in Morocco from February 7 to 9.

102. Telegram Secto 27/727 From Secretary of State Rogers in Morocco to the Department of State, February 10, 1970, 1545Z. 102. Telegram Secto 27/727 From Secretary of State Rogers in Morocco to the Department of State, February 10, 1970, 1545Z.1

February 10, 1970, 1545Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY TUNIS 0738
P R ORPQOPOZ FEB 70

85

ACTION SS-45

INFO OCT-01 CCO-00 FILE-01/047 W 086108

P R DROPOOPOZ FEB 70

FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS

INFO

AMEMBASSY RABAT

TUNIS 0738
SECTO 25
FOLLOWING HIGHLIGHTS PRIVATE MEETING BETWEEN KING HASSAN AND SECY PRECEDING LUNCHEON AT GUEST PALACE MON, FEB 9.

1. KING RECALLED HIS LONG ACQUAINTANCE WITH PRES. NIXON SAYING THEY FIRST MET WHEN BOTH HAD SERVED AS, IN EFFECT, VP'S OF THEIR RESPECTIVE COUNTRIES. KING HOPED RELATIONSHIP WOULD CONTINUE NOW THAT THEY WERE BOTH CHIEFS OF STATE. SECY EXTENDED INVITATION TO KING TO VISIT WASHINGTON SAYING THAT WHILE THE SECY VISIT TO RABAT WAS USEFUL THERE NO SUBSTITUTE FOR DIRECT MEETINGS BETWEEN CHIEFS OF STATE.

2. IN DISCUSSING MIDDLE EAST AND MEDITERRANEAN, KING SAID US SIXTH FLEET HAD ALWAYS BEEN IN MEDITERRANEAN BUT ISRAELI-ARAB WAR FURNISHED RUSSIANS WITH THE ALIBI THEY NEEDED TO PUT IN THEIR OWN SHIPS. HASSAN SAID IF THERE WERE NO WAR RUSSIAN PRESENCE COULD BE REMOVED. IN FURTHER COMMENTS ON PALESTINIAN PROBLEM, KING CHARACTERIZED ARAB CHIEFS OF STATE AS HAVING ACTED LIKE “BOOKMAKERS” EACH PLAYING PALESTINIAN “HORSES”. NOW PALESTINIANS HAVE SAID ISRAEL-PALESTINIAN ISSUE FOR PALESTINIANS TO RESOLVE, NOT NASSER, HUSSEIN OR SYRIA. PALESTINIANS SAY THIS IS NOT WAR OF 100 MILLION ARABS GAINST 2 1/2 MILLION JEWS BUT 1 1/2 MILLION PALESTINIANS WHO WANT RETURN TO THEIR COUNTRY AND ENJOY EQUAL RIGHTS WITH PALESTINIANS OF JEWISH FAITH. YASSER ARAFAT HAD SAID AT ARAB SUMMIT THERE 1 1/2 MILLION MOSLEM PALESTINIANS AND 2 1/2 MILLION JEWISH PALESTINIANS AND HE WILLING FOLLOW DEMOCRATIC RULES BUT ISRAEL MUST ABANDON FORM OF APARTHEID WHICH IT CALLS ZIONISM. HASSAN SAID HE HAD MANY JEWISH FRIENDS WHO RETURNED FROM ISRAEL DISGUSTED WITH THAT COUNTRY'S EXTREME ZIONIST ATTITUDE. KING SAID NO ARAB STATE COULD CONCLUDE ANY TREATY AS LONG AS FATE OF 1 1/2 MILLION PALESTINIANS NOT RESOLVED. KING POINTED OUT NEGOTIATIONS CHARACTERIZING GREAT INTERNATIONAL PROBLEMS AS IN US-CHICOM TALKS, FRG TALKS RE POLAND, US-USSR SALT TALKS, ETC.,AND SAID SAME SHOULD BE POSSIBLE IN MIDDLE EAST. HE SAID ECONOMY OF ISRAEL NON EXISTENT. COUNTRY LIVES ON GIFTS FROM US-JEWISH COMMUNITIES.

3. KING SAID HE DID NOT EXPECT THOSE WHO MADE WAR TO MAKE PEACE. HE PLACED HOPES ON YOUNG GENERATION ISRAELIS AND WAS READY TO MEET WITH SOME ISRAELIS HIS AGE FOR WHOM THIS NOT A WAR OF RELIGION. KING HAD NO FAITH IN IMPLEMENTATION UN RESOLUTION NOV 1967 AND FELT US AND SOVS IN PRESENT SPIRIT RAPPROACHMENT SHOULD TRY ELIMINATE THIS ONE FOCUS POSSIBLE CONFLICT.

4. TURNING TO NORTH AFRICA KING SAID HE VIEWED WITH DEEP CONCERN EVENTS IN LIBYA KNOWING THAT UPON IDRIS DEATH MONARCHY WOULD END THERE. HE ADMITTED ERROR IN TIMING BUT SAID RESULT WAS ANTICIPATED. HE SAID EVENT CONTROLLED BY NASSER AND TWO IDEOLOGIES AT PLAY—NASSER AND BAATH PARTY'S. KING SAID IF HE WERE GANGSTER LIKE NASSER HE WOULD BYPASS TUNISIA. THIS LIKE HOLDING UP A SMALL TOWN BANK BUT RATHER HE WOULD PREFER GRAB ALGERIA AND SPREAD INTO TUNISIA AND MOROCCO. KING TOLD SECY BOUMEDIENE A VERY WISE LEADER AND AWARE THIS POSSIBLE TACTIC. KING SAID IT PAINFUL TO THINK THAT NASSER NOW USING LIBYAN RESOURCES TO FINANCE HIS FUTURE SUBVERSIONS.

5. AT SUMMIT MEETING, ALGERIA SAID QUOTE WE WILL STOP ARMING OURSELVES, WE ARE READY TO GIVE HALF OUR WEAPONS TO EGYPT AS WE NO LONGER HAVE PROBLEMS WITH MOROCCO. WHAT DIFFERENCES ARE LEFT WE CAN SETTLE AMICABLY. UNQUOTE. MOROCCO HAD SAID THE SAME. KING WARNED THAT ONE SHOULD NOT EQUATE ALGERIAN SPIRIT OF RESISTANCE WHERE NATIONAL COHESIVENESS ACHIEVED BY STUDENTS AND UNIONS WITH LIBYA WHERE THERE WERE NO TRADE UNIONS, NO POLITICAL PARTIES, NO STUDENTS, NO SENSE OF NATIONAL UNITY AND ONLY 1 1/2 MILLION POPULATION. SECY ASSURRED HASSAN WE AWARE NASSER'S AND SOVS INTENTIONS IN LIBYA AND WOULD CONTINUE WATCH SITUATION MOST CAREFULLY.

6. KING CONCLUDED COMMENTS ON ALGERIA BY SAYING BASICIALLY HE THOUGHT ALGERIA WANTED TWO THINGS: (1) RESUMPTION OIL TALKS AND (2) REVIEW OF AID POLICIES.

7. SECY SAID WE WOULD CONTINUE SUPPORT SPANISH SAHARA AND KING EXPRESSED HIS APPRECIATION FOR USG SUPPORT UNDER PRESIDENTS KENNEDY, JOHNSON AND NIXON. IN RESPONSE TO QUESTION KING SAID HE THOUGHT SPANISH SITUATION IN AFRICA MIGHT IMPROVE AS SPANISH FONMIN MORE AMENABLE THAN HIS PREDECESSOR.

8. TUNIS 0735 REPORTS BRIEF DISCUSSION KING HASSAN ON US AID.

CALHOUN

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, ORG 7 S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. It was repeated Priority to Rabat and to Algiers, Tripoli, and Madrid. Rogers was in Morocco from February 7 to 9.

103. Telegram 30004 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Sierra Leone and Guinea, February 28, 1970, 0017Z 103. Telegram 30004 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Sierra Leone and Guinea, February 28, 1970, 0017Z1

February 28, 1970, 0017Z

OUTGOING TELEGRAM
Department of State
030004

ACTION:

AmEmbassy FREETOWN AmEmbassy

CONAKRY PRIORITY

FOR ASSISTANT SECRETARY NEWSOM
AF ROUNDUP

1. Morocco. Although reports often conflicting, three developments have recently disturbed Moroccan scene and led to almost constant state alert among military and police forces. First, [text not declassified]military plot against regime discovered late December or early January and some military officers, all captains or below, summarily executed. Second, according to press and intelligence reports, six or more Moroccan terrorists were apprehended in Spain in January. Their reported objectives were assassination of King Hassan and, according one report, Boumediene and Bourguiba as well. Third, continued student unrest, including strikes after Id al Kebir holidays, is highly visible. Hassan has discharged Minister of Education Guedira, and Prime Minister Laraki now has education portfolio. Mohamed V University and many lycees throughout country affected. Embassy reports indicate student situation relatively calm Rabat and Casablanca, though security forces in greater evidence than usual. There are reports of arrests, minor scuffles, and some chanting of anti-Hassan slogans. Bread and butter issues appear, at least on surface, major concern of students.

[Here follows material unrelated to Morocco.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, ORG 7 AF. Secret; Priority. Drafted on February 26 by Virginia Montague (AF/I); cleared in draft by Hare (AF/N), Marianne Cook (AF/C), Thomas McNamara (EUR/FBX), Gordon Beyer (AF/E), and Harvey Nelson (AF/S); cleared by Donald Spigler (AF/I), and Robert Brown (S/S); and approved by Moore.

104. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, June 3, 1970 104. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, June 3, 19701

Washington, June 3, 1970

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
INFORMATION 10740
June 3, 1970

MEMORANDUM

FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM: Henry A. Kissinger [HK initialed]

SUBJECT:

Your Talk with Moroccan Prime Minister Laraki—3:30 p. m. June 4

King Hassan is sending Prime Minister Laraki as a special emissary to discuss with you deterioration in the Mid-Eastern situation. This initiative results from President Nasser's request that the King intervene personally with you to underscore the seriousness of Nasser's peace appeal to you. Comparable emissaries have already been received by Prime Minister Wilson and President Pompidou. There is a strong element in this initiative of Hassan trying to preserve his own position in the Arab world as active for the Arab cause.

What He Will Say

He will probably bring a formal message from the King urging in a general way that you give special attention to the Middle East. If the pattern here follows that in London and Paris, this message will be relatively bland. But it is believed that Laraki has instructions to press orally the following points: —that further deterioration will lead to further Soviet and radical gains;

—that the U.S. not deliver further arms to Israel;

—that the U.S. press Israel to withdraw from the occupied territories;

—that the U.S. press Israel to accept a political solution based on the UN Security Council resolution.

—that the U.S. press Israel to accept a role for the Palestinians.

Laraki is personally Western-oriented, but he is strongly pro-Arab and strident on the Arab-Israeli question.

Your Objective

There are two reasons for your seeing Laraki: —to bolster further our relationship with Moroccan leadership and to encourage the notion that the U.S. will be responsive to moderate Arab voices and

—to use this as a channel to other Arabs to convey the message that the U.S. is genuinely trying to help achieve a settlement.

The impression to be conveyed is that we are prepared to do what is necessary to help achieve a political settlement but we cannot do the job alone. Above all, we must be certain in our own minds that there is a will to peace on both sides. What we really need from Nasser is his unequivocal assurance that he is prepared to live and let live with Israel provided Israel withdraws to essentially pre-war borders and gives the Palestinians a fair deal.

Talking Points —You appreciate his coming. We are always eager to listen to our Arab friends. You regard King Hassan as one of our good friends.

—You are deeply concerned about the situation in the Middle East and especially about the new Soviet role.

—The U.S. has tried to work with the USSR for peace and limiting the arms race. But Moscow has not been constructive on either count. This has been especially true on the question of arms supply.

—We do not support Israel unqualifiedly, but we are committed to its survival. Most of our diplomatic efforts in the past year were made against Israel's wishes. We have subscribed to the principle (in the UN Resolution) that Israel should not gain territory as a result of the war provided its neighbors commit themselves in concrete ways to accept Israel and live at peace.

—You have always felt strongly about the plight of the Palestinians and the necessity of a fair settlement for them if there is to be peace.

—We take President Nasser's May 1 speech seriously and will respond as soon as we are ready. What we have most needed from President Nasser all along has been unequivocal assurance that he is ready to live at peace with Israel and to commit himself to concrete measures for enforcing that peace. We are aware of his recent statements along these lines and would welcome any greater precision that might be possible.

Bilateral Issues 1. The Prime Minister may press for continued U.S. help with Morocco's own air force (19 of 24 contracted F-5 aircraft have been delivered). In general, we are interested in assisting, but the $10 million planned for FY 1970 is unavailable until the Foreign Military Sales Act is freed.

2. King Hassan's visit, originally scheduled for July, has been postponed at the King's request because of the expected arrival of a baby. A date in December was offered, and he suggested early next year. [On the surface, this seems mainly a matter of finding a mutually possible time, although we have one report that suggests that the King may be wary of committing himself before he sees which way the U.S. will move on the Arab-Israeli problem.]

Prime Minister Laraki understands English but will speak through a French language interpreter. We assume he will be accompanied by Ambassador Osman.

Secretary Rogers' memo is attached

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 740, Country Files, Africa, Morocco, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for information. A stamped notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. The attached memorandum and talking points from Secretary Rogers are not printed. The summary of the President's conversation with Laraki is printed as Document 106.

105. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 8, 1970 105. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 8, 19701

Washington, June 8, 1970

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION 10740
June 8, 1970

MEMORANDUM

FOR DR. KISSINGER

FROM: Harold H. Saunders [signed Hal]

SUBJECT:

Summary of Conversation between Prime Minister Laraki and the President

Since I presume you were the only one on our side present with the President and Prime Minister, I would appreciate it if you could glance over the attached draft telegram as a summary of the conversation.

Recommendation: That you authorize clearance of the attached telegram if it looks accurate.

Department of State
TELEGRAM

ACTION:

Amembassy RABAT

SUBJ:

Summary of Conversation between Dr. Laraki and President Nixon

1. The Prime Minister said King Hasson thought the recent appeal from President Nasser was a positive element in the Middle East situation. He does not believe that direct negotiations are possible in the present circumstances. Rather, a settlement would have to be reached through indirect or secret negotiation. Morocco is seriously concerned about the decline of US influence in the Mediterranean and the Near East. If no solution is found to the present conflict the whole area will increasingly drift away from Western influence and the USSR will correspondingly increase its influence. Morocco believes that in view of Israel's air and technical superiority any additional delivery of arms would aggravate the situation seriously. The US must use its influence to bring Israel to accept the overall solution proposed by the UN Security Council.

2. The Prime Minister advised President Nixon that if he had any suggestion with respect to working out a solution together he would be glad to convey it to His Majesty. However, if additional arms deliveries are made, then nothing could be worked out.

3. President Nixon said our position with respect to Israel continues to be one of great restraint. He said the US stood by the principle of Israel's right to exist and that Israel's position in relation to its neighbors should not be weakened. The US is concerned about the introduction of Soviet pilots into the UAR.

4. The President said that discussions were being held with Israel, with the Russians, and also at the Four-Power Conferences, to arrive at a just and balanced solution. Our conversations with the Russians have been quite unsuccessful. The President also stated that our policy towards the Middle East is still under review, that there are frequent meetings on the Middle East, and that there would be one next week. It could be that nothing dramatic would come out of the meeting. He appreciated today's thoughtful and constructive conversation.

END

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 740, Country Files, Africa, Morocco, Vol. I. Secret; Exdis. Sent for action. Saunders wrote the following postscript: “The angle to be especially considered is whether in this form this summary could be given to Laraki for his record since he was alone and did not take detailed notes. H.S.” Kissinger eliminated the last sentence in paragraph 3 and substituted the word “just” for “favorable” in the first sentence of paragraph 4. With these changes, Kissinger approved the summary, and agreed that it could be passed on to Laraki. On June 5, Laraki also had urged Secretary Rogers to consider seriously Nasser's peace appeal as a step towards easing the worsening Middle East situation. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL MOR-US)

106. Intelligence Note RAFN-29 Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Washington, July 14, 1970 106. Intelligence Note RAFN-29 Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Washington, July 14, 19701

Washington, July 14, 1970

Department of State
BUREAU OF INTELLIGENCE AND RESEARCH
INTELLIGENCE NOTE RAFN-29

MOROCCO: HASSAN MOVES TO END “STATE OF EXCEPTION”

This report was produced by the Bureau of intelligence and Research. Aside from normal substantive exchange with other agencies at the working level, it has not been coordinated elsewhere.

In a July 9 birthday message to the Moroccan people, King Hassan announced plans to end the “state of exception” by which he has ruled since June 7, 1965. He intends to submit constitutional revisions to a referendum on July 24, then provide for a two-round election, on August 21 and 28, for a unicameral parliament. While he has not yet made public the precise powers of the new legislative body, they will presumably be very limited and clearly subordinate to those of the monarch.

Bending to Domestic Pressures?

The King's initiative seems to some observers a concession to various domestic political pressures. Many educated Moroccans and the political parties have resented the longevity and blatant absolutism of his emergency rule. Anti-monarchical sentiment has risen since the fall of Libya's Kinq Idris in September 1969. Moreover, Hassan's regime has been beset from several quarters since late 1969. The discovery of a subversive group prompted the rounding-up of some 400 left wing dissidents throughout the country. Student unrest of unprecedented intensity led to university strikes lasting nearly 11 weeks. Revelations of official corruption embarrassed the government and raised nagging doubts about the accountability of high officials. Irredentist elements, led by the conservative Istiqlal Party, erupted in outrage after Hassan recently gave up Morocco's longstanding claims to Algerian-held territory.

…Or Following a Plan?

None of these pressures, however, appears genuinely to have threatened Hassan's rule or even influenced significantly his decision to restore parliament at this time. He has had constitutional revisions under consideration for several years. Moreover, various indications, starting in early 1969 and multiplying after the October local elections, have suggested the probability of a timetable to lift the “state of exception” sometime in 1970. Nonetheless, Hassan has taken extraordinary precautions to ensure the success of his plans and to forestall any organized opposition. He made his announcement with little forewarning and deliberately set early dates for the voting exercises to coincide with the summer vacation season. He has also issued veiled warnings to the electorate that rejection of the referendum would mean continuation of the “state of exception” and to political parties that those who preach boycott would find themselves excluded from the political system.

Stacking the Seats

Hassan's careful preparations also extend to the composition of the parliament. He apparently plans to draw at least one-half of the membership from existing—and largely apolitical—elected bodies: provincial assemblies, municipal and communal councils, and professional chambers representing business, labor, and agriculture. He is encouraging his cabinet ministers and other loyal aides to run for the remaining seats. He presumably expects that his efficient Minister of Interior will supervise the elections with the same magisterial aplomb he showed in the local council vote of October 3, 1969 (when he was able to announce complete election results, including statistical analyses of the age group, education level, and political affiliation of the 11,166 winning candidates, less than 24 hours after the polls closed).

Short-term Success Likely

The short-term objectives of King Hassan seem assured. Besides gathering great credit with the public for his initiative, he can almost certainly look forward to a massive referendum victory and minimum-risk parliamentary elections. The major opposition parties, while unhappy over the role and makeup of the parliament and apprehensive about electoral rigging, will be under severe pressure to “cooperate” with the palace and to participate. However they decide, Hassan will be able to install a loyalist-dominated legislature in early September and thereby add what could become a genuinely needed safety valve.

Longer-term Prospects Uncertain

Hassan's future actions will determine whether he has created a new institutional bulwark for his monarchy or has opened a Pandora's box. He will face a formidable problem in making the new parliament a credible political institution. Over the past nine years he has used the “divide and manipulate” technique to hold power. He has factionalized the political elite, including his most fervent supporters, to the point of immobilism. Just as he divided the loyal majority in the 1963-65 parliament, he could do the same with the loyal majority in the new body. Indeed, unless Hassan decides to change his tactics and to promote the development of a cohesive working majority, perhaps under the aegis of a new political party or under another form of leadership authority vested outside his person, he will risk immobilism in the new assembly and eventually another breakdown in parliament-palace relations. The representative character and power of the legislature also appear crucial. If the deputies lack genuine grassroots support and have no real power, they could seem to to the Moroccan public like a band of self-serving sycophants. This lack of confidence could be of critical importance, for even today Moroccans under 30 years old, and comprising around two-thirds of the total populace, tend to have little respect for either regime or parties.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-5 MOR. Confidential; Noforn; Controlled Dissemination. Drafted by Mattson and cleared by Harrop. In a subsequent political summary, Airgram A-209, December 8, the Embassy reported, “The new constitution under which the King enjoys the same prerogatives approximating his powers under the State of Exemption [sic?] won approval so unnecessarily overwhelming (97.8%) in the July 24 referendum as to cast doubts on the credibility of that consultation of the popular will. Nonetheless, the referendum exposed the weakness of the opposition's popular grass-roots support and its inability to compete against the well-oiled political apparatus of the regime.” (Ibid., POL 2 MOR)

107. Intelligence Note RAFN-49 Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Washington, November 3, 1970 107. Intelligence Note RAFN-49 Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Washington, November 3, 19701

Washington, November 3, 1970

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
INTELLIGENCE NOTE
BUREAU OF INTELLIGENCE AND RESEARCH
RAFN-4
November 3, 1970

MOROCCO: KENITRA AND THE KING

Since the evacuation of Wheelus airbase in June 1970, the sole American military facilities remaining in the Arab world are in Morocco: the US Navy Training Command at Kenitra and sensitive communications installactions at nearby Bouknadel and Sidi Yahia. A king's word rather than any written treaty guarantees their existence. In 1963, when the US evacuated the military bases it had occupied in Morocco, King Hassan orally assured President Kennedy that these facilities could remain indefinitely; he repeated this oral assurance to President Johnson in 1967. Both sentimental and political reasons appear to lie behind the King's commitment. This, however, may increasingly be eroded by anti-US pressures and by his own excessive efforts to utilize the existence of the bases as a lever for obtaining greater US aid and support.

Royal Sentiment. King Hassan's personal feelings towards the US cannot be accurately measured. We do know, however, that they go back to a memorable boyhood experience: his presence at the 1943 meeting at Casablanca between his father, Mohammed V and President Roosevelt. Since then, Hassan has placed considerable value on friendship with the US, probably reflecting a continuing sense of personal gratitude to the first major Western power that expressed favorable interest in Moroccan independence. In addition, the king probably retains favorable memories of his contacts with American personnel at Kenitra while he was Crown Prince in the late 1950's: he, his brother, and sisters got to know Americans there and learned to rely on US facilities for luxury goods and on base officials for various personal and political services.

A Convenient Option. Hassan has also developed important political reasons to cultivate the US. His “American option” has become a means to many ends. On different occasions he has been able to use the US as counterweight in various dealings: with his domestic opposition, hostile neighbors (notably Algeria), ex-colonial power France, and the USSR. His trip to Washington in 1963, for example, enabled him to draw an implied US stamp of approval for the controversial constitutional system he installed at that time. Similarly, he played up Moroccan-US ties during the four-year period, 1965-69, when the French withdrew their ambassador and suspended economic assistance.

From the outset Hassan apparently recognized that his US option, to be credible, required a continuing and visible US interest in close relations with Morocco. While Hassan probably appreciated the element of disinterest in US diplomatic friendship for Morocco—in contrast to the French whose designs he considered neo-colonialist—he also seemed to have realized it could well lead to declining US attentiveness. Hassan therefore looked to the US military for support and sought White House attention, skillfully trying to establish a personal relationship with each new president.

To place his US insurance policy on a more secure basis, he assured President Kennedy in 1963 that the Kenitra facilities could remain. Three years later, he attempted to carry his “special relationship” with the US a step farther. Hassan's domestic problems in 1966 were formidable; drought had caused a severe shortfall in farm production, and the political parties were chafing under a state of emergency rule imposed the previous year. Moreover, Morocco was at odds with its North African neighbors as well as Spain and France, and the king was under military pressure to counter the Algerian threat with an arms buildup. In a deftly orchestrated campaign (including a visit to Moscow and bilateral talks with the US at diplomatic, military, [text not declassified]), Hassan laid the groundwork for his proposition in January 1967, that Morocco and the US conclude a formal mutual security arrangement. His proposal met with rebuff by US officials, but Hassan nevertheless reassured President Johnson, during a visit to Washington in February 1967, that the US could continue using the Kenitra facilities.

Advantages to Hassan Outweigh Drawbacks. The arrangements on Kenitra have provided Hassan with considerable leverage to help ensure a continuing flow of US military aid and economic assistance. It has enabled him to prevent a gradual phase-down in US aid levels that had been planned as a consequence of the 1963 evacuation. Instead he was able to count on substantial US support in later years. Overall, through fiscal year 1969, Morocco has received, since 1953, about $66.2 million under the military assistance program and an additional $692.4 million in US economic aid ($56.2 and $292.5 million, respectively, since FY 1963).

Over the past seven years, Hassan has thus parlayed the US stake in Kenitra into concrete political and economic advantages for his regime. These benefits give Hassan, if anything, a greater stake than Washington in a continued US military presence. Moreover, he has thus far succeeded in neutralizing the political drawbacks in the arrangements. Foreign criticism from radical Arab quarters, notably Algeria during the June 1967 war, has not deterred him from maintaining this apparent anachronism in the Arab world—nor has it barred him from active participation in Arab councils and diplomatic campaigns. At home he has been able to sidestep the potentially embarrassing question of whether the US military facilities constitute an infringement of Moroccan sovereignty. By placing Moroccan flags over the three installations, Moroccan military insignia on the uniforms of US personnel, and a sizeable Moroccan military presence at the Kenitra base, Hassan has been able to marshal supporting evidence for his claim that the three bases are legally—and genuinely—Moroccan. (Moroccan military and civilian officials and, to a considerable extent, educated Moroccans in general, are aware of the continuing US military presence at these installations—although not the details of their activities). Indeed, at a press conference in July Hassan baldly asserted that even Soviet party leader Brezhnev had acknowledged the bases to be Moroccan. His credibility appears to remain intact even though the Moroccan opposition press, echoing news despatches on the Symington sub-committee hearings, has recently begun for the first time to question the US military presence. His defense of the status quo serves to tie his past verbal assurances even closer to his power and prestige.

Facilitics May Be Caught Between Hassan's Enemies and His Own Expectations.

Notwithstanding this royal support, the US military facilities in Morocco face an uncertain future and may be increasingly subject to royal pressure. The Moroccan monarch appears in a paradoxical situation. On the one hand, his present determination to preserve the US presence leaves him increasingly vulnerable to the tides of popular opinion. Another rapid rise in Middle East tensions could compromise the US facilities, and a renewed outbreak of Arab/Israeli hostilities almost certainly would do so. Furthermore, Hassan's uncompromising stance toward his domestic opposition is likely to drive the political opposition, desperately searching for ways to embarrass and harass the regime, to intensify its attacks on the US presence. Moreover, organized labor is likely to join the attack since the authorities on October 1 ordered the Moroccan workers (over 750) employed at US facilities on the three installations to disaffiliate from the country's largest trade union.

On the other hand, the growing number of dissatisfactions Morocco finds in its bilateral relations with the US, including the prospects of declining American economic and military assistance, will probably cause Hassan once again to attempt to use the bases as leverage against the US. That the regime has thus far permitted the opposition press to publish articles critical of Kenitra—while Morocco seizes newspaper issues and arrests journalists for articles on numerous other subjects—suggests that Hassan may already have opened such a campaign. If the American response is unsatisfactory to Hassan, he may well put additional pressure on the US by increasing Moroccan controls over the bases.

INR/Africa

Director: William C. Harrop

Analyst: JMattson

ect. 22297

Released by-

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15 MOR-US. Secret; Noforn; Controlled Dissemination. Drafted by Mattson and approved by Harrop.

108. Telegram 4828 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, November 4, 1970, 1755Z 108. Telegram 4828 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, November 4, 1970, 1755Z1

November 4, 1970, 1755Z

Department of State
TELEGRAM
4828
P 041755Z NOV 70

50 40

ACTION AF-05

INFO OCT-01 SS-20 NSC-10 NSCE-00 INR-07 CIAE-00 NSAE-00 L-02 DODE-00 PM-03 PRS-01 RSR-01 RSC-01 NEA-08 H-01 USIA-04/064 W 076887

P 041755Z NOV 70

FM AMEMBASSY RABAT

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1312

SUBJ:

KENITRA FACILITIES

1. I HAVE JUST RETURNED FROM MEETING WITH PRIME MINISTER WHO SUMMONED ME TO DISCUSS US FACILITIES AT KENITRA. HE ASKED ME POINT BLANK WHETHER USG CONSIDERED US FACILITIES AT KENITRA TO BE BASE OR NOT. HE ADDED THAT JUDGING FROM PRESS REPORTS OF SENATE SUBCOMMITTEE HEARING ON KENITRA, SENATORS CLEARLY CONSIDERED US FACILITIES AT KENITRA TO BE BASE. REPORTED ATTITUDE OF EXECUTIVE BRANCH, PRIMIN MAINTAINED, WAS NOT CLEAR, AND IN HIS VIEW EXECUTIVE BRANCH TESTIMONY COULD HAVE BEEN MUCH FIRMER.

2. HE NOTED THAT IN AFTERMATH PUBLICATION OF HEARINGS THERE HAD BEEN NO OFFICIAL STATEMENT FROM DEPARTMENT OF STATE NOR FROM EMBASSY RABAT, AND MOROCCAN GOVERNMENT, THROUGH STATEMENT IN MAP (RABAT 4826), HAD BEEN ONLY OFFICIAL VOICE TO DENY THERE US BASE IN MOROCCO.

3. PRIMIN WENT ON TO SAY THAT FROM EVERY MOROCCAN EMBASSY IN ARAB WORLD THERE HAD BEEN REPORTS OF LOCAL PRESS ALLEGATIONS OF US BASE IN MOROCCO AND DEROGATORY ALLUSION TO CONNECTIONS BETWEEN KENITRA. FACILITIES AND OPERATIONS OF SIXTH FLEET DETRIMENTAL TO ARAB CAUSE. ALL THESE BASED ON PRESS REPORTS OF SENATE SUBCOMMITTEE REPORT.

4. IN THESE CIRCUMSTANCES, PRIMIN SAID, DOUBTS HAD ARISEN IN MINDS OF MANY MOROCCANS AS TO NATURE OF US PRESENCE AT KENITRA. IT WAS IMPORTANT TO HIM TO LEARN EXACTLY HOW USG REGARDED THESE FACILITIES IF WE REGARDED THEM AS BASE, THERE WERE ESTABLISHED TYPES OF AGREEMENTS WHICH GOVERNED EXISTENCE OF BASES. IF WE DID NOT REGARD FACILITIES AS BASE, WE SHOULD CONSIDER POSSIBLE WAYS OF ATTENUATING NEGATIVE EFFECT OF RECENT PUBLICITY. HE DESIRED AN EXPLICIT OFFICIAL (PRIVATE) STATEMENT FROM DEPARTMENT.

5. I SAID I WOULD ASK FOR ONE, BUT COULD TELL HIM THAT WE DID NOT CONSIDER KENITRA TO BE A US BASE. US WAS USING FACILITIES AT A MOROCCAN INSTALLATION THROUGH COURTESY OF GOM. THIS HAD BEEN MADE CLEAR BY EXECUTIVE BRANCH TESTIMONY DURING CONGRESSIONAL HEARINGS. STATE DEPARTMENT HAD RECENTLY BEEN PREPARED TO DECLARE THIS PUBLICLY, BUT AS FAR AS I KNEW HAD NOT HAD OPPORTUNITY SINCE NO JOURNALIST HAD POSED QUESTION. I DESCRIBED DIFFERENCE OF VIEW BETWEEN THE SENATE AND THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH OVER NATURE OF ARRANGEMENTS ABROAD TO BE SUBMITTED TO SENATE: I EXPRESSED OPINION THAT EVEN IF PRESIDENT HIMSELF HAD PUBLICLY DENIED EXISTENCE OF US BASE AT KENITRA, VIEWS OF SENATORS TAKING OPPOSITE POSITION WOULD STILL HAVE BEEN GIVEN WIDE PUBLICITY AND HAVE BEEN PICKED UP BY UNFRIENDLY REGIMES IN MIDDLE EAST. I ASKED WHETHER PRIMIN FELT EXPLICIT PUBLIC DECLARATION NOW BY USG WOULD BE HELPFUL, ADDING THAT IT WAS MY IMPRESSION THAT WITH REGARD TO STATEMENT BY EMBASSY RABAT, MR. ZENINED OF MINISTRY OF INFORMATION HAD AGREED WITH US THAT IT WOULD BE PREFERABLE FOR EMBASSY SAY NOTHING SINCE STORIES RE KENITRA WERE EMANATING FROM WASHINGTON. LARAKI REPLIED THAT HE THOUGHT IT WAS TOO LATE TO RECTIFY SITUATION THROUGH PUBLIC STATEMENT AT THIS TIME.

6. PRIMIN REFUSED TO BE DRAWN OUT WITH REGARD TO WHAT ATTENUATING STEPS MIGHT BE TAKEN SHOULD DEPARTMENT'S RESPONSE BE THAT KENITRA FACILITIES ARE NOT US BASE. HE CONTINUED TO STRESS THE AWKWARD POSITION WHICH GOM HAD BEEN PUT INTO BY RECENT PUBLICITY, WHICH HE SEEMED TO CONSIDER MUCH MORE HARMFUL THAN PRESS STORIES IN JULY OWING TO FACT THAT IT BASED ON PUBLIC OFFICIAL REPORT OF SENATE SUBCOMMITTEE. HE SPECIFICALLY ALLUDED TO ONE SENATOR'S REPORTED STATEMENT THAT US MIGHT SEND IN SOLDIERS IF SAFETY OF AMERICANS AT KENITRA WERE ENDANGERED.

7. AT NO TIME DID PRIMIN BRING KING'S NAME INTO CONVERSATION.

8. COMMENT: I FOUND THIS INTERVIEW DISCONCERTING OWING TO PRIMIN'S REFUSAL TO BE FRANK WITH REGARD TO WHAT WAS ON HIS MIND. I AM CONFIDENT HE KNOWS THE CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING OUR PRESENCE AT KENITRA. IT IS UNFORTUNATE THAT OPPORTUNITY APPARENTLY DID NOT ARISE FOR DEPARTMENT TO ISSUE OFFICIAL DENIAL RE EXISTENCE OF AMERICAN BASE IN MOROCCO AS GOM EVIDENTLY FEELING VERY EXPOSED AT PRESENT.

9. I SUGGEST FOLLOWING ACTIONS: A. DEPARTMENT TO SEND ME STATEMENT FOR COMMUNICATION TO PRIMIN ALONG LINES THAT PROPOSED FOR PUBLIC USE IN STATE 179653.

B. AT SAME TIME DEPARTMENT AUTHORIZE ME TO CONVEY TO LARAKI EXCERPTS FROM CONFIDENTIAL OPENING REMARKS BY ASSISTANT SECRETARY NEWSOM TO SENATE SUBCOMMITTEE LAST JULY. I WOULD SUGGEST CONVEYING STATEMENTS BEGINNING SECOND PARAGRAPH PAGE 2, ALL OF PAGE 3, ALL OF PAGE 4 EXCEPT THE SENTENCE ABOUT INTELLIGENCE FUNCTIONS, AND PAGE 5 DOWN TO LAST SENTENCE FIRST PARAGRAPH. IN ADDITION I WOULD INCLUDE FIRST PARAGRAPH PAGE 6 AND SECOND PARAGRAPH PAGE 6 DOWN TO LAST SENTENCE.

C. ALTHOUGH PRIMIN SAID PUBLIC STATEMENT BY DEPARTMENT NOW TOO LATE TO BE USEFUL, I BELIEVE THAT ONE MIGHT BE HELPFUL AND SUGGEST THAT DEPARTMENT URGENTLY CREATE OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE STATEMENT ALONG LINES PARAGRAPH 3 STATE 179653.

10. I DO NOT KNOW WHAT MAY COME OF THIS; GOM MAY CALM DOWN IF USG MAKES OFFICIAL STATEMENT; ON OTHER HAND GOM MAY WISH TO COMPENSTATE FOR AGGRAVATION OF POLITICAL LIABILITY OF US PRESENCE AT KENITRA BY SEEKING OBTAIN COMPENSATION IN SOME FORM FROM US. SUCH COMPENSATION MIGHT CONSIST OF ADDITIONAL ECONOMIC OR MILITARY ASSISTANCE, MORE LIKELY LATTER.

ROCKWELL

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15 MOR-US. Secret; Priority; Limdis. The hearings of the Senate Subcommittee on U.S. Overseas Commitments, chaired by William “Stuart” Symington, met in July and November, 1970. In telegram 182605 to Rabat, November 5, the Department replied that the base at Kenitra was under full Moroccan sovereignty and control, and agreed that Rabat might have raised the issue to obtain increased compensation. (Ibid.)

109. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, November 30, 1970 109. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, November 30, 19701

Washington, November 30, 1970

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION
November 30, 1970

MEMORANDUM

FOR DR. KISSINGER

FROM: Harold H. Saunders [Hal signed]

SUBJECT:

Presidential Emissary to Discuss U.S. Communications Facilities in Morocco

You may have seen the telegram at Tab B reporting the King of Morocco's desire to discuss the status of the U.S. communications facility at Kenitra (Morocco) with a Presidential emissary.

As you know, King Hassan has a distressing penchant for emissaries, but in this case he has more reason than usual. The presence of our communications facilities—naval [text not declassified]—is based only on an oral understanding between him and President Kennedy in 1963. When our SAC bases there were closed, these facilities stayed on under the Moroccan flag and training activities for Moroccans are conducted there.

As a result of news stories coming out of the Symington Subcommittee, this has again blown up as a public issue in Morocco. The King's opposition has charged the King with allowing a U.S. “base” on Moroccan soil. Disturbed by this, the King has asked for an emissary (a) to review the implications of the continued existence of these bases and (b) to assure him that they are indeed Communications facilities and not operational bases.

The logical course of action would be: —to complete our own review (underway) of the need for these facilities;

—to discuss our conclusions with the Moroccan technical level;

—to ratify new arrangements at the top.

Ambassador Rockwell proposed this procedure, but the King still feels he would like to see an emissary.

In this case, I would be inclined to go along since there is one possible emissary who would make a lot of sense. Robert Murphy not only has a longstanding association with the King [text not declassified] One of the issues here will be what price the U.S. will be prepared to pay Hassan in military assistance (from a depleted African budget) in return for continuation at Kenitra.

The telegram at Tab A, therefore, says we are prepared to send an emissary in two or three weeks, as soon as the latest round of publicity on the issue has died down.

While I would normally try to turn this off, I think we might as well respond promptly and get this issue settled. Otherwise, this problem will still be hanging around to confront the President when Hassan makes his official visit in March (assuming the President approves the proposed visit list).

RECOMMENDATION: That you authorize clearance of the telegram at Tab A.
Approve [HK initialed]
Other

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 740, Country Files, Africa, Morocco, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for action. Kissinger approved the recommendation and wrote on the memorandum, “Ok with Saunders changes and delete last [paragraph] HK.” Attached but not printed at Tab A telegram 195658 to Rabat, December 1. It confirmed that the U.S. Government did not regard Kenitra as a U.S. base. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15-MOR-US) Attached but not printed at Tab B is telegram 5136 from Rabat, November 25.

110. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, January 25, 1971 110. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, January 25, 19711

Washington, January 25, 1971

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
INFORMATION 24605
January 25, 1971

MEMORANDUM

FOR DR. KISSINGER

FROM: Harold H. Saunders [Hal signed]

SUBJECT:

Robert Murphy's Trip to Morocco

You will recall that Robert Murphy scurried off to Morocco in mid-December to discuss the future of the Kenitra communications facilities with King Hassan. Ambassador Rockwell, who was present at the meeting, sent in a report based on both is own and Mr. Murphy's observations which was sent to you at the time. What it all boiled down to was the fact that the King wanted more U.S. aid.

To wind up his responsibilities, Mr. Murphy has sent Secretary Rogers a fuller account of the meeting with a copy of the letter designated for you [attached]. Murphy's report is basically in harmony with Rockwell's: --Murphy shares with Rockwell the impression that the King is simply trying to exploit the situation to derive substantial material benefits from the U.S. He was told that “nominal and picayune items will no longer do.” However, Murphy also stressed that the atmosphere was entirely friendly and he does not believe the King intends to eject or threaten to eject the facilities. [As Rockwell had noted, the King indicated that he had no complexes about bases; he simply wanted to know “what President Nixon wanted” in connection with them.]

--Murphy also concluded that the King has decided that this is a good time to bargain and that the negotiations ought to be kept at the Chief of State level.

--The King agreed that the Russians have been active in stimulating domestic opposition to the U.S. facilities, doubtless because of the ramifications they may have for the Soviet Mediterranean fleet. He indicated that he had been quite courageous in his talks with Brezhnev in Moscow. In that connection, Rockwell recalled the King's annoyance over the yearly negotiations for PL 480 wheat and other aid which were not felt to be commensurate with the difficulties occasioned by the U.S. military presence in Morocco; in the King's words, “if, however, the counterpart were sufficient, then I could look Brezhnev in the face.”

--Murphy was hopeful the King would be more specific as to his wants — he went only so far as to say he would send an emissary to Washington and, of course, discuss the matter with the President himself —- and the King was equally disappointed that Murphy had nothing substantial to say on the matter of “counterpart.”

--Murphy also came away with the impression that the hasty American departure from Wheelus came as somewhat of a surprise to the Moroccans.

There is nothing you need to do about this at the moment. Here is what is in train:

1. I have told State to get this settled before King Hassan comes on his visit in March. We probably cannot prevent his raising the subject with the President because he remembers bargaining personally with President Kennedy for more aid in return for allowing us to stay at Kenitra when our SAC bases closed in 1963. Nevertheless, I have told State I did not think President Nixon would want to get into that and thought he would prefer this issue to be settled.

2. The military [text not declassified] have just finished their study of how badly they want to retain these facilities. Their study will be the subject of IG study very shortly. At that point, I shall discuss with you what the options look like and how you might wish to involve yourself.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 740, Country Files, Africa, Morocco, Vol. I. Secret; Exdis. Sent for information. The attachment, dated December 17, is not printed. Rockwell's report on the same conversation was sent in telegram 5409 from Rabat, December 15, 1970. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15 MOR-US)

111. Telegram 51970 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Morocco, March 27, 1971, 2034Z. 111. Telegram 51970 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Morocco, March 27, 1971, 2034Z.1

March 27, 1971, 2034Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State 051970
27 MAR 71

ACTION:

AmEmbassy RABAT

INFO:

USCINCEUR

USG REPLY TO KING Hassan RE KENITRA

REFERENCE:

(a) RABAT 5409 (b) RABAT 1069 :/

1. We have examined King's request conveyed to Robert Murphy, in latter's capacity as special envoy of President December 1970, that USG extend additional benefits to Morocco in order to assist King and His Government in convincing Moroccan people of continued desirability US presence at Kenitra. Request has been reviewed in light of Kenitra's continued usefulness to USG, US resource availability, and traditional US friendship for Morocco demonstrated by our long-term interest in Morocco's security and economic development. Impending Hassan visit to US has lent certain note of urgency to this examination, but as you are aware, basic political, military and economic aspects of problem were already under review at time of Murphy's and your audience with King in December.

2. Conclusion has been reached that USG should seek retain access to Kenitra complex as long as possible view special advantages afforded by use of Moroccan frequencies, which its retention entails, if political, both domestic and foreign, as well as economic costs do not become insurmountable. We recognize, however, that Moroccan political climate over near to mid-term future may pose problems for continued US military presence at Kenitra, however disguised or described to Moroccan public. We are also agreed that USG has long-term interest in Moroccan internal political stability and does not wish to do anything which might threaten present regime as it attempts to adjust to incipient internal political forces which have already begun to manifest themselves.

3. USG also recognizes that our presence does not rest on any contractual legal basis and may be terminated by King or GOM at any time. Hopefully, any required withdrawal would be delayed until such time as orderly arrangements had been developed elsewhere. In its own long-term interest, USG prefers avoid confrontation disruptive to our total relationship with Moroccan regime on this issue.

4. In light foregoing, which is for your background only, you are requested to seek audience with King indicating that you wish to deliver on behalf of President latter's reply to King's observations regarding Kenitra which were conveyed to you and to Robert Murphy last year. You should note that the President appreciates this opportunity to communicate with the King on a matter of mutual interest which, he would hope, King would agree may now be set aside so that other matters of common concern may be reviewed during King's state visit in April.

5. In your reply to King you should make following points: (A) Fact that His Majesty has continued to make possible US access to Kenitra has been very much appreciated by USG as evidence King's own appreciation of importance to Morocco of effective US presence in area in which Soviet presence has significantly increased.

(B) USG, however, in past had never tied its assistance programs to Morocco to continued US access to Kenitra. Our economic aid program, amounting to $660 million through 1969, has been based on our estimate not only of Moroccan economic requirements but also on Moroccan ability to benefit from USG economic aid. Size of that program, as well as its composition, has also had to reflect availability of US economic assistance worldwide at any given time. Despite pressure on US economic assistance resources, owing to changed attitudes of American public, Congressional opinion, and unforeseen demands arising out of US commitments in Southeast Asia, Morocco had continued to be major beneficiary of US economic assistance programs. In Fiscal Year 1970 alone, they amount to approximately $26.6 million, and will be substantially greater during Fiscal Year 1971.

(c) Similarly, US military assistance program for Morocco had also been maintained at significant level despite downward pressures on military assistance budget and compelling requirements arising out of Southeast Asian problem. USG has always developed its programs for Morocco in terms of total relationship of Morocco to US as a friendly country which we wished to see endowed with a credible defense deterrent. Fact that USG had access to Kenitra was not repeat not a determining factor at any time affecting either the size or composition of USG programs for Morocco. Indeed, USG has a continuing interest in Morocco's security and development. In future, as in past, size of program will reflect assessment by both governments of Moroccan priority requirements in military area and total resources available US and other donors to meet those requirements.

(d) President wishes King to know that subject to Congressional appropriations we will continue to assist Morocco in future because of our continued interest in Moroccan legitimate security and development needs.

(e) As regards Kenitra, if at any time His Majesty were to conclude that our presence at Kenitra posed unacceptable political liabilities we would understand and we would be prepared to discuss with His Government altering the US presence at Kenitra as appropaiate. In meantime, we hope GOM will find way of conveying full extent of substantial USG economic and military assistance to Moroccan public in order that major benefits US-Moroccan relationship has brought to Morocco may be more widely understood. Morocco is the largest African recipient of US economic and military assistance, over $726 million from 1946 to 1969.

6. At this point the King may identify what specific additional assistance projects he has in mind. If so, you should make clear financial restrictions which preclude additions to ongoing programs while indicating our willingness to reexamine possible adjustments of programs in light GOM priorities. As appropriate and if you deem it advantageous, you should be prepared to review with him our total FY 71 assistance programs (including AID assistance resources made available during FY 71) and indicating that we would hope that our economic assistance would continue to be generally of same order of magnitude in FY 72, qualified as subject to availability funds from Congress. Such review would make it necessary for you to refer to the proposed FMS credit and grant MAP for training, as well as Navy's proposed improvements to Kenitra (paras (a) and (b) below). In deciding whether to use this info, you should weigh the advantages which may be derived by withholding info until King Hassan's visit to Washington. We have in mind that notwithstanding our hope Kenitra discussions will be concluded before King's arrival US and therefore not raised with President, we cannot be certain this will be the case. Consequently, if subject were raised by King with President, there may be advantages in not having conveyed this info in advance. (a) We are planning on $15 million FMS credit in FY 71 and the same amount for FY 72. The $15 million in FY 71 will require Presidential Determination to waive Congressional ceiling, but this message constitutes White House authorization use of that figure in discussions with the King. We leave to your discretion whether it necessary clarify that the FMS credit for FY 70 is zero as a result of Congressional failure appropriate funds.

(b) Navy projects to improve the power plant and electrical distribution, construct warehouse, refurbish and improve existing housing and structures are planned. Also Navy has authorized for construction 200 new housing units for US personnel. These projects, totaling approximately $14 million, are subject to availability of excess dirhams. $8 million already approved for FY 69 and 71 and Navy seeking approval for additional $6 million in FY 72.

(c) In addition, Navy prepared expand NAVTRACOM Telecommunications School.

7. In summary, we want remain at Kenitra but hope at same time to avoid direct quid pro quo context for discussions, given difficulty of obtaining additional assistance funds for Morocco.
END
GROUP 3

ROGERS

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15 MOR-US. Secret; Exdis. It was repeated to USCINCEUR. Drafted on March 18 by Blake and G. Bader (DOD/ISA); cleared by PM/ISO, USIA, CIA, OSD/ISA, Navy, S/PC,AID, PM/MAS, OSD/Admin,INR, AF, JCS, S/S, and the White House; and approved by Johnson

112. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 29, 1971 112. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 29, 19711

Washington, March 29, 1971

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION 26916
March 29, 1971

MEMORANDUM

FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM: Henry A. Kissinger [HK initialed] [stamped THE PRESIDENT HAS SEEN]

SUBJECT:

U.S. Communications Facilities in Morocco

Background

When the U.S. closed down its three Strategic Air Command bases in Morocco in 1963, King Hassan reached an oral agreement with President Kennedy during a state visit in the spring of that year which permitted the U.S. to stay on at its naval [text not declassified] communications facilities at Kenitra. The base was transferred to Moroccan control, and the US Navy established a communications training school for the Moroccan military there. Also, the training program for the F-5 aircraft which we sold to Morocco was located at that installation. In that same talk with President Kennedy, certain levels of economic and military assistance for the next couple of years were also mentioned.

The operation continued smoothly until last summer when there were leaks from the Symington sub-committee's hearings on U.S. installations abroad. Those newspaper stories were picked up in Morocco, and the opposition party and press made a good thing of the idea that the U.S. still had a “base” in Morocco. The Moroccan government handled the problem reasonably well, saying that this was not a U.S. base and that the main activity there was training Moroccans with some U.S. communications on the side.

Against the background of that political flurry, King Hassan last November said he wanted to discuss with you how he could show his people that the continuation of this relationship with the U.S. at Kenitra worked to their advantage. Robert Murphy was asked to talk with the King about this. His assessment was that the King did not wish to get rid of the U.S. installation but was angling for more aid in return for it. Apparently he remembered the arrangement he had made directly with President Kennedy and had in mind capitalizing on his forthcoming state visit to get something more for the facility.

A complete intra-U.S. Government review has now taken place, and the Navy [text not declassified] concluded that it would be helpful if our facilities could remain in being as long as possible, although if popular political pressure in Morocco mounted, we would withdraw and duplicate their function as much as possible in Spain and elsewhere.

The Present Problem

The present problem, therefore, is to explain to King Hassan our requirements in relation to the Kenitra facilities and our general programming for military and economic assistance to Morocco. The purpose of the present exercise is to get as much of this settled before he comes on his state visit at the end of April, so that you will not have to do more than simply note that a satisfactory understanding has been reached. This cannot be guaranteed because the King has a notion that the way to do business on something like this is between heads of state. But as much will be done as possible to save you from anything more than a simple ratification of a general understanding.

The line of action which has been proposed through the NSC system is to instruct Ambassador Rockwell to go to the King and to make the following points in your name: —The U.S. has appreciated its continued access to these facilities.

—The U.S. has not tied its assistance programs to Morocco to our continued access to the base. Our economic aid program (over $660 million through 1969) has been based on our estimates not only of Moroccan economic requirements but also our general friendly relationship with Morocco.

—The President wishes the King to know that, subject to Congressional appropriations, the U.S. will continue to assist Morocco in the future because of our continued interest in Morocco's legitimate security and development needs.

—With regard to Kenitra, at any time His Majesty concludes that our presence there poses unacceptable political liabilities to him we would understand and would be prepared to discuss with his government altering our presence as appropriate. In fact, some changes are already being made. We hope that the Moroccan government will find a way of conveying to the Moroccan people a full understanding of the substantial U.S. economic and military assistance the U.S. has provided. Morocco is the largest African recipient of U.S. economic and military assistance since World War II.

Ambassador Rockwell would also be authorized, at his discretion, to review with the King our plans for general economic and military assistance through FY 1972. This would include $15 million in military credit in FY 1971 and again in FY 1972. This will require a Presidential determination that it is important to U.S. interests to provide this amount, but that has been included in your Budget. At the same time, the Navy will make improvements at the installation, which will benefit the Moroccans, which will total approximately $14 million and will expand the telecommunications school for the Moroccan military.

The one issue in this approach is whether Ambassador Rockwell should be authorized to speak to the King about aid levels. The argument against doing so is that if the King were to raise the subject here when he comes, you would not have anything new to offer. However, it seems desirable to make some effort to give the King fully what we have in mind and then tell him, in the course of Ambassador Rockwell's presentation, that you hope this subject can be laid aside so that other matters of common concern may be discussed during the King's visit.

Summary

In short, this is a holding action. We do not believe that the King really wants us to leave. He wants a continuing association with the U.S. He also wants as much military and economic assistance as he can get from us. The amount that has been offered is as much as we can do within the scope of our appropriations and what the Moroccans can use.

RECOMMENDATION: That the above approach be authorized.
Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 740, Country Files, Africa, Morocco, Vol. I. Secret; Exdis. Sent for action. A stamped notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. Nixon approved the recommendation.

113. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 15, 1971, 11 a.m. 113. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 15, 1971, 11 a.m.1

Washington, April 15, 1971, 11 a.m.

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

DATE & TIME:

April 15, 1971, 11:00 a.m.

PLACE:

The President's Oval Office

SUBJECT:

Meeting Between the President, Moroccan Prime Minister Laraki, Assistant Secretary of State Newsom, and Henry A. Kissinger

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

Prime Minister Laraki opened the conversation by saying that the King of Morocco had asked him to come to express his warm feeling for the United States. Laraki said, “The King had looked forward to his State Visit on April 22. We are very conscious of the efforts of the United States to ease relations in the Middle East. We are also conscious of the fact that my visit in June was followed by the Rogers plan. Morocco has used its influence to get the Rogers plan accepted. Since then Nasser has died. Many changes have occurred—Nasser's death and various peace proposals. We have good relations with the UAR and they check everything with us. We have kept up the pressure to maintain the ceasefire but the present circumstances are very delicate. His Majesty has asked that there be an urgent convening of the Arab Summit. We want to bring the Arab World to realism. Our objective is to get more realism into the outlook of the Arabs. The planned meeting would coincide with the visit of His Majesty to the U.S. and it is obvious that his Majesty cannot absent himself from a Summit he himself has called.

Last week His Majesty received emissaries from Hussein and Boumediene. We are the only Arabs who are on good terms with all other Arabs. This has produced a series of dilemmas for the King. Either to come but not speak at the National Press Club and on Meet the Press, which is against his nature, or to have the public appearances and thereby jeopardize the Summit. We recognize that these trips are planned months ahead and therefore we have two proposals to make. One, we could turn the visit into a private one. His Majesty would arrive in the morning and leave in the evening. Or, we could postpone the visit. Above all, His Majesty wants it to be clear that nothing that is done will affect the bilateral relationship. His Majesty leaves the decision up to the President.”

The President said, “I agree completely with the role of Morocco. Morocco is the most stable and objective nation in the area. Secondly, we want to enhance His Majesty's role and we will do whatever His Majesty wants. If he came on a private visit he need not make any public speeches. On the other hand, we want to give His Majesty the honor befitting his station and that would suggest that a dinner would be better than a lunch, so if he came on a private visit he should plan to stay overnight. But we would like to work it out, whichever is more convenient.”

Laraki said, “His Majesty has left me the discussion of turning it into a private visit or postponement. I believe that turning it into a private visit might appear to some that the best Arab friend of the U.S. was being treated in a cavalier way, and a certain sector of the press would exploit it. Therefore, let us postpone the visit until June or October. If by then there has been an Arab Summit we will brief you on it; if not, we will give you our view of the situation. It was noticeable that now the Arab Summit seemed much less imminent.” There was then some desultory conversation about possible dates, and the meeting ended.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1025, Presidential/HAK Memcons, Mem Con-The President, Prime Minister Laraki, April 15, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. The meeting took place in the Oval Office. The Department's draft memorandum of the conversation is located in Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 7 MOR.

114. Airgram A-117 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, June 9, 1971 114. Airgram A-117 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, June 9, 19711

June 9, 1971

AIRGRAM
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
A-117

DATE:

June 9, 1971

TO:

Department of State

INFO:

Amconsul CASABLANCA Amconsul TANGIER

FROM:Amembassy RABAT

SUBJECT:

Comments on Djerejian Proposal for Reorientation of US Policy in Morocco

REF:

Rabat A-97

In its A-97 of May 19, the Embassy forwarded to the Department an analysis by Mr. Edward Djerejian, the Labor-Political Officer at Casablanca, recommending a reorientation of U.S. policy in Morocco. Mr. Djerejian maintained that we are over-committed to Morocco and that our real interest here is in supporting an independent and democratic Morocco which will be able to achieve the social and economic development which is the basis of social justice. We made no comment on his analysis at that time but promised one later. A group of substantive officers and I have since discussed the report at some length with Mr. Djerejian himself and the following represents a distillation of our principal comments on the paper.

First of all, we all agree that Mr. Djerejian has done a useful job in focusing our attention on important aspects of our policy toward Morocco and of forcing us to reexamine some of the fundamental concepts under which we have been operating. I think he is to be commended for his imaginative and thoughtful analysis. We do not agree with all of it but we think it is provocative and worth discussing.

What Mr. Djerejian's recommendations amount to, we think, is that we dissociate ourselves from the regime and that we encourage those elements which are by their nature opposed to autocratic government in Morocco. This assumes the existence of such elements and that they are likely contenders for power. I do not know that such elements, having a realistic possibility of attaining power, do in fact exist. All observers seem to be agreed that the only likely force to mount a revolution here is the Army, and I do not think we would find the Army any less autocratic or more effective in promoting the social and economic development of the country than is the present regime. Nor do I think that lessening of our economic support to the regime would promote the economic and social development of the country.

There are two fundamental assumptions of Mr. Djerejian's analysis which seem open to question. One is that we are overcommitted here and the other is that radical change is inevitable. We have had a long discussion about whether or not we are overcommitted; I think we can all agree that our present commitment is an inheritance from the past. Were we to arrive on the scene today and were there no naval communications facilities here, I doubt we would decide that Morocco should be the largest AID recipient country in Africa. We would probably put some of that money some place else. The point is, however, that we are not arriving fresh on the scene and that to alter radically the level of our bilateral aid to Morocco would inevitably affect our relations with this government and would affect our tenure at Kenitra, Sidi Yahya and Bouknadel. I personally do not feel that in the circumstances we are overcommitted. While there may be some question about the utilization of some of the aid we have given Morocco, I think in general it has been well used and that our aid Mission is doing an effective job of stimulating the Moroccan government into rational change. We are getting value for our money in terms of our tenure at Kenitra and the other installations, and I understand that those installations are in fact of great value to our military forces.

We also find it difficult to accept the thesis that radical change here is inevitable. One can compare the population and unemployment figures with the pace of economic development and look at the examples set by other Arab countries and conclude that radical change within the next 10 years is possible, or even likely, but one should not conclude that it is inevitable.

We hold no brief for King Hassan but we do not think one should sell him short. A great deal of money and effort has gone into the building of infrastructure in this country, and they are on the eve of paying off—structures like the new dams on the lower Moulouya and the Ziz Rivers are only now beginning to perform their planned functions. An era of agricultural development is opening up which may change many of our basic assumptions. It certainly is in our interests that these efforts come to fruition, that Morocco continue to enjoy stability and a reasonable degree of freedom and that King Hassan succeed in bringing this country through its transition from a traditional to a modern state by peaceful means. We may not approve totally of the way he is doing it, but our experiences with the Shah of Iran show that we are not always right about such things.

We fully agree with Mr. Djerejian that we should do what we can to urge the regime to increase popular participation in the development effort and to make better utilization of its human resources. Our leverage in this regard should not be overestimated, however, and a constant harping on this theme is likely to reduce our effectiveness. We also agree that we should not associate ourselves with the repressive political aspects of the regime and will do our best to avoid doing so, We doubt, however, that we could do much to change the regime's attitude or tactics towards the radical opposition, nor are we sure it would be wise to do so.

Mr. Djerejian recommended that we undertake an intensive informational and cultural effort to communicate and cultivate Moroccan youth and potential leaders. We are already carrying out a fairly active program in this regard, principally through USIS, and there are built-in limitations as to how far we can go because of the regime's desire to control contacts between foreigners and Moroccans. Our new Embassy Youth Committee is at the moment considering possibilities for new approaches in this field and it may be that we will decide

AIRGRAM
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
A-117

TO:

Department of State

INFO:

Amconsul CASABLANCA Amconsul TANGIER

FROM:Amembassy RABAT

DATE:

June 9, 1971

SUBJECT:

Comments on Djerejian Proposal for Reorientation of US Policy in Morocco

REF:

Rabat A-97

In its A-97 of May 19, the Embassy forwarded to the Department an analysis by Mr. Edward Djerejian, the Labor-Political Officer at Casablanca, recommending a reorientation of U.S. policy in Morocco. Mr. Djerejian maintained that we are over-committed to Morocco and that our real interest here is in supporting an independent and democratic Morocco which will be able to achieve the social and economic development which is the basis of social justice. We made no comment on his analysis at that time but promised one later. A group of substantive officers and I have since discussed the report at some length with Mr. Djerejian himself and the following represents a distillation of our principal comments on the paper.

First of all, we all agree that Mr. Djerejian has done a useful job in focusing our attention on important aspects of our policy toward Morocco and of forcing us to reexamine some of the fundamental concepts under which we have been operating. I think he is to be commended for his imaginative and thoughtful analysis. We do not agree with all of it but we think it is provocative and worth discussing.

What Mr. Djerejian's recommendations amount to, we think, is that we dissociate ourselves from the regime and that we encourage those elements which are by their nature opposed to autocratic government in Morocco. This assumes the existence of such elements and that they are likely contenders for power. I do not know that such elements, having a realistic possibility of attaining power, do in fact exist. All observers seem to be agreed that the only likely force to mount a revolution here is the Army, and I do not think we would find the Army any less autocratic or more effective in promoting the social and economic development of the country than is the present regime. Nor do I think that lessening of our economic support to the regime would promote the economic and social development of the country.

There are two fundamental assumptions of Mr. Djerejian's analysis which seem open to question. One is that we are overcommitted here and the other is that radical change is inevitable. We have had a long discussion about whether or not we are overcommitted; I think we can all agree that our present commitment is an inheritance from the past. Were we to arrive on the scene today and were there no naval communications facilities here, I doubt we would decide that Morocco should be the largest AID recipient country in Africa. We would probably put some of that money some place else. The point is, however, that we are not arriving fresh on the scene and that to alter radically the level of our bilateral aid to Morocco would inevitably affect our relations with this government and would affect our tenure at Kenitra, Sidi Yahya and Bouknadel. I personally do not feel that in the circumstances we are overcommitted. While there may be some question about the utilization of some of the aid we have given Morocco, I think in general it has been well used and that our aid Mission is doing an effective job of stimulating the Moroccan government into rational change. We are getting value for our money in terms of our tenure at Kenitra and the other installations, and I understand that those installations are in fact of great value to our military forces.

We also find it difficult to accept the thesis that radical change here is inevitable. One can compare the population and unemployment figures with the pace of economic development and look at the examples set by other Arab countries and conclude that radical change within the next 10 years is possible, or even likely, but one should not conclude that it is inevitable. We hold no brief for King Hassan but we do not think one should sell him short. A great deal of money and effort has gone into the building of infrastructure in this country, and they are on the eve of paying off—structures like the new dams on the lower Moulouya and the Ziz Rivers are only now beginning to perform their planned functions. An era of agricultural development is opening up which may change many of our basic assumptions. It certainly is in our interests that these efforts come to fruition, that Morocco continue to enjoy stability and a reasonable degree of freedom and that King Hassan succeed in bringing this country through its transition from a traditional to a modern state by peaceful means. We may not approve totally of the way he is doing it, but our experiences with the Shah of Iran show that we are not always right about such things.

We fully agree with Mr. Djerejian that we should do what we can to urge the regime to increase popular participation in the development effort and to make better utilization of its human resources. Our leverage in this regard should not be overestimated, however, and a constant harping on this theme is likely to reduce our effectiveness. We also agree that we should not associate ourselves with the repressive political aspects of the regime and will do our best to avoid doing so, We doubt, however, that we could do much to change the regime's attitude or tactics towards the radical opposition, nor are we sure it would be wise to do so.

Mr. Djerejian recommended that we undertake an intensive informational and cultural effort to communicate and cultivate Moroccan youth and potential leaders. We are already carrying out a fairly active program in this regard, principally through USIS, and there are built-in limitations as to how far we can go because of the regime's desire to control contacts between foreigners and Moroccans. Our new Embassy Youth Committee is at the moment considering possibilities for new approaches in this field and it may be that we will decide to reexamine or retread some of our present programs.

Mr. Djerejian also recommended that we expand our contacts with representative social and political groups such as the trade union movement. From discussion with Mr. Djerejian we have learned that he has in mind more the question of contacts between diplomatic representatives here and labor leaders in Casablanca, for example. We have no problem with this and will try to improve our track record.

Mr. Djerejian recommends expanding unilateral and multilateral assistance and eliminating bilateral assistance except for Promotion Nationale, Peace Corps and unilateral programs. We have also discussed this at some length and believe we have convinced Mr. Djerejian that in terms of his stated goal of promoting the economic and social development of Morocco, we have greater influence through a bilateral program than we would have if we relied entirely on multilateral efforts, even assuming the latter was possible under aid legislation.

Mr. Djerejian recommends reducing military assistance levels, but his recommendation seems to have been based upon a misunderstanding as to the nature and level of our assistance. Our program today consists of about $1 million grant aid and $10 million in credit sales each year. This is already a very modest program and in the present circumstances we think it is the minimum we can do and still make any effective contribution to the Moroccan defense capability. We think Morocco does need a defense capability and that it is in our interests to help develop it.

Finally, Mr. Djerejian recommends timely withdrawal from our installations at Kenitra, Sidi Yahya and Bouknadel if they are no longer in our strategic interests. We fully agree, but we believe that those installations are in fact in our strategic interests at present. Or rather, this is what we have been given to understand by Washington and we are in no position to judge otherwise.

This discussion calls to mind the fact that we still have no national policy paper for Morocco. We are aware of the problems with NSSM 87 but it seems to us that a thoroughgoing discussion of what our interests are and what we should be doing about them is still in order. If it does no more than highlight the need for such a discussion, Mr. Djerejian's paper will have served a useful purpose.

ROCKWELL

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 1 MOR-US. Secret. Drafted on June 7 by Parker and approved by Rockwell. The Embassy sent the original proposal to the Department as Rabat A-97, May 19. (Ibid.)

115. Airgram A-43 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Morocco, June 16, 1971 115. Airgram A-43 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Morocco, June 16, 19711

June 16, 1971

AIRGRAM
Department of State
A-43

DATE:

June 16, 1971

TO:

Amembassy RABAT

FROM:Department of State

SUBJECT :

Policy Planning Paper

REF:

CA-5632, November 3, 1970

Attached are three copies of the Policy Planning Paper for Morocco, as approved by the members o the NSC Interdepartmental Group for Africa.

The paper constitutes an official statement of US policy towards Morocco and should be used as a guideline by all elements of the Embassy in the preparation of policy statements, action plans and future budgetary projections.

ROGERS

Enclosures As Stated

MOROCCO: Policy Planning Paper

Approved by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for Africa
June 1971

Introduction

Although Morocco has distinctively North African characteristics and is a part of the “Arab” (or at any rate, Islamic world), geography and the economics of location have given it a very strong North and West orientation. It is a key strategic land mass at the Atlantic end of the Mediterranean, with old cultural and commercial ties with Spain and France.

Historically, the prime American interest in Morocco has been to keep it and its adjacent waters free from influences that might be detrimental to the free flow of commerce and navigation. This is still a major concern. Since World War II, however, we have had a more specific strategic interest in the country, reflected in the 1950's by SAC bases and now by the Kenitra Naval Communications Station. Over the years we have developed something resembling a “special relationship” with the Moroccan Government. This relationship has not only been significant in the bilateral sense, it has helped provide on occasion a bridge of understanding and comprehension to other Arab states.

Our commercial relations with Morocco are still relatively modest. As the country develops, however, we would hope that the technical and financial aid we have provided over the years, would give American business a valuable entree.

A. U.S. Interests in Morocco

1. The United States has a significant communications facility in the Kenitra complex that is the master communications station for the Mediterranean area and an important link in our world-wide communications network.

2. In Tangier, the U.S. has an important VOA relay station.

3. Because of its development efforts, Morocco is potentially a modest market for U.S. capital goods, services, and possibly for private investment.

4. The US strategic interest in Morocco derives from its geographic location and NATO's responsibility for defense of Western Europe. While denial of military operating rights in Morocco will not significantly restrict NATO's ability to carry out its mission in the Mediterranean, NATO (particularly U.S.) ability to pass freely through the Straits of Gibraltar is essential to the protection of the southern flank of Europe.

5. Morocco, in contrast to a substantial part of the Arab world, maintains a cordial relationship with the United States, thus providing the US a valuable means of contact with a significant region.

B. U.S. 0bjectives Over the Next Five Years

1. Continuation of cordial relations with Morocco.

2. Preservation of U.S. facilities at Kenitra and Tangier as long as they are required.

3. Continuation of Morocco's generally moderate stance on the Middle East problem and receptiveness to U.S. views on matters of mutual interest.

4. More rapid and rational economic and social development of Morocco.

5. Continued access to Morocco by U.S. goods, services and capital on a non-discriminatory basis.

6. Increased Western European economic and military assistance and increased international organization economic assistance to Morocco.

7. A preservation of Moroccan independence at least to the extent that it not be used by a hostile power capable of effective military action against NATO interests.

C. Morocco's Objectives vis-à-vis the United States

1. Use U.S. as counterweight to French presence in political and economic/military assistance fields.

2. Maximize U.S. contribution to economic development plans.

3. Maximize U.S. military assistance.

4. Maintain U.S. interest in Morocco, through Kenitra, to the extent this does not become an unacceptable political (internal and/or external) liability to the Moroccan Government.

5. Obtain U.S. support to influence the Spanish towards a settlement on the Saharan issue.

D. Recommended Courses of Action

1. Recognize that over next five years maximum possible US support for the Moroccan development effort best assures GOM ability and willingness to cope with economic and social problems that are likely to grow more critical in the late seventies.

2. Attempt to keep our use of the Kenitra communications facility out of a quid-pro-quo context and as a part of our overall relationship while at the same time insuring that the Moroccans realize the value of this total relationship.

3. Continue the present 10 million dollar annual level of military sales credits, stretched to the extent possible by sales from excess military materiel stocks at nominal prices, at least as long as we remain at Kenitra.

4. Increase grant military assistance for training to the former annual level of 1.2 million dollars, at least as long as we remain at Kenitra.

5. If we decide we desire to remain at Kenitra, assure allocation yearly of sufficient US-owned excess foreign currency and dollar funds to maintain and operate the base and to provide continued training to Moroccan military personnel.

6. While leaving King Hassan and senior Moroccan officials in no doubt about U.S. confidence in the capacity of the regime to deal with current and future problems, put greater stress within U.S. aid programs on help to the Moroccans to solve increasing urban social and economic problems.

7. Continue PL-480 assistance to Morocco in a volume related to the needs of the economy.

8. Provide development loans, as appropriate, in cooperation with the IBRD and the Consultative Group of western aid donors to Morocco, over the next two years to help finance the balance of the Moroccan Five Year Economic Development Plan.

9. Continue US technical assistance for selective high priority development needs where the United States has a capacity for offering superior services. In this connection, place special emphasis on provision of French-speaking technicians.

10. Encourage Export-Import Bank and private investors to participate in the Moroccan development effort.

11. Insure long term GOM commitment to support the Tangier university project, so that AID excess currency funds may be released for endowment purposes.

12. Contingent upon improved administrative procedures, encourage extension of Promotion Nationale to projects for slum clearance, low-cost housing, preparatory work on tourist complexes, and construction of a chain of national camp sites.

13. Contingent upon improved administrative procedures, examine with Promotion Nationale possibilities for projects of vocational training programs geared to public and private sector employment needs.

14. Encourage and cooperate where practicable with the Peace Corps, with foreign bilateral donors, and with international agencies in regional vocational training and civic programs designed to provide basic skills for the agricultural sector.

15. Increase exchanges of persons in educational and technical fields, with particular emphasis on identifying and cultivating promising young people.

16. Maintain and expand discreet contacts with opposition, student, labor, and youth groups.

17. Maintain an active information program that deals directly with press, radio and TV.

18. Maintain cultural presentations, exhibits, English teaching, libraries and book presentations.

19. Use the VOA regional center in Rabat to disseminate material designed to encourage MAGHREB cooperation.

20. Provide quality material for use by Moroccan international broadcasts which are carried by VOA facilities for a total of 231 hours weekly.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 1 MOR-US. Secret; Noforn. Drafted on June 8 by Holmes and approved by Carter.

116. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon, Washington, July 10, 1971 116. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon, Washington, July 10, 1971 1

July 10, 1971

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM
July 10, 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR:

THE PRESIDENT

FROM:GENERAL ALEXANDER M. HAIG

SUBJECT:

Coup Attempt in Morocco

The following is the situation in Morocco based on the most recent reports available: —A disaffected group of Moroccan military apparently led by three Army Brigadiers, Military Region Commander, and a Lt. Colonel, who commands the Non-Commissioned Officers School, today attempted a coup against Hassan. The attack was made on the Royal Palace near Rabat where the King was hosting a large group of diplomats and notables in celebration of his 42nd birthday.

—The affair at the Palace was bloody but the King was not harmed. The Belgium Ambassador and several other important figures apparently were killed. The King's brother reportedly is seriously wounded.

—We have no reports on Americans being harmed although Ambassador Rockwell and other Americans were present at the King's celebration.

—The King still is in control of the situation and has given full military and civilian powers to Interior Minister, General Oufkir.

—The King is expected shortly to broadcast an appeal over Moroccan radio to the people and the Armed Forces.

—The King and the Queen are reportedly aboard a Moroccan Naval vessel off the coast.

—At this time order seems to be returning and the coup attempt apparently has failed.

I will provide you with a more detailed status report and assessment of the implications of this coup attempt tomorrow.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Morocco, Attempted Coup d'état, 10 July 1971. Confidential. A stamped notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it.

117. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon, Washington, July 11, 1971 117. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon, Washington, July 11, 19711

Washington, July 11, 1971

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM
July 11, 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR:

THE PRESIDENT

FROM:GENERAL ALEXANDER M. HAIG [AH initialed]

SUBJECT:

Coup Attempt in Morocco

Situation:

The attempt to overthrow King Hassan II of Morocco apparently has failed, although some sporadic fighting continues and some of the rebels are still to be rounded up.

The latest reporting from our Embassy indicates that the situation seems to be normal everywhere in the country except Rabat. There is still, however, occasional firing in the downtown area of the capital city, particularly around the radio station and near army headquarters. The Royal Palace apparently is still in rebel hands. All known principals of the coup attempt are reported to be either dead or arrested.

From all indications King Hassan is unharmed and, after initially putting out to sea, he has returned to a small palace that he maintains outside of Rabat. In a radio statement, Hassan said Morocco had passed through the most serious crisis in its history and declared the army remains loyal.

Minister of Interior General Oufkir has been given full military and civilian powers to restore order and clean out the rebels and, for all practical purposes, is the man actually running the country at this moment. He is a very tough, well-seasoned and controversial figure characterized in the past by both his loyalty to the King and harshness in suppressing opposition. If he bails out Hassan this time, Oufkir can be expected to play a very influential role in the future. He is reported to be well disposed to the U. S. and the West but as a pragmatist he is capable of being accommodating to the Soviets if he thought this were in Morocco's interest.

The Libyans reportedly have placed their armed forces on alert and have proclaimed their support for the rebels. The King reacted to this announcement with utter contempt. It is doubtful at this point that the Libyans will go beyond propaganda and perhaps threats. The Algerians have not committed themselves one way or the other and seem to be lying low. So far no other government in the area has taken any public position.

U.S. Action:

The State Department has reviewed its emergency evacuation plans for the some 5,000 American nationals in Morocco of whom 3,400 are military personnel and dependents stationed at the Kenitra Base. No Americans have been harmed or are in serious danger. Should the situation take an unexpected turn for the worse, ships from the Sixth Fleet could be rapidly positioned for evacuation purposes.

Ambassador Rockwell and the Department of State have recommended that you send a message congratulating King Hassan on the successful escape from the attempt on his life and expressing hope for future peace and stability. The situation appears to have clarified sufficiently to make such a gesture which will be greatly appreciated by King Hassan. I have approved dispatch of the attached message, leaving it to the Ambassador's discretion as to manner and timing of delivery. He will advise when the message has been conveyed. We will then consider the possibility of acknowledging here to the press that you have sent a message.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Morocco, Attempted Coup d'état, 10 July 1971. Secret. A stamped notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. The congratulatory message, not published, was sent as telegram 124513 to Rabat, July 11. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 MOR)

118. Intelligence Note RAFN-39 Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Washington, July 15, 1971 118. Intelligence Note RAFN-39 Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Washington, July 15, 19711

Washington, July 15, 1971

Department of State
INTELLIGENCE NOTE
BUREAU OF INTELLIGENCE AND RESEARCH
July 15, 1971

MOROCCO: KING Hassan, HIS ARMY, AND HIS FUTURE

This report was produced by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research. Aside from normal substantive exchange with other agencies at the working level, it has not been coordinated elsewhere.

The near-miss coup attempt of July 10 in Morocco—which resulted in a savage internecine army bloodbath—is now effectively quelled. The full details of the military conspiracy and of what actually transpired at the tragic birthday party remain yet to be clarified, but the events of July add up to a major turning point in the reign of King Hassan. His relationship to the army has changed significantly and, although presently secure, he seems in greater eventual jeopardy than ever before from basic military and civilian discontent.

Army's Loyalty Shattered—The senior military leadership, split between rebels and loyalists, is severely decimated. Nine of the country's 16 generals are known to have been killed or executed thus far, and numerous colonels, majors, and lower-ranking officers have died. But the prime casualty was the idea that the army gave monolithic and unconditional loyalty to the monarch. King Hassan, founder and commander-in-chief of the Royal Armed Forces, had assiduously cultivated the myth and almost certainly regarded the military as indispensable. The coup attempt has cast doubt on the military establishment. While Hassan understandably has publicly maintained that the army remains “pure and honest”, his top surviving military supporters, Generals Mohamed Oufkir and Driss Ben Aomar, are leading a hunt for those in the army allied to or sympathetic toward the conspirators. Presumably, a thorough-going purge of the officer corps—which may have been much more broadly implicated in the coup affair than is presently known—will ensue. Even so, the army probably cannot be put together again as a wholly loyal instrument of royal will. The wholesale slaughter of brother officers could well set in motion deep-seated resentments and blood revenge motives within the clannish Berbers, who make up most of the senior officer corps. And the vacancies in higher ranks raise the inevitable prospect of promotion into command responsibilities for the better-educated younger generation of middle-grade officers, a group whose ultimate reliability thus far is open to question.

Growing Military Influence? While the specific grievances that triggered the army officers' revolt remain unclear, substantial military dissatisfaction on several scores has been evident over the past year. The King's decision to restore constitutional government and parliament in the summer of 1970 (after five years of emergency rule in which the military and security forces had a largely unfettered hand) was not popular in military ranks even though army officers were given a role in managing the elections. Of probably greater significance was military unhappiness over blatant corruption and favoritism among high civilian ministers and officials—not that all the military were immune. A corruption scandal in April sullied the regime's reputation, led the King to postpone his visit to the US, and obliged him to dismiss four ministers and other lesser officials. The military were also displeased over the King's Algerian policy which, in the eyes of nationalist army officers, appeared to amount to virtual capitulation on Morocco's long-standing border claims.

The loyalist military leaders, on whom the King is dependent to a greater degree than ever before, have an innate antipathy toward the existing political system, viewing parties as basically demagogic and civilian officials as venal and ineffective. To rally morale in the military, they will almost certainly request—and receive in the coming months—accelerated promotions and increased arms of impressive proportions. Moreover, they are likely to exploit their present bargaining position to press for a more efficient, perhaps military-led, government and for policies with popular appeal and more nationalist content. They may press the King to seek revisions in the US military presence at Kenitra if not satisfied with American responsiveness to present and likely additional requests for arms.

Hassan's Longer-Term Dilemma: Restoring a Political Balance. To a considerable extent, King Hassan is himself responsible for his present predicament: over-reliance on his military establishment. His consummate success over 11 years of rule in progressively concentrating virtually all effective powers in his hands destroyed the balance of political forces on which the monarchy rested when he acceded to the throne in 1961. Political parties, trade unions, and other civilian political forces eroded into near impotence, leaving the King virtually alone with the military. By relying heavily on the security forces to repress popular discontent, Hassan contained potential trouble but deepened resentment against the regime. And by disregarding the military officers' dissatisfactions over policy and the course of domestic events, the King became increasingly vulnerable to the kind of military reaction that occurred on July 10. Even though he has mustered sufficient army support to overcome that challenge, Hassan's existing relationship with the military leaves him basically vulnerable. He may attempt to neutralize the military, seeking even more than in the past to play against one another various army units as well as the security police, gendarmerie, and auxiliary forces. But he is unlikely willingly to alter his autocratic style of rule or allow civilian political groups to develop into a significant opposing force. As a consequence, King Hassan's throne appears in greater jeopardy over the longer term than ever before.

INR/Africa

Director : LMRives

Analyst : JAMattson

Date :

Released by:

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-9 MOR. Secret; Noforn; Controlled Dissemination; Limdis. Drafted by Mattson and cleared by Rives.

119. Telegram 3745 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, July 23, 1971, 1115Z. 119. Telegram 3745 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, July 23, 1971, 1115Z.1

July 23, 1971, 1115Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY RABAT 3745

53

ACTION AF-19

INFO OCT-01 EUR-20 NEA-13 CIAE-00 DODE-00 PH-09 H-02 INR-08 L-04 NSAE-00 NSC-10 P-03 RSC-01 PRS-01 SS-20 USIA-12 AID-28 M-03 OPR-03 SY-03 RSR-01 IO-16/177 W 022708

P R 231115Z JUL 71

FM AMEMBASSY RABAT

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 3613

INFO

USDEL SOTO GRANDE PRIORITY

CINCEUR

AMEMBASSY MADRID

AMEMBASSY PARIS

COMNAVTRACOM

USINT ALGIERS

AMEMBASSY TUNIS

AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

AMCONSUL CASABLANCA

AMCONSUL TANGIER

SUBJECT:

FUTURE OF THE REGIME

1. SUMMARY - WHATEVER MOTIVATIONS OF COUP PLOTTERS WERE, KING HASSAN NEEDS TO CHANGE HIS LIFE STYLE AND WAY OF DOING BUSINESS IF HE IS TO SURVIVE. HIS INITIAL REACTIONS TO COUP INDICATE HE SEEKING RATIONALIZE EVENTS RATHER THAN ANALYZING THEIR CAUSES AND MODIFYING HIS POLICIES ACCORDINGLY. THIS SOUNDS LIKE RECIPE FOR CONTINUED INSTABILITY.

2. WHILE SITUATION IN MOROCCO HAS RETURNED TO SOMETHING APPROACHING NORMALCY, THINGS ARE NOT THE SAME AS BEFORE. THUS, THERE ARE POLICE ROADBLOCKS AT THE EXITS FROM THE CITY (AND ELSEWHERE IN THE COUNTRY), THERE AHE NUMEROUS SOLDIERS IN EVIDENCE AROUND RESIDENCES OF MOULAY ABDALLAH AT SOUISSI AND HASSAN AT SKHIRAT, OUR FORMER MILITARY CONTACTS ARE SKITTISH ABOUT CONTACT WITH US, AND THERE IS GENERAL AIR OF UNCERTAINTY AS TO FUTURE. SKHIRAT IS STILL THE NUMBER ONE TOPIC OF CONVERSATION, AND IT INTRUDES ITSELF INTO EVERY SOCIAL GATHERING. AS ONE OF CASABLANCA'S CONTACTS SAYS, WE ARE DROWNING IN HYPOTHESES.

3. SETTING ASIDE PREDICATABLE RUMORS AND ALLEGATIONS OF FOREIGN INVOLVEMENT, WHICH NO ONE IN AUTHORITY EXCEPT KING SEEMS TO TAKE SERIOUSLY, THERE ARE STILL ONLY TWO BROAD THEMES INVOKED TO EXPLAIN COUP. ONE IS CORRUPTION SUCH AS QTE RAMPANT QTE ARE WIDELY USED IN DESCRIBING CORRUPTION HERE, WE HAVE PREVIOUSLY REPORTED (OUR A-71 OF APRIL 6, 1971) THAT ITS DIMENSIONS ARE HARD TO FIX. IT HAS CERTAINLY BEEN LESS BLATANT THAN IT WAS IN FAROUK'S EGYPT) OR IDRISS' LIBYA. CORRUPTION IS A POPULAR ISSUE, HOWEVER, AND IT SEEMS TO HAVE BEEN A MAJOR PREOCCUPATION WITH MEDBOUH. IT IS EASY TO IMAGINE MEDBOUH AND ABABOU BEING ABLE TO GET OTHER OFFICERS AND THEIR SUBORDINATES WORKED UP ABOUT IT, EVEN THOUGH THEY THEMSELVES MERE BENEFICIARIES OF THE SYSTEM.

4. WHAT SEEMS TO BOTHER THE STUDENT FROM WAZZAN MORE THAN CORRUPTION, HOWEVER, IS THE KING'S LIFE STYLE, WHICH IS CONTRASTED UNFAVORABLY WITH THAT OF MUHAMMAD V, WHOM EVERYONE REMEMBERS AS A MAN OF SIMPLE HABITS. HASSAN'S FLAMBOYANT TASTE IN CLOTHES, HIS NUMEROUS PALACES, AND THE PRESUMED HIGH LIVING THAT GOES ON INSIDE THEM, WHILE NEEDED GOVERNMENT ACTIONS ARE POSTPONED BECAUSE OF LACK OF MONEY, HAVE UNDOUBTEDLY ALIENATED MANY CONSERVATIVES, AS WELL AS LIBERALS. A POOR MUSIC STUDENT ASKS, FOR INSTANCE, “WHY DOES HASSAN KEEP BUILDING NEW PALACES WHEN WE DON'T EVEN HAVE A CONSERVATORY?” ESSENTIALLY SAME QUESTION IS POSED IN DIFFERENT WAYS BY DIFFERENT PEOPLE, BUT IT ALL BOILS DOWN TO A QUERY AS TO WHY THE KING IS LIVING SO HIGH ON THE HOG IF THE COUNTRY IS SO POOR. THE POPULAR ANSWER IS A CONCLUSION THAT HE IS NOT VIRTUOUS, THAT HE IS THEREFORE NOT ENTITLED TO RULE, AND THAT HIS DAYS ARE NUMBERED BECAUSE THERE IS NO ONE LEFT HE CAN TRUST. IN PAST PEOPLE HAVE PUT THE BLAME ON THOSE AROUND HASSAN RATHER THAN ON HIM. THEY NO LONGER SEEM INCLINED TO GIVE HIM THE BENEFIT OF THAT DOUBT.

5. THE SECOND THEME, PERSONAL AMBITION, HAS TAKEN SECOND PLACE TO CORRUPTION IN THE REPORTS OF MOST WESTERN OBSERVERS. WE FIND IT HARD TO BELIEVE, FOR INSTANCE, THAT MEDBOUBH WAS MOTIVATED SIMPLY BY A DESIRE FOR MORE POWER. ON THE OTHER HAND, WHILE IT IS TRUE THAT MEDBOUH AND HIS CO-CONSPIRATORS WERE ALREADY ENJOYING THE FRUITS OF POWER, IT ALSO SEEMS CLEAR THAT THEY WANTED MORE OR THEY WOULD NOT HAVE MOVED. THERE WERE NO DECLARATIONS OF INTENT TO STEP DOWN AS SOON AS THE BODY POLITIC WAS PURIFIED, AND NO INDICATIONS OF ANY CAREFULLY THOUGHT-OUT PLANS FUR REFORM. THE MORE ONE LOOKS AT THE COUP, THE MORE IT LOOKS LIKE A SIMPLE POWER PLAY, BY AT LEAST SOME OF THOSE INVOLVED, SUCH AS ABABOU AND HAMMOU. THE PLOTTERS INTENDED TO GET RID OF THE KING ONE WAY OR ANOTHER AND TO TAKE OVER THE COUNTRY. CORRUPTION WAS A HANDY ISSUE, BUT THEY DO NOT SEEM TO HAVE MADE MUCH OF IT. ABABOU REPORTEDLY HARRANGUED PEOPLE AT THE ETAT MAJOR ABOUT CORRUPTION, BUT THERE WERE NO DECLARATIONS ABOUT CORRUPT RULE AND NO CALL FOR THE POPULACE TO RALLY AROUND THE STANDARD OF REVOLUTION ON RADIO. FAILURE TO ISSUE SUCH RADIO APPEALS, WHICH WOULD HAVE STRUCK A RESPONSIVE CHORD, CAN BE EXPLAINED BY LACK OF PRIOR PLANNING, BUT IT IS PERHAPS SIGNIFICANT THAT MORE ATTENTION WAS NOT PAID TO THIS ASPECT BY THE PLOTTERS.

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY RABAT 3745

53

ACTION AF-19

INFO OCT-01 EUR-20 NEA-13 CIAE-00 DODE-00 PH-09 H-02 INR-08 L-04 NSAE-00 NSC-10 P-03 RSC-01 PRS-01 SS-20 USIA-12 AID-28 M-03 OPR-03 SY-03 RSR-01 IO-16/177 W 023021

P R 231115Z JUL 71

FM AMEMBASSY RABAT

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 3613

INFO

USDEL SOTO GRANDE PRIORITY

CINCEUR

AMEMBASSY MADRID

AMEMBASSY PARIS

COMNAVTRACOM

USINT ALGIERS

AMEMBASSY TUNIS

AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

AMCONSUL CASABLANCA

AMCONSUL TANGIER

SUBJECT:

FUTURE OF THE REGIME

6. THE TWO THEMES ARE NOT MUTUALLY EXCLUSIVE IN ANY EVENT. BOTH WERE UNDOUBTEDLY AT WORK. IF CORRUPTION WAS AND IS THE PRIMARY PROBLEM, THE KING THEORETICALLY CAN DO SOMETHING ABOUT THAT, AND ABOUT HIS OWN LIFE STYLE. PERSONAL AMBITION, HOWEVER, IS LIKELY TO BE A RECURRING PROBLEM, WHATEVER HE DOES ABOUT CORRUPTION, UNTIL AND UNLESS HE CREATES SOME VIABLE POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS. THE ROYAL SPELL HAS NOW BEEN BROKEN. MEDBOUH AND ABABOU HAVE SHOWN THAT WAY, AND THE NEXT GROUP OF OFFICERS WILL BE MORE CAREFUL, AND WILL HAVE ORGANIZED MORE SUPPORT IN ADVANCE.

7. THE REGIME WAS AND IS INSTITUTIONALLY VULNERABLE BECAUSE IT IS HEADED BY AN AUTOCRATIC MONARCH AND MONARCHS ARE INCREASINGLY ANACHRONISTIC IN TRANSITIONAL SOCIETIES. EVEN IN MOROCCO, WHERE THE MONARCHY IS NATIVE AND OF LONG STANDING, THE TRADITIONAL BASIS OF HASSAN'S KINGLY LEGITIMACY IS NOT ALONE SUFFICIENT TO JUSTIFY HIS RULE IN MODERN TIMES. HIS ROLE AS COMMANDER OF THE FAITHFUL AND HIS DESCENT FROM THE PROPHET MAY ASSURE HIM SOME CONSERVATIVE SUPPORT, BUT HAVE NEVER CUT MUCH ICE IN MOROCCO WHEN IT COMES TO BREAD AND BUTTER ISSUES SUCH AS TRIBAL LOYALTIES, VENGEANCE, SCHOOLS AND JOBS.

8. ABOVE SUI GENERIE WEAKNESS HAS BEEN COMPOUNDED BY KING'S REFUSAL TO SHARE REAL POWER WITH OR SERIOUSLY CONSIDER REPRESENTATIVE POLITICAL INTEREST GROUPS, I.E., POLITICAL PARTIES, LABOR UNIONS, STUDENTS, INTELLECTUALS, EVEN PROFESSIONALS AND BUSINESSMEN. HE HAS DENIED HIMSELF STRENGTH THAT COMES FROM GIVING BROAD SPECTRUM OF INTEREST GROUPS, AS OPPOSED TO FAVORED INDIVIDUALS, STAKE IN SUCCESS OF REGIME AND ITS POLICIES. AND HE HAS FURTHER ALIENATED MANY MEMBERS OF SUCH GROUPS BY HEAVY-HANDED USE OF STATE SECURITY FORCES AGAINST THEM. HE HAS CREATED NO MEANINGFUL INSTITUTIONS, AND HAS DISMANTLED MOST OF THOSE THAT EXISTED ALREADY (COMMENT IN LAST PARA CASABLANCA A-54 IS PERTINENT IN THIS REGARD). THE ONE INSTITUTION TO WHICH HE PAID GREAT ATTENTION, THE MILITARY ESTABLISHMENT, HAS JUST BITTEN THE HAND THAT FED IT.

9. THE ABOVE POLITICAL/INSTITUTIONAL LIABILITIES MUST BE ADDED SERIOUS LACK OF DYNAMISM IN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT. WHILE GOM HAS PURSUED REASONABLY RATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICIES, OVERALL PERFORMANCE HAS SHOWN MARKED LACK OF URGENCY. AS DEPARTMENT WELL AWARE, ANNUAL PER CAPITA INCOME AVERAGE JUST OVER $200 NATIONWIDE AND IS MUCH LOWER IN RURAL AREAS. THERE IS VERY SERIOUS AND POLITICALLY DANGEROUS UNEMPLOYMENT. WE ESTIMATE ABOUT 27PC IN CASABLANCA, THE ECONOMIC CAPITAL, AND RURAL UNEMPLOYMENT/UNDEREMPLOYMENT SITUATION IS PERHAPS WORSE. SITUATION MADE PROGRESSIVELY WORSE BY POPULATION GROWTH.

10. SUCH PROBLEMS OF COURSE NOT UNIQUE TO MOROCCO, BUT POLITICAL DANGER HERE STEMS FROM KNOWLEDGE THAT NOT ONLY IS GOM UNDYNAMIC IN FACING DEVELOPMENT PROBLEMS BUT ALSO THE KING AND HIS MINISTERS ARE LIVING UNCOMMONLY WELL. PEOPLE CAN BEAR HARDSHIP IF CONVINCED LEADERS ARE HARDWORKING, HONEST AND SINCERE (NASSER'S FORMULA). THEY ARE NOT SO CONVINCED HERE.

11. IMPLICIT IN ALL OF FOREGOING IS THAT IF KING CORRECTS THE WEAKNESSES OF THE REGIME, AND CHANGES HIS PERSONAL STYLE, HE HAS A DECENT CHANCE OF SURVIVAL. THE PROBLEM OF AMBITIONS AMONG OFFICERS MAY REMAIN, BUT CAN BE BETTER CONTROLLED IF HE HAS SOME INSTITUTIONS OTHER THAN STATE SECURITY APPARATUS ON WHICH HE CAN DEPEND FOR SUPPORT. HE WILL HAVE TO SHOW FAR MORE VIGOR AND DEDICATION TO RUNNING COUNTRY THAN HE HAS TO DATE, HOWEVER, HE MIGHT TAKE CLUE FROM HIS SHARIFIS, COUSIN, KING HUSSEIN, PUT DOWN HIS GOLF CLUB, FOREGO HIS CONCUBINES, AND ROLL UP HIS SLEEVES. HE WOULD DO EVEN BETTER TO EMULATE IRAN'S SHAH AND PROCLAIM AND PURSUE HIS OWN WHITE REVOLUTION. WHATEVER HE DOES, KING MUST REALIZE HE IS IN DESPERATE COMPETITION WITH SERIOUS COUNTERCLAIMANTS FOR POWER. HE WILL HAVE TO WORK HARD IF HE IS TO WIN.

12. MUCH OF WHAT WE HAVE HEARD FROM AND ABOUT HASSAN SINCE THE COUP INDICATES THAT, WHATEVER AGONIZING INWARD REAPPRAISAL HE IS GOING THROUGH, HE IS OUTWARDLY SEEKING TO RATIONALIZE THE COUP ATTEMPT BY ADDUCING OUTSIDE INTERFERENCE, MENTAL INSTABILITY ON MEDBOUH'S PART, DRUGGED TROOPS, ETC., RATHER THAN SERIOUSLY ANALYZING COUNTRY'S MALAISE AND TRYING TO DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT. THUS, ON THE ONE HAND HE TOLD MEDBOUH'S BROTHER-IN-LAW OTHMAN BENJELLOUN ON JULY 17 THAT HENCEFORTH THE WATCHWORD WAS TO BE AUSTERITY, AND ON THE OTHER WE HAVE JUST BEEN TOLD HE SENT THE KENITRA GOLF PRO OFF TO ENGLAND ON JULY 21 TO BUY 42 PAIRS OF GOLF SHOES FOR THE PALACE ENTOURAGE. IF THIS REFLECTS HIS APPRECIATION OF HIS SITUATION, WE CAN VISUALIZE HIM TRYING TO DO BUSINESS AS USUAL EXCEPT FOR INCREASED RELIANCE ON FEWER PEOPLE AND ON MORE STRINGENT REPRESSIVE MEASURES. WE BELIEVE THIS WOULD BE RECIPE FOR CONTINUED INSTABILITY AND WE SHARE VIEWS OF MOHAMED ABDERAZZAK IN THIS REGARD REPORTED IN CASA'S 0375. GP-3

ROCKWELL

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-9 MOR. Secret. It was repeated Priority to Soto Grande, and to CINCEUR, Madrid, Paris, COMNAVTRACOM, Algiers, Tunis, Tripoli, Casablanca, and Tangier. In telegram 3815 from Rabat, July 27, the Embassy suggested that one consequence of the coup might be an attempt by the Moroccan regime to draw closer to the United States. (Ibid., POL MOR-US)

120. Telegram 134263 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Spain, July 23, 1971, 2259Z. 120. Telegram 134263 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Spain, July 23, 1971, 2259Z.1

July 23, 1971, 2259Z

Department of State
TELEGRAM
134263
July 23, 1971

ACTION:

AmEmbassy MADRID FLASH

INFO:

AmEmbassy RABAT FLASH

USDEL-SOTO GRANDE FLASH

INFO:

SOTO GRANDE FLASH

STATE 134263

TOVIP

FOR THE VICE PRESIDENT, AMBASSADOR HILL, AND AMBASSADOR ROCKWELL FROM THE SECRETARY

1. Ambassador HILL should deliver following personal message from me to Lopez Bravo:

QUOTE: I greatly appreciate your bringing so promptly to our attention fact that King Hassan's intelligence people are charging CIA was behind plot to kill him. Especially in view of our long and friendly association with the King, which has obviously been to our mutual benefit, I am astounded that he should appear to give credence to such a charge. I can categorically assure you that no agency of the United States Government was in any way involved in the attempt against the King. I would welcome your immediately conveying this to King Hassan. UNQUOTE

FOR THE VICE PRESIDENT: Believe that it would be useful for you to follow up the foregoing with the King if suitable opportunity presents itself. END

ROGERS

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 MOR. Secret; Flash; Nodis. It was repeated Flash to Rabat and Soto Grande. Drafted and approved by Johnson; cleared in substance with Rogers and with Newsom and Eliot. In telegram 101 from Madrid, July 23, Ambassador Robert Hill had transmitted the message from Lopez Bravo that King Hassan suspected the CIA of complicity in the plot against him. (Ibid.) Also on July 23, CIA Director Richard Helms replied to Ambassador HILL: “You may tell Lopez Bravo categorically that neither CIA nor any other element of U. S. Government had anything whatsoever to do with recent plot against King Hassan.” (Ibid.)

121. Telegram 4204 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, August 19, 1971, 1605Z. 121. Telegram 4204 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, August 19, 1971, 1605Z.1

August 19, 1971, 1605Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY RABAT 4204
R 191605Z AUG 71

42

ACTION AF-04

INFO OCT-01 SS-14 NSCE-00 NSC-10 INR-05 PH-03 L-02 CIAE-00 NSAE-00 IO-03 EUR-10 NEA-06 AID-18 RSC-01 RSR-01/070 W 099810

R 191605Z AUG 71

FROM

FM AMEMBASSY RABAT

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 3850

SECDEF

USCINCEUR

SUBJECT:

GENERAL OUKFIR ON MOROCCAN MILITARY POLICY AND US-MOROCCAN RELATIONS

REF:

RABAT 4091

JOINT EMBASSY/MUSLO MESSAGE
SECDEF FOR ASD/ISA. CINCEUR FOR ECMA

SUMMARY: MOROCCAN COMMANDER KENITRA BASE AMEKRANE TOLD MUSLO CHIEF AUGUST 11 THAT MINDEF OUFKIR RECASTING GOM MILITARY POLICY INTO FIRM PRO-US/WESTERN ANTI-SOVIET MOLD. AMEKRANE SAID OUFKIR DEPENDING ON MUSLO IN THIS EFFORT AND ASKED HE STANDBY FOR IMMINENT MEETING. SEVEN DAYS LATER, AUGUST 18, MEETING TOOK PLACE. OUFKIR TOLD MUSLO CHIEF AND POLITICAL COUNSELOR HE WILL DO ALL POSSIBLE TO PROMOTE CLOSE COOPERATION AND COORDINATION WITH USG. HE SAID NON-ALIGNMENT NOT REALISTIC, THAT GOM LINING UP WITH US, AND THAT MOROCCO COULD SERVE US-MILITARY INTERESTS IN MEDITERANEAN. FINALLY, HE SAID HE RELYING ON MUSLO FOR ADVICE AND RECOMMENDATIONS INCLUDING FY 71 CREDIT PURCHASE. IT NOT CLEAR IF OUFKIR SPEAKS FOR KING, BUT HIS OVERTURE REQUIRES CAREFUL HANDLING. RECOMMEND CORRECT AND HELPFUL BUT NOT ENTHUSIASTIC RESPONSE. END SUMMARY.

1. REFERENCE IN REFTEL TO POSSIBLE MAJOR CHANGE IN REQUIREMENTS AND POLICIES OF GOM MILITARY LEADERSHIP WAS BASED ON REPORT THAT LT. COL. AMEKRANE, MOROCCAN COMMANDER KENITRA BASE, GAVE TO CHIEF MUSLO ON AUGUST OF CONVERSATION HE HAD HAD WITH MINISTER OF DEFENSE GENERAL OUFKIR ON AUGUST 10. AMEKRANE SAID HE HAD BEEN DIRECTED BY OUFKIR TO CONTACT CHIEF MUSLO FOR PURPOSE OF DETERMINING WHAT USG COULD DO FOR MOROCCO. OUFKIR REPORTED TO HAVE SAID MOROCCO IS ANTI-COMMUNIST, DOES NOT WANT TO BE DEPENDENT ON SOVIET UNION, DOES NOT WANT USSR TO BE IN COMMAND OF MEDITERRANEAN, AND THAT HE WANTED MOROCCO TO BE INTEGRATED INTO WESTERN DEFENSE. ACCORDING TO AMEKRANE, OUFKIR SAID HE WANTED TO PLAY SAME GAME WITH US THAT ALGERIA HAS BEEN PLAYING WITH SOVIET UNION, IN WHICH ALGERIA HAS BEEN GIVEN A LOT OF SOVIET EQUIPMENT THAT IS BEING OPERATED BY SOVIET MILITARY. OUFKIR FURTHER REPORTEDLY STATED “WE ARE AND ALWAYS WILL BE A WESTERN COUNTRY AND MUST HAVE STABILITY, AND IN COOPERATION WITH THE US DEVELOP OUR COUNTRY.”

2. AMEKRANE ALSO SAID OUFKIR WANTED MUSLO TO MAKE COMPLETE FORCE STUDY OF HIS ENTIRE MILITARY ORGANIZATION, WAS CANCELLING ALL PRIORITIES Of CREDIT PURCHASES AND WAS POSTPONING TRIP OF MORROCAN DELEGATION TO U.S. HE QUOTED OUFKIR AS SAYING HE WOULD WELCOME AMERICAN MILITARY PRESENCE IN MOROCCO AND WANTED A LARGE ADVISORY GRGUP SUCH AS IRAN HAS. WHEN ASKED WHETHER OUKFIR HAD TO HAVE APPROVAL OF KING, AMEKRANE SAID KING HAD CHARGED OUFKIR WITH DEVELOPMENT OF ARMED FORCES, GIVEN HIM CARTE BLANC, AND DELEGATED DECISION MAKING AUTHORITY TO HIM. CHIEF MUSLO WAS ADVISED HE WOULD BE CALLED FOR A MEETING WITHIN 72 HOURS. WE DID NOT REPORT THESE DETAILS AT TIME BECAUSE WE WAITING FOR CONFIRMATION, WHICH WAS EXPECTED MOMENTARILY, FROM OUFKIR HIMSELF.

3. SUBSEQUENTLY, AFTER SEVEN DAYS WAIT, GENERAL OUFKIR RECEIVED CHIEF MUSLO AND EMBASSY POLITICAL COUNSELOR FOR LONG LUNCHEON CONVERSATION AUGUST 18. AMEKRANE ALSO PRESENT. GENERAL OUFKIR MADE IT CLEAR GOM IS UNDERTAKING COMPLETE REVISION OF MILITARY BUDGET AND EQUIPMENT PRIORITIES. AND THAT HE WILL DO EVERYTHING POSSIBLE TO FURTHER CLOSE COOPERATION AND COORDINATION WITH USG. FOLLOWING REPORTS HIS POLITICAL COMMENTARY AND HIGHLIGHTS OF MILITARY STATEMENTS. DETAILS OF MILITARY ASPECTS OF CONVERSATION BEING REPORTED SEPARATELY.

4. DURING DETAILED DISCUSSION OF BEST WAY TO SPEND $15,000,000 FY 1971 CREDIT FUNDS, OUFKIR STATED REGIONAL PRIORITIES WERE BEING CANCELLED AND THAT HE WAS GOING TO RELY ON MUSLO'S RECOMMENDATIONS RE ALLOCATION OF FUNDS. OUFKIR STRESSED VIEW THAT MAIN MISSION OF MOROCCAN ARMED FORCES IS DEFENSIVE AND THAT OBJECTIVE OF PROGRAM SHOULD BE TO HELP PROVIDE SUITABLE AND PRACTICAL MATERIAL. HE DID NOT, FOR EXAMPLE, WANT “SCHOOL FOR ASTRONAUTS,” BUT RATHER TO INCLUDE WHERE POSSISLE MATERIAL THAT ALSO COULD BE USED FOR CIVIC ACTION. HERE HE CITED HELICOPTERS WITH FLEXIBILITY FOR MILITARY ACTION AND CIVILIAN ASSISTANCE, E.G. SEARCH AND RESCUE, MEDICAL EVACUATION, AND DISASTER ASSISTANCE. HE ALSO CITED NEED FOR COMMUNICATION NEWTWORK TO REACH ALL UNITS AND AN ALTERNATE HEADQUARTERS CAPABILITY. IN ALLUSION TO SKHIRAT, HE QUIPPED “IN CASE THEY TAKE OVER MY ETAT-JAJOR, I'LL STILL HAVE ONE.”

5. STRESSING DESIRE FOR CLOSE AND FRIENDLY RELATIONS WITH USG, OUFKIR SAID THAT IN HIS OPINION NON-ALIGNMENT IS NOT A REALISTIC POLICY IN A WORLD DOMINATED BY TWO GREAT POWERS, AND THAT DESPITE IDEAS PREVALENT IN MANY DEVELOPING COUNTRIES, HE THOUGHT IT NECESSARY TD BE ON ONE SIDE OR THE OTHER. MOROCCO, HE REITERATED, IS VERY DEFINITELY ON US SIDE. HE NOTED FORMER US SAC BASES WERE DETERIORATING AND ALLUDED TO POSSIBLE US NEED FOR THESE BASES IN CRISIS. IN FURTHER STATEMENT RELATED TO KENITRA, HE DECLARED “AS LONG AS I AM HERE YOU WILL HAVE NO WORRIES ABOUT THE BASES.”

42

ACTION AF-04

INFO OCT-01 SS-14 NSCE-00 NSC-10 INR-05 PH-03 L-02 CIAE-00 NSAE-00 IO-03 EUR-10 NEA-06 AID-18 RSC-01 RSR-01/070 W 099810

R 191605Z AUG 71

FROM

FM AMEMBASSY RABAT

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 3850

SECDEF

USCINCEUR

SECTION 2 OF 2 RABAT 4204

NOFORN

6. OUFKIR SAID THAT IN, HIS PERSONAL OPINION, MOROCCO SHOULD BE A MEMBER OF ONLY TWO INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS, THE UN AS A MEMBER OF THE WORLD COMMUNITY, AND THE OAU TO FACILITATE RELATIONS WITH AFRICAN STATES. FROM A MOROCCAN POLITICAL STANDPOINT, HE REGRETFULLY ADDED, IT ALSO NECESSARY TO REMAIN IN ARAB LEAGUE.

7. SAYING THAT MOROCCO IS A SMALL PART OF THE FREE WORLD, OUFKIR NOTED THE NEED TO PROTECT ITS TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY. WE STRESSED MOROCCO'S POSITION ON THE MEDITERRANEAN, AND EMPHASIZED THE STRATEGIC INTEREST OF THIS POSITION TO US. NOTING STATEMENTS BY SOME PEOPLE THAT MEDITERRANEAN SHOULD BE FOR PEOPLE OF MEDITERRANEAN COUNTRIES, HE SAID THAT MOROCCO COULD ACT FOR AMERICANS BY ASSUMPTION OF PART OF US NAVY MISSION. USING AS AN EXAMPLE, HE READ FROM MESSAGE HE HAD RECEIVED DURING LUNCH REPORTING PRESENCE OF SOVIET NAVAL VESSELS ANCHORED OFF AL HOCEIMA. HE EMPHASIZED NEED FOR PATROL BOATS, OLD OR NEW, TO PERFORM MISSIONS SUCH AS RECONNAISANCE AND COMMUNICATIONS.

8. REVISING MOROCCAN ARMED FORCES' PAST LUKEWARM ATTITUDE TOWARD MUSLO, OUFKIR MADE CLEAR HIS DESIRE FOR CLOSE WORKING RELATIONSHIPS WITH IT, AND SAID HE WOULD RELY ON MUSLO FOR MANY STUDIES AND RECOMMENDATIONS INCLUDING FY 71 CREDIT PURCHASES. HE MADE NUMEROUS HELPFUL DECISIONS ON SPOT (REPORTED IN SEPTEL).

9. COMMENT: WE DO NOT KNOW HOW MUCH OUFKIR SPEAKS FOR KING (WHOM HE DID NOT MENTION DURING CONVERSATION) AND HOW MUCH HE IS FREE-WHEELING, BUT HIS STATEMENTS BEAR OUT EXPECTATION THAT MOROCCAN REGIME WOULD SEEK TO DRAW CLOSER TO US IN AFTERMATH JULY 18 ATTEMPTED COUP (RABAT 3815). BELIEVE WE MUST BE VERY CAREFUL HOW WE RESPOND TO THIS OVERTURE. WHILE WE WELCOME OPPORTUNITY INJECT ELEMENT OF RATIONALITY INTO MOROCCAN MILITARY PLANNING, OUFKIR IS NOT MOST POPULAR MAN IN KINGDOM AND WE OBVIOUSLY DO NOT WANT TO GET IN BED WITH HIM. SUGGEST OUR RESPONSES BE CORRECT AND HELPFUL, BUT NOT ENTHUSIASITC.
GP-4

ROCKWELL

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 1 MOR. Secret; Limdis; Noforn. It was also sent to SECDEF and USCINCEUR. In telegram 153823 to Rabat, August 20, the Department agreed that while Washington should be helpful, it did not want to increase the U.S. security posture or political identification with the Moroccan regime. (Ibid.)

122. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 29, 1971, 10 a.m. 122. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 29, 1971, 10 a.m.1

Washington, September 29, 1971, 10 a.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE:

Sept. 29, 1971

Time:

10:00 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS:

Mohamed Karim-Lamrani, Prime Minister of Morocco

Mekki Zailachi, Charge d'Affaires, a.i, Embassy of Morocco

The Secretary

Mr. James J. Blake, Country Director for Morocco

Mr. Alec Tournayan, Interpreter

Copies to:

S

AF

Amembassy Rabat

U

PM/ISP

J

AFR/NA

C

AF/N

S/PC

AA/AFR

The Secretary welcomed the Prime Minister to Washington. He expressed great pleasure in meeting the Prime Minister for the first time and congratulated him on his new assignment. We were pleased, he said, that things were more stable in Morocco now. The Secretary said he looked back upon his visit to Morocco with great pleasure. It was a visit neither Mrs. Rogers nor he would ever forget.

The Prime Minister thanked the Secretary and conveyed to him His Majesty's personal greetings. In Morocco, the Prime Minister said, His Majesty and the Moroccan Government have warm recollections of the Secretary's visit.

The Secretary said that we were very distressed by the recent difficulties in Morocco. The President, who considered the King a close friend, spoke of him often and had been very worried, and then relieved. We were happy also that the Vice President's visit had gone so well.

The Prime Minister said that he had come to Washington primarily to attend the IMF/IBRD meetings, he being also Minister of Finance, but he had sought this occasion to inform the Secretary personally of the evolution of the situation in Morocco. The events of July 10 had taken them all by surprise. The attempted coup had not been based on any doctrinal or political motives. It had not involved any open or clandestine political organization, nor had it been based on any particular ideology. It had been organized by a few high ranking officers who used their power and influence to take over a school for non-commissioned officers and to stage this abominable action. It had been aimed at everyone, right and left, political parties included, and His Majesty himself. What they would have done subsequently had they succeeded has never been determined but the savagery of their attack did not bode well for the future.

Karim-Lamrani said that world press reports had been of serious concern to Morocco. Today one should not say that all was for the best in the best of all possible worlds in Morocco. A great deal of rethinking had to take place regarding the institutions of the state, its economic and financial structure and everything affecting the education, training and employment of the Moroccan man himself. Such is the difficult mandate, the Prime Minister said, which had been given his government. In record time it had the task of straightening out a number of problems in different areas. Its work would be aimed primarily at that large segment of the Moroccan population constituting the “have nots”.

The Prime Minister emphasized that it was up to the Moroccans to reorganize themselves, plan their programs, and generate their own material and human requirements. They would need, however, the understanding and help of their friends to achieve even the minimum required. With renewed vigor and earnestness they could reach these goals rapidly, but the popular consensus must continue to support the monarchy and the person of the King. After 13 centuries of monarchy, Morocco is not prepared to accept an overnight change. The Monarchy remains the basis on which necessary programs must be established.

If Moroccans themselves are concerned to bring about a restoration of serenity in Morocco, the Prime Minister went on, the free world must feel the same way. Because of the political and strategic importance of Morocco, of which the United States is well aware, whatever happens in Morocco is bound to have international importance.

In conclusion, the Prime Minister said he wished to stress that Morocco had gone to work. It needed understanding, however, and also help to carry out its vast program of economic development. The Prime Minister said he was making his first trip as Prime Minister to Washington because he looked upon the United States as the prime partner of Morocco and the country most capable of understanding Morocco.

The Secretary expressed his appreciation for and concurrence in the Prime Minister's remarks. The United States, the Secretary said, attaches great importance to its friendship and close relations with Morocco and shares the Prime Minister's assessment of Morocco's strategic position. The Secretary assured the Prime Minister that the United States would give careful and sympathetic consideration to specific proposals Morocco might wish to make. We feel that relations between our two countries are very good. We want them to remain very good. We are pleased at the approach taken by Morocco in promoting social and economic development which is so essential in the long run to insure the stability of the country.

In addition to the problems mentioned by the Prime Minister as facing Morocco, the Secretary said, there was the shortage of natural resources. He said he hoped that Morocco would soon find oil. A second problem, the Secretary continued, derived from the fact that in our modern world the institutions of monarchy were looked upon by some as being anachronistic.

The programs outlined by the Prime Minister were therefore going in the right direction, the Secretary said. They centered upon improving the situation of the people and would give the monarchy greater visibility, thereby compensating for one of the problems of a king. The Secretary noted that the King enjoyed great respect in Morocco as well as abroad.

The Prime Minister replied that the natural resource experts of today were convinced that oil would be found in Morocco. Moreover, the government was developing the mining sector and the agricultural sector. The areas served by new irrigation dams were under development and agrarian reforms were being implemented.

As to the compatibility between the Monarchy as an institution and our modern world, the Prime Minister said, whether a nation was a republic or a kingdom, in itself, meant little--what mattered was what was in it. Some monarchies were very democratic as in northern Europe. Some republics were fascist, not to cite any by name, but the socialist republics came to mind. What gave value to a system was the nature of the man leading it. Morocco was fortunate to have a king who was young and modern and close to his people. The Prime Minister concluded that the King must draw even closer to his people. His Majesty needed to be closer to the population at all levels in day to day acts as well as the acts of statesmanship. What mattered most of all was that the steps taken and measures announced be carried out in a healthy climate and with a serious attitude.

The Prime Minister, in conclusion, pointed out that he was no professional politician. He had not sought to be Prime Minister. The job had been thrust upon him. This gave him the right, he said, to impose certain conditions without which no governmental program could be implemented.

The Secretary expressed his appreciation for this opportunity to meet the Prime Minister and to have a frank discussion with him. He stressed the respect His Majesty enjoys in the United States, and specifically referred to President Eisenhower's and President Nixon's high regard for the King.

The Secretary said he was pleased to see that the Government of Morocco was concerning itself with modernizing the monarchy. Our administration, he said, did not feel that it could give advice to countries about their internal affairs; there had been too much of that in the past. Each country must be guided by its own past and tradition. We want the Prime Minister to know, the Secretary concluded, that the United States fully supports the Moroccan monarchy and its King, and we want to be as helpful to Morocco as we can.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 7 MOR. Secret. Drafted by Robert H. Pelletreau (AF/N); and approved in S on October 13.

123. Telegram 186454 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Morocco, October 12, 1971, 1549Z. 123. Telegram 186454 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Morocco, October 12, 1971, 1549Z.1

October 12, 1971, 1549Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State 186454

ACTION:

Amembassy RABAT

USCINCEUR

INFO:

CHMUSLO RABAT

SUBJECT:

US Posture Toward Moroccan Military

JOINT STATE/DEFENSE MESSAGE

1. The following reflects substance from inter-agency consultations with Colonel Rolin, Chief MUSLO, and provides guidance in handling specific requests made by General Oufkir.

2. General Posture: US obviously has significant strategic interest in Morocco deriving from its geographic location. Consequently we wish Morocco to maintain its defensive capability and internal security. Future Moroccan support in Law of the Sea negotiations for free transit through Straits of Gibraltar would be desirable. However, limitations on our resources, desirability of U.S. not becoming too closely identified with regime, and our concern that GOM concentrate its own resources on urgently required economic and social reforms significantly limit extent to which it would either be practicable or desirable for USG to increase its level of military assistance and advisory effort in response to Oufkir's request. At same time, within these limiting parameters and national interest considerations, we wish to be helpful responding to Oufkir in a manner that will provide additional reassurance that broad lines of US policy toward Morocco will continue. We therefore agreeable to MUSLO taking advantage of new atmosphere to foster closer relations with Moroccan military which we continue regard as focus of significant political power. Under overall guidance of the Ambassador, MUSLO may be as responsive as prudently possible to Moroccan requests for advice and assistance, provided that such advice and assistance does not promise or imply a commitment of additional US resources for Moroccan military establishment.

3. Oufkir's Requests: The following guidance was provided with respect to handling specific Oufkir requests (Rabat 4210, 4283): A. Military Orqanization: We regard as politically undesirable formal participation by MUSLO in Oufkir's review of Moroccan Army, Navy and Air Force organization. Formal MUSLO responsiveness to his request for recommendations re headquarters reorganization and formal MUSLO participation equally undesirable. Foregoing based on fact that we do not rpt not wish to give either Moroccans or French impression that we seeking to enter more central or exclusive relationship with Moroccan military. This should not preclude MUSLO from providing technical and professional advice on specific questions.

B. Command and Control System: The assignment of two personnel on a temporary basis to respond to technical questions has already been approved. Since Oufkir apparently places high priority on a Qte coup-proof Unqte command and control system (including an alternate or mobile command post) as a part of the FY 71 program, we would wish to be responsive in this area. We would not want US personnel assigned in an advisory capacity which might result in their becoming directly involved in operating the Moroccan military comunications network.

C. Civic Action: Oufkir appears to be interested in expanding civic action efforts of the Moroccan Army. Advisory assistance relative to civic action may be provided as long as it does not rpt not result in a significant expansion of our military assistance effort.

D. Increased Advisory Effort: Oufkir's interest in increasing our advisory effort should offer a fertile field for enhancing capability of the MUSLO. We prepared consider substitutions in MUSLO personnel and even small increases if benefit is likely to outweigh cost or political implications of an increased presence.

GP-1

ROGERS

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 19-8 US-MOR. Secret. It was also sent to USCINCEUR and repeated to CHMUSLO Rabat. Drafted on October 7 by Blake and Bader (OSD/ISA); cleared by DOD/ISA, JCS, PM/MAS, AF/RA, AF/N, and PM/ISP; and approved by Odell. In telegram 4283 from Rabat, August 25, the Embassy had supplied a more detailed list of Oufkir's subsidiary requests for assistance in improving communications with units and assigning civic tasks to military forces. (Ibid., DEF 19-8 US-MOR)

124. Telephone Conversation Between President Nixon and King Hassan of Morocco, via a French Interpreter, October 23, 1971, 11:59 a.m.-12:08 p.m. 124. Telephone Conversation Between President Nixon and King Hassan of Morocco, via a French Interpreter, October 23, 1971, 11:59 a.m.-12:08 p.m.1

October 23, 1971, 11:59 a.m.-12:08 p.m.

Nixon: Good Afternoon, Your Majesty. I have disturbed you this afternoon to present to you my views on a subject that I consider to be of the greatest importance, the vote in the United Nations on Chinese representation, which will occur on Tuesday. As you know, since we had the opportunity to meet in 1957, I have always had the very greatest respect for you and also for the independence and integrity of your country. And because I cherish our personal relationship, I want to speak to you in the frankest terms about this important issue. It is my conviction that the removal of an honorable member of the United Nations by a simple majority vote would be a precedent of the most disastrous consequences. It could have the most serious implications for the future survival of this organization. And for this reason, I would ask you to consider voting with the United States in favor of making the issue of expelling the government of Taiwan an “important question” and at the same time to support the position in establishing this matter as one of priority during Tuesday's deliberation. I believe this is in the interest of the United Nations in the future, because if any member can be expelled at any time by a simple majority vote, this could unravel the organization in years to come. And if if you could find it possible to vote with the United States on this issue alone, that is of the “important question,” I would consider it a very great personal favor. And I look forward, Your Majesty, to our meeting again at some time. I know we have planned it, but events have intervened, and I — Mrs. Nixon and I look forward to welcoming Your Majesty at a time convenient to you in our country.

HASSAN: (via interpreter): His Majesty would like to thank you, Mr. President,—

Nixon: Yes, yes. Thank you.

HASSAN (via interpreter): — for your kind expressions. Please convey my best personal greetings to Mrs. Nixon. I have personally looked into this matter of China. I know that it is a highly delicate issue. I have explained this to Mr. Rockwell. And it was my intention to look into this matter again this afternoon with my government. I want you to tell the President that I fully understand the concern of the United States. I want you to tell the President that I am deeply touched that he has called me personally. Nixon: Mmm-hmmm.

HASSAN (via interpreter): And I want you to convey to the President my wishes for his personal happiness and prosperity, and I will not fail to send you a message regarding our position. This is all.

Nixon: Merci Beaucoup, Monsieur Le Presi - Mons -Your Majesty.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Tapes, Oval Office, Conversation 12-106. Secret. The editor transcribed the portion of the tape recording published here specifically for this volume. Morocco was instrumental in the defeat of Washington's proposal to retain Taipei as a UN member, by abstaining on the “important question” resolution. With the U.S. defeat, a simple majority successfully voted for Taiwanese expulsion. In telegram 198650 to Rabat, October 30, the Department sent a record of Newsom's discussion with the Moroccan Chargé expressing U.S. disappointment. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Files, 1970-73, POL MOR-US.)

125. National Intelligence Estimate 61-72, Washington, June 15, 1972 125. National Intelligence Estimate 61-72, Washington, June 15, 19721

Washington, June 15, 1972

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
THE OUTLOOK FOR MOROCCO
NIE 61-72
15 June 1972

CONCLUSIONS

A. Morocco is a poor country with a medieval monarchy facing growing pressures for political, economic, and social change. King Hassan II, who was nearly overthrown in a military uprising in July 1971, has learned little from his narrow escape. He still believes that he can continue to rule in the style of an oriental potentate. This virtually assures that other challenges to the King will take place, but Hassan is in a strong position and could carry on for many years.

B. There is only a slight possibility that Hassan will shift course and gradually reduce his own political role. Even such a posture would not guarantee a decrease in political tension. Indeed, there is no assurance that the civilian opposition would cooperate with the King. The relaxation of royal authority might add to the uncertainties and whet politicians' appetites for further power.

C. The military establishment is both the chief prop of and potential threat to the crown. Thus far, General Oufkir, who has firm control of the armed forces, has shown no inclination to move against the King. He would be tempted to step in, however, if Hassan seemed to be fumbling badly in handling the problems of government. The odds in favor of a move by lower ranking officers, who seem more concerned with the need for basic change in society, are likely to grow over time. We do not have, however, any concrete evidence of plotting against the King in the Moroccan armed forces.

D. The regime is not likely to deal effectively with its growing economic and social problems, but these do not pose an immediate threat. Over the longer run, the failure to make basic agricultural and social reforms will promote the radicalization of the Moroccan political scene.

E. In foreign policy, Hassan is principally concerned with improving relations with the other states of the Maghreb and with boosting his stature among African and Islamic nations. While he does not want to antagonize the USSR, he desires friendly relations with the West in general and France and the US in particular. Hassan sees value in continued US operation of the Kenitra communications complex, but his will to preserve present arrangements would weaken if he judged their value to him was waning and if popular pressure mounted, say in the event of a major round of fighting between Arabs and Israel. The close relationship between the US and Morocco would be called into question if the monarchy were overthrown.

DISCUSSION

1. Morocco is a basically conservative and traditional state in which there are increasingly ominous rumblings of change. Its uneven exposure to European ideas and ways has left it a mixture of the traditional and the contemporary. Since the end of the French and Spanish Protectorates in 1956, it has made little progress in developing modern political, economic, and social institutions. The legacy of the French policy of divide and rule, accentuating the differences between the Berbers of the mountains and the Arabized population of the towns and lowlands, has played its part.* But even more significant have been the effects of the sharply segmented, still partly feudal, Moroccan social system in which power and authority are widely diffused among competing individuals and factions. Though the tribal structure has weakened among the Arabized population, the traditional system still strongly influences political alignments and discourages the rise of effective national parties. Only the monarchy provides cohesion, combining as it does both political and religious authority and attracting the loyalty of both Arab and Berber.

2. The Moroccan system, despite its conservative character, has elements of flexibility and resilience. It is based on personal relationships and loyalties rather than on law. And serious confrontation is avoided by opening back doors when the front doors close. It is ruled by and for a small Arabized elite around King Hassan II. Corruption and favoritism are an inevitable component of the system and touch the lives and politics of most prominent and powerful people in Morocco, including the royal family and hangers-on at court. Within broad limits this is considered normal by most Moroccans, and the small politically conscious minority of the population becomes concerned only if corruption and personal influence exceed customary bounds. Many in this minority also become concerned when the King shows signs of losing control. It is precisely for these reasons that discontent has been rising in recent years in Morocco.

3. This whole structure was nearly toppled in July 1971 by a military uprising. At that time, a nucleus of middle grade officers, joined by some of the senior generals, seized and held the King briefly. Their coup quickly collapsed because of failures in planning and leadership, disunity among the conspirators, loyalty to the King in the armed forces, and bad luck. The alleged conspirators were promptly put to death—which may serve as a deterrent to future attempts or may merely cause future conspirators to plan more carefully. But the attempt indicated that pressures for change were mounting, and it called into question the durability of the traditional system in Morocco.

I. THE INSTITUTIONS OF POWER

A. The Monarchy

4. The centuries old Alaouite Dynasty is the central political institution in Morocco. King Hassan's father, who had been deposed, returned to the throne just before the French Protectorate ended in 1956 and consolidated the royal power. Since acceding to the throne in 1961, Hassan has gone even further than his father in asserting the supremacy of the monarchy. When bloody riots broke out in Casablanca in 1965, he prorogued parliament and virtually suspended political activity. But after five years of a “state of exception,” he felt it expedient to regularize the regime. He drew up a constitution in 1970, confirming royal authority over all facets of the government and providing some illusion of popular participation in government.

5. Following the 1971 coup attempt, Hassan promulgated a new constitution. This document, though slightly more liberal than its predecessor, confirms the King's prerogative to make and unmake governments and to rule by decree if he deems necessary. While the civilian politicians bitterly criticized the unilateral proclamation of this instrument by the King before negotiations on the role of the civilian parties in the government had been concluded, they recognize their inability to mount a successful open challenge to Hassan and concede the King's primacy—at least for the present.

6. King Hassan, now 43, is a skillful political manipulator, who has sought to bolster the loyalty of the military establishment to the throne and has greatly reduced the influence of civilian politicians. On the one hand he has attempted to prevent the formation of groups powerful enough to threaten his position, and on the other has made skillful use of patronage and the desire for office that animates Moroccan politicians in general. He has made office the gateway to riches, not political power, and his pandering to the acquisitiveness of the elite has aggravated the problem of corruption. Another source of discontent is his luxurious style of living which is considered inappropriate by both traditionalists and modernists.

7. Characteristically, Hassan has reacted firmly to opposition when he thought it could be overcome or, when faced by broader pressure, by a pretense of concession. Thus soon after the suppression of the attempted military coup of last July he acknowledged the need for popular participation in the governing process. This stance, however, has turned out to have been mainly a device to buy time. In his subsequent dealings with the politicians—consulting, but in the end facing them with faits accompli—Hassan has clearly demonstrated that he does not want to share power nor to act as a constitutional monarch. His actions over the past 10 months lead us to judge that he believes it possible to continue the traditional system of royal rule without meaningful concessions to the political parties.

8. Though he has obvious political skills, Hassan does not concentrate his whole attention on governing. Not even the uprising of July 1971 changed his preoccupation with the pursuit of pleasure. His expenditures of time and money on golf are legendary in Morocco as are the pomp and circumstance of royal travel. Moreover, he is autocratic and not disposed to take advice from others. Further, Hassan is erratic and changeable, acting on the spur of the moment and frequently reversing direction. The shock of his near deposition last July seems only to have accentuated this tendency. In short, he appears to have learned little from the attempted coup.

B. The Political Parties

9. The Istiqlal Party played the major role in bringing an end to the Protectorates in 1956, but the political parties today lack the strength to force the King to deal with them. In part, their weakness stems from the inability of the politicians to pull together. After independence this factionalism led the left wing of the Istiqlal to split off to form the National Union of Popular Forces (UNFP). Other minor groupings also arose, including the Popular Movement, which was inspired by the Palace as a counterweight to the Istiqlal and has cooperated closely with the monarchy. Thanks to this disunity and rivalry, the civilian politicians found themselves unable to contest the assumption of supreme power by the monarch. The party leaders never effectively controlled the Cabinet, even during the first few years after independence when they were nominally part of the governmental coalition. And their organizations have been further weakened, demoralized, and disrupted by their exclusion from normal political activity since 1965.

10. The party leaders themselves have contributed to the growth of factionalism. The head of the more conservative Istiqlal Party, Allal al-Fassi, a traditional Arab leader from the city of Fez, has been willing to engage in private discussions with the King and with leaders of other parties, but he is rigidly insistent that his party should have the dominant position. His generally uncompromising stand and elitist approach have undermined cooperative efforts among the politicians. He has just suffered a heart attack and may have to curtail his activity. This may make him all the less willing to see his political rivals in the UNFP play a major role in directing opposition to the King.

11. The UNFP leaders, Abderrahim Bouabid and Abdallah Ibrahim, are somewhat more flexible in their approach. Despite their differences with the Istiqlal and the rather imperious al-Fassi, they agreed in 1970 to patch together a so-called National Front of the two parties in order better to face the King with the appearance of unity. This effort has not been very successful. The rival parties continue to pull in different directions in their negotiations with the King. And even though the UNFP views the monarchy as basically a medieval institution which should be stripped of its dominant power, the party's leaders in talks with the King have been more conciliatory than their counterparts in the Istiqlal. Recognizing their party's weakness, Bouabid and Ibrahim have persevered in trying to keep contact with Hassan even after his unilateral postponement of elections demonstrated his contempt for these conversations.

12. The troubles of the parties also stem from their limited constituencies and poor image. Neither party has a mass base or a nation-wide following. In the 1963 elections the Istiqlal got about 30 and the UNFP about 22 percent of the vote; their popular backing has no doubt decreased in the interim. The Istiqlal appeals to the traditional Arab mercantile and land-owning elite, particularly around Fez, though it also has some support from Arabized elements in rural areas. The UNFP is basically an urban party, backed by segments of the middle class, educated youth (whose number is increasing), and organized labor.

13. The major labor organization, the Moroccan Federation of Labor (UMT), with several hundred thousand members is closely allied to the UNFP but independent of it. Led by the charismatic and politically active Mahjoub Ben Seddik, the UMT has the capability to provoke serious disorders, particularly when allied with disaffected students. UMT leadership, which at times has had difficulties imposing discipline on certain locals, has recently been reshuffled to make room for younger and more militant cadres.

C. The Military

14. The 60,000-man military establishment is both the chief prop of and potential threat to the crown. In fact, the cadets who took part in the July uprising thought that they were protecting the King. Particularly since a number of officers of questionable loyalty were killed or removed as a result of the coup attempt, the remaining senior officers are generally conservative and monarchist in outlook. We know little about the attitudes and intentions of the officer corps as a whole, however. Broadly speaking, the armed forces do not conceive of the military establishment as an independent political force.

15. The uprising of last July was the first attack against the throne since independence. It stemmed in part from the revulsion of a few officers against the corruption rampant in the regime. This was particularly true of General Medbouh, who joined a group of middle grade officers who had taken the initiative in planning the coup attempt. Despite the King's subsequent purge of elements suspected of disloyalty, there are reports that some officers remain concerned over the continuing corruption in high places. Moreover, the purge may itself have created resentment among the junior officers. There are also signs that some officers are disturbed by the King's fitful attention to the business of governing and by the unsteady course of his relations with the civilian politicians. We do not have, however, any concrete evidence of plotting against the King in the Moroccan armed forces.

16. The Moroccan military establishment is distinguished by the high percentage of Berbers in its senior ranks. During the Protectorate, the French consciously encouraged Berbers to enter the military profession as a counterweight to the Arabized majority which dominated the political scene. Since independence there have been no visible signs of significant ethnic rivalry within the military. But in Moroccan society at large many Berbers resent the favored position of the Arabs from Fez in the economic and administrative sectors. The army leaders continue to favor Berber officers, and Berber clannishness could become a more important factor in the attitudes of the officer corps.

17. The present leader of the military establishment, General Mohamed Oufkir, is unquestionably the most important figure in the country after King Hassan. Oufkir is a Berber whose power is based not only on his closeness to the King, but on his longtime control of the internal security, police, and intelligence networks. An outstanding administrator, he is also widely feared for his tough and frequently brutal treatment of his opponents. (He is widely believed to have been responsible for the kidnapping and murder of leftist Moroccan opposition leader Medhi Ben Barka in 1965.) Long relied on by the King, Oufkir further strengthened his position after the July 1971 uprising when he was given unlimited powers to restore public order. He now serves as the commander of the Royal Armed Forces and Minister of National Defense.

18. Despite his years in the public eye, the 52-year old Oufkir has remained a figure of some mystery. He is conservative, bent on maintaining order, and is contemptuous of the civilian politicians. In the past he has shown sympathy for efforts to strengthen the authority of the monarchy. But since July 1971 his attitudes toward the regime have seemed less clear. There is speculation among the officer corps that Oufkir may be having second thoughts about Hassan. He is apparently attempting in low key to persuade the King to change his life-style, but Oufkir does not seem to be encouraging Hassan to make basic reforms. Oufkir himself apparently does not believe that fundamental alterations in the systems are necessary or wise, partly because such changes might threaten his—and the military establishment's—position.

II. PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS

A. Economic Development and Social Change

19. The interplay of political forces goes on against the background of increasingly serious economic and social problems. The country is independent, largely self-sufficient, and has fairly flourishing trade. It is not embroiled in conflict with its neighbors. But it has many of the familiar ills of developing states: a wide gap between rich and poor, massive unemployment and underemployment, very rapid population growth, disaffected students and an embittered younger urban generation, an ineffective and insufficient educational system, and a self-centered and greedy elite. Morocco exports over $100 million worth of phosphates annually, but it lacks oil or other resources likely to provide the revenues needed for rapid development.

20. The Moroccan economy has not recorded an impressive performance since independence. It lags far behind neighboring oil-rich Algeria in almost all indices of economic growth. Indeed, until 1967 gross national product increased little faster than population growth. Moreover, the country passed through inflation and recession which depressed economic activity significantly. In the past few years, however, the government has been somewhat more successful. It increased investment in irrigation facilities, modernized phosphate mines, and improved the efficiency of tax collection. Incentives to private investment have also had effect, and balance-of-payments surpluses have led to relaxation of foreign exchange and tariff regulations. Morocco has shown a growth rate of about 5.5 percent between 1968-1972, a favorable foreign exchange situation, increased earnings from tourism, and bumper harvests. Though the July uprising added uncertainties, some of the strains in the economy have been relieved. And the prospects for growth in the small modern industrial and agricultural sectors are good.

21. King Hassan talks of the need for social and economic development, but thus far has not made a determined effort to attack the problems of the traditional sector of the economy. Important in his thinking is the risk of unhinging the political and social structure of the agricultural sector, which sustains most of the population and contributes significantly to overall economic activity. There has been some investment in dams and irrigation facilities, but this is only beginning to show results. Agriculture thus remains largely dependent on rainfall which is capricious. Droughts have been frequent and productivity has increased very slowly. More important, the King has not encouraged efforts to change landholding patterns and the organization of the rural sector as demanded by the National Front. As long as Hassan fails to promote reform of the agrarian sector, Morocco's prospects for greater economic progress will remain dim.

22. These political constraints on development are not likely to be soon overcome. The present government is unprepared to take bold initiatives in economic and social realms. In fact, the nature and execution of reform is a major point of dispute between the King and the political parties, who call for such steps as agrarian reform and nationalization of the key sectors of the economy. Even if the National Front were to gain control of parliament following elections, the party leaders themselves would find it hard to agree on concrete programs. Under the best of circumstances, it would be difficult to carry out radical land reform and to modernize traditional agriculture practices. Reform of the French-style educational system is also needed, but the present regime is not disposed to make more than minimal changes. Any government would find it both expensive and difficult to modernize Morocco's schools.

23. Basic economic and social problems do not pose an immediate threat to the regime. The peasantry is politically inert and most of those who are the most economically disadvantaged have the least political power and initiative. It is not easy to mobilize the rural elements for political ends even with appeals to economic self-interest. Besides, the peasants are so steeped in the traditional mold that they do not generally blame the regime for their poverty. For their part, the political party leaders, perhaps because they recognize that rousing the peasantry is dangerous for them, are not attempting to foment rural discontent.

24. But the traditional social order is slowly giving way before the forces of change. The growing exodus from the farms is creating ever larger concentrations of migrants who maintain a precarious existence in slums on the outskirts of the cities, in effect living between the traditional and modern sectors of society. Education is gradually enlarging the ranks of aspirants to the ruling elite. But denied political power and often without satisfactory jobs, these people become potential dissidents. The younger urban generation is coming increasingly to believe that the continuation of the monarchy is incompatible with social and economic progress. All this contributes to an ever expanding reservoir of discontent.

25. Over the long run, this process poses a potent challenge to the Moroccan Government. Up to now, the voices calling for a complete restructuring of the system have been few; most advocates of this view have found it necessary to go into exile. But student unrest is growing, and the tiny Party of Liberation and Socialism (which is the Moroccan Communist Party) is seeking a broader role, although to date its activities have been well circumscribed by the security forces. The King's immobility on the matter of reform will no doubt encourage the growth of opposition. It will be some time, however, before challenges from this quarter could seriously tax the capacity of the regime to keep order. But clearly continuing failure to enact reforms would promote an eventual radicalization of the Moroccan political scene.

B. The Political Outlook

26. Hassan's monopoly of political power brings him into direct conflict with the civilian politicians. The new constitution clearly represents less than they had hoped to achieve. In an effort to press Hassan, they announced a boycott of the referendum to approve it, though they did not actively marshal their followers to abstain nor did they repudiate the new constitution once promulgated. Hassan's postponement of elections also disappointed some, although there are signs that the Istiqlal was not unhappy with the prospect of additional time in which to organize. But particularly if the King postpones new parliamentary elections beyond 1973, the temper of the opposition seems certain to rise. Already the leadership of the UNFP faces pressure from its rank-and-file members not to acquiesce in concessions to the King. And general disillusionment over his failure to change his ways after the July uprising is growing. Thus the civilian parties—whether in concert or separately—are likely to increase their opposition to Hassan.

27. Hassan, however, is not impressed by the political parties or their leaders. Hence, the odds are that he will continue much in the pattern of the past, holding the reins himself and turning to repression if need be. He clearly prefers to rule through a non-party government, like the present one, which is entirely subservient to his will. He may refuse to allow elections on one pretext or another or he may rig the results to favor his hand-picked candidates to deny the franchise significant meaning. At the same time, he might feel it expedient to leave hope alive that one day he would relax control in order to lure the political parties to remain within the system, and he will make gestures intended to assuage the opposition's frustrations.

28. This course entails risks. Hassan shows no signs of providing dynamic leadership; his personal habits militate against success in providing the efficient and capable rule required to keep the present system functioning smoothly over the longer run. If he embarked on a course utilizing even more repression, discontent would be likely to focus increasingly on the monarchy. In this event, it is difficult to predict how long Hassan could remain master of the situation, though given luck, he might be able to carry on for many years. But Moroccan politics would be tense and it is likely that other challenges to the King would be made.

29. There is, of course, a slight possibility that Hassan will recognize this danger, change his ways, allow parliament to be elected and function freely, and gradually reduce his obvious political role. Even this conciliatory posture would not guarantee a decrease in political tension. Indeed, there is no assurance that the civilian opposition would cooperate with the King. The relaxation of royal authority might add to the uncertainties and whet politicians' appetites for further power. It could therefore lead to louder and more articulate demands by civilian political leaders. But the opposition is aware of the risks in challenging the King this directly and is thus likely to be moderate in its demands for some time. Hence, this course offers some possibility of transition to a more broadly based regime without passing through a revolutionary stage.

30. In any event, maintaining the loyalty of the military is the key to Hassan's success. Thus far, General Oufkir and his senior associates have shown no inclination to take over the government—and Oufkir had every opportunity to do so in the wake of the unsuccessful coup last July. He would be tempted to step in, however, if Hassan seemed to be fumbling badly in handling the problems of government. Indeed, the King's lengthy consultations with the politicians have already raised within the military both fears that he might surrender too much and concern at his image of impotence. Oufkir, with a firm grip on the military establishment, would stand an excellent chance of success, should he decide to depose Hassan. His chances would be considerably better than those of the officers whose effort miscarried last July, for he could use regular command channels. Moreover, he is the most able general remaining in the armed forces. Moves against the King by lower ranking officers would be unlikely to succeed while Oufkir is on the scene. His recent purge has complicated the task of plotters within the armed forces as well as increasing the reliability of the officer corps.

31. Over time, however, the odds in favor of a military coup are likely to grow. The younger officers are better educated than their superiors and appear more concerned with the need for basic change in society. Further, they are exposed to the example of revolutionary regimes, especially in Algeria, and to the cumulative impact of antimonarchical sentiment elsewhere in the Arab world. In the long run, therefore, the gradual modernization of the officer corps seems destined to make the military establishment a less reliable prop for the monarchy. And eventually a significant proportion of the officers may come to subscribe to the dissatisfaction with Hassan now prevalent among younger urban civilians.

32. If a successor regime were led by General Oufkir or one of his senior associates, such as General Driss Ben Aomar, it would not necessarily be antimonarchical in outlook. Depending on the circumstances that brought it to power, it might institute a regency for the nine-year old Crown Prince Sidi Mohammed, and continue much in the vein of King Hassan, but with far more sustained attention to the problems of government. A regime dominated by the younger officers would be strongly opposed to retaining any remnants of the monarchy and would perhaps resemble the government in Algeria. Nationalist in orientation and focused inward on Morocco's domestic problems, it would be likely to promote rapid social change and measures to produce a more equitable distribution of income. But the disappearance of the monarchy would also promote a revival of regionalist forces.

III. FOREIGN RELATIONS

33. The King, who is by and large the master of Morocco's foreign policy, has limited international aspirations. He is mainly concerned with his neighbors in the MAGHREB and to a lesser extent with recognition by African and Islamic nations as a leader. (He is host of an OAU summit meeting being held in June 1972 and was elected its chairman.) He has backed down from the territorial demands espoused by his father and is seeking an amicable resolution of Morocco's border dispute with Algeria. Libya's verbal support for the Moroccan insurgents last July has seriously strained Moroccan-Libyan relations, producing reciprocal propaganda attacks and mutual suspicions of subversion. And Hassan's desire to remain detached from the Arab-Israeli issue conflicts with his wish to be accepted as an Arab leader.

34. Dealings with the Great Powers are also troublesome for Hassan. He wants friendly relations with the West in general and the US and France in particular. But at the same time, he does not want to antagonize the USSR. Though he is suspicious of Soviet naval activity in the Mediterranean and fears that the USSR has aims to acquire hegemony in North Africa, he makes an effort to appear evenhanded. Hence, he permits some Soviet vessels to call at Moroccan ports and high Moroccan officials exchange visits with their Soviet counterparts. He has also concluded several significant economic deals with the USSR for projects such as electrical generating plants and irrigation facilities.

35. The US has been closely associated with the Moroccan monarchy over the years. US military and economic aid have been relatively large (about $860 million since independence of which some $77 million is military and about $783 million economic). Moreover, inside Morocco the US is widely regarded as a staunch supporter of the royal regime. Despite domestic criticism, Hassan, for his part, has permitted the US to operate the important Kenitra communications complex. And he is not eager to see this relationship disturbed.

36. But forces that threaten cooperation with the US are rising. As elsewhere in Africa and Asia, nationalist feeling is growing in Morocco. This process would no doubt be speeded if party politics and political campaigning are permitted as provided by the constitution. Both the UNFP and the Istiqlal stand for US withdrawal from the Kenitra facilities, and would be tempted to raise this issue on occasion to garner additional popular support. Hassan still sees value in retaining this link to the US and uses it as an inducement for additional military aid. However, he may interpret present US plans to reduce the complement at the Kenitra complex as an indication that it is a waning asset for him. These calculations would weaken his will to preserve the arrangement if popular pressure against the American presence were to mount, say in the event of a major round of fighting between Arabs and Israel.

37. The close relationship between the US and Morocco could be far more seriously disrupted if the monarchy were to be overthrown. A conservative military regime would try to maintain close ties with the US. But even such a regime would be influenced by pressures of nationalist sentiment. A radical regime would almost certainly adopt a hostile stance to the US, and could be expected to terminate US access to the Kenitra facilities.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 361, Subject Files, National Intelligence Estimates. Secret; Controlled Dissemination. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, Defense, and NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. The Director of CIA submitted this estimate with the concurrence of all members of the USIB with the exception of the representative of the FBI who abstained on the grounds that it was outside his jurisdiction.

* The Moroccan population is overwhelmingly Berber in origin, and the majority of those who now call themselves Arabs are really Arabized Berbers. Those who are termed Berbers—roughly 25 percent of the population—are so called because of their adherence to Berber speech and folkways.

126. Telegram 3761 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, August 17, 1972, 0020Z. 126. Telegram 3761 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, August 17, 1972, 0020Z.1

August 17, 1972, 0020Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY RABAT
0 170020Z AUG 72

73-60

ACTION AF-18

INFO OCT-01 EUR-20 CCO-00 SSO-00 NSCE-00 USIE-00 CIAE-00 DODE-00 PN-06 H-02 INR-06 L-03 NSAE-00 NSC-10 P-03 RSC-01 PRS-01 SS-14 INRE-00 RSR-01 SCS-03 AID-20 FBO-01 NIC-01 M-03 OC-06 DPR-02 T-03 SCA-01 A-01 OMB-01 SY-03/131 W 043856

O 170020Z AUG 72

FM

AMEMBASSY RABAT

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC NIACT IMMEDIATE 6692

INFO

AMEMBASSY PARIS IMMEDIATE

AMEMBASSY ROME IMMEDIATE

AMEMBASSY MADRID IMMEDIATE

AMEMBASSY TUNIS IMMEDIATE

AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI IMMEDIATE

USINT ALGIERS IMMEDIATE

AMEMBASSY LONDON IMMEDIATE

USCINCEUR

COMNAVTRACOM MOROCCO

SUBJECT:

ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATION OF KING HASSAN: PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENT

REF:

3746

1. WE HAVE SEEN THIS AFTERNOON AND EVENING WHAT NOW APPEARS TO BE THE FAILURE OF ONE MORE DESPERATE ATTEMPT TO ELIMINATE KING HASSAN FROM LEADERSHIP OF MOROCCO. KING HAS HAD WHAT CAN ONLY BE DESCRIBED AS MIRACULOUS ESCAPE. IT IS HARD TO UNDERSTAND HOW TRAINED FIGHTER PILOT, FLYING AS ESCORT, COULD HAVE FAILED TO SHOOT DOWN KING'S PLANE, ALTHOUGH ONE OF OUR MUSLO STAFF HAS NOTED THAT F-5 FIGHTER PILOTS HAVE NOT HAD MUCH OPPORTUNITY TO PRACTICE WITH LIVE AMMUNITION SINCE ATTEMPTED COUP AT SKHIRAT LAST YEAR.

2. IT NOW EVIDENT THAT ASSASSINATION ATTEMPT CARRIED OUT BY SMALL ELITE GROUP OF FIGHTER PILOTS WITH SUPPORT AT LEAST SOME AIR FORCE ENLISTED MEN. LACK OF EVIDENCE THUS FAR OF ANY COLLUSION WITH ANY OTHER MILITARY OR CIVILIAN ELEMENTS SUGGESTS F-5 SQUADRONS ONLY SELF-ASSIGNED MISSION WAS TO REMOVE KING. PRESUMABLY THEY GAMBLED THAT THE EFFECTIVE REMOVAL OF KING WOULD BE ACCEPTED BY REST OF MILITARY, INCLUDING OUFKIR, AND COUNTRY AT LARGE. (IT APPEARS THAT OUFKIR'S CLOSE FRIEND AMEKRANE, WHO HAS REPORTEDLY LANDED IN GIBRALTAR, WAS IN ON PLOT: RABAT 3760).

3. GAMBLE WAS LOST, AND IT IMPOSSIBLE TO TELL HOW KING WILL REACT TO ASSASSINATION ATTEMPT. ONE THING CERTAIN. FACT THAT US NAVY HAS PRESENCE AT KENITRA AND THE US AIR FORCE TRAINED MOROCCAN F-5 FIGHTER SQUADRON IS LOST ON NO ONE AND COULD LIKELY HAVE EFFECT ON US MILITARY PRESENCE HERE. I HAVE ALREADY EMPHASIZED TO FOREIGN MINISTER BENHIMA THAT THERE IS ABSOLUTELY NO US INVOLVEMENT—EVEN UNWITTING—IN WHAT WAS OBVIOUSLY ALL MOROCCAN AFFAIR. ON INSTRUCTIONS FROM THE DEPARTMENT I AM SEEKING SEE RENHIMA AGAIN TONIGHT TO FORMALLY CONVEY OUR SHOCK AND DISMAY AT ANY SUGGESTION THAT AMERICANS COULD IN ANY WAY BE INVOLVED IN AN ACTIVITY THREATENING THE SECURITY OF THE KING AND TO ASK GOM TO ACT PROMPTLY TO PREVENT FURTHER CIRCULATION SUCH RUMORS.
GDS

DE TARR

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 MOR. Confidential; Niact; Immediate. It was repeated Immediate to Paris, Rome, Madrid, Tunis, Tripoli, Algiers, and London, and to USCINCEUR and COMNAVTRACOM.

127. Intelligence Note RAAN-36 Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Washington, August 17, 1972 127. Intelligence Note RAAN-36 Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Washington, August 17, 19721

Washington, August 17, 1972

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
BUREAU OF INTELLIGENCE AND RESEARCH
INTELLIGENCE NOTE
RAAN-36
August 17, 1972

MOROCCO: HASSAN'S MILITARY PROVES UNTRUSTWORTHY

This report was produced by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research. Aside from normal substantive exchange with other agencies at the working level, it has not been coordinated elsewhere.

The attempt on August 16 by pilots of the Moroccan F-5 fighter squadron to kill King Hassan brings into question the loyalty of the Moroccan military. This loyalty is the key to the durability of Hassan's regime, particularly in view of his failure in recent months to broaden his power base by bringing the political opposition into the government. Since the abortive coup at Skhirat in 1971, the King has demonstrated that he is interested only in cosmetic reforms and that he has no intention to share power in a meaningful way. He appeared content to let his power rest on the narrow base of the military establishment, and seemed sufficiently confident of Defense Minister General Mohamed Oufkir's control to leave on an extended vacation to France at the end of July.

Demise of Oufkir. The apparent suicide of General Oufkir in the early hours of August 17 removes an irreplaceable pillar of support. Oufkir's total devotion to the monarchy was important because he was both ruthless and well organized, traits which enabled him to command respect from and inspire awe in the military establishment. He supposedly lived by a severe code of honor which had once led him to threaten suicide should the King lose faith in him. His replacement, General Driss Ben Aomar, while a loyal and respected officer (an ex-Chief of Staff) is not in good health and does not have the presence of Oufkir. He is not likely to be able to mend rifts within the military that may result from this latest attempt to overthrow Hassan.

Internal Outlook. The King now faces the task of again purging the military, which has shown itself untrustworthy twice in the past 13 months. To gain time and contemplate future maneuvers, if the King remains true to form, he will attempt to reopen a dialogue with the political opposition. He may be expected to downplay the attempted assassination as an isolated incident and create an atmosphere of dialogue and reform. Past experience, however, does not suggest that Hassan will change his personalized style of government based on a traditional web of patron-client relationships.

International Implications. The latest attempt came just as Hassan was recovering his international stature as a result of his adroit handling of the Rabat OAU Summit and his election as OAU President in June. He now stands to have his prestige slip again, particularly if he finds it necessary to devote all his energy to stabilizing his domestic scene. He may be inclined, however, to exploit his role as OAU President to try recovering international status as well as to draw attention at home away from a confused situation.

Neighboring Tunisia, Mauritania and possibly Algeria—despite Boumediene's dislike of monarchy—will probably be relieved that Morocco has been spared, at least for the moment, the chaos that would have resulted had the coup been successful. The hostile Libyan radio, on the other hand, lost no time in lauding the attempt on the King and calling for other efforts.

US Linked to Plot. Moroccan officials have already alluded to US involvement because the pilots operated from Kenitra, where we have recently reduced our presence. We have strongly denied any role. While Hassan probably feels any such charges groundless, he nonetheless might believe that such a popular attitude would warrant a reduction or change in the US military presence; this would also serve him well in negotiations be may undertake with the political opposition, which opposes any US military presence in Morocco.

INR-Africa

Director : GH. Sumn

Analyst : HAHoffman

Ext. 22297

Released by:

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 MOR. Confidential. Drafted by Hoffman; cleared by Godfrey Summ (INR/Africa).

128. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Rush) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Moorer), Washington, August 29, 1972 128. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Rush) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Moorer), Washington, August 29, 19721

Washington, August 29, 1972

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301
29 AUG 1972

MEMORANDUM

TO THE CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF

SUBJECT:

US Military Involvement in Morocco

The recent attempted coup in Morocco and the uncertain future facing the regime lead me to believe that we should consider ways of reducing the level of our military involvement and dependence on the Moroccan communications facilities.

I am aware that some of our activities and military presence is directly associated with the oral agreement with King Hassan in 1963 concerning base management and telecommunications training. I believe, however, that we should make every effort, consistent with that agreement, to shift the actual operating functions of the RMAF base at Kenitra to Moroccans, restricting US personnel to advisory roles. I also recognize that any precipitous withdrawal of personnel involved in training and base operations might adversely affect our continued use of the US Navy communications facilities, and that, therefore, any reductions in presence would have to be done on a gradual basis.

I would like you to examine this situation and submit recommendations to me on ways we can reduce our involvement by turning over to the Moroccans as many of the operations and maintenance functions as possible at the RMAF base at Kenitra, with US personnel, if necessary, continuing to serve as advisors. I would also like you to examine the impact of the Fleet Satellite Communications System on our continued need for the communications sites at Sidi Yahia and Bouknadel and the desirability of reorienting these facilities by remote-keying (one of the options in the 1971 JCS contingency relocation plan), retaining the use of the Moroccan frequencies but reducing our overall presence in Morocco, and how quickly this could be accomplished. This evaluation should identify costs, personnel and any anticipated degradation of capabilities. I understand the Navy has already initiated studies and actions that could be helpful in determining ways to reduce our dependence on the Moroccan-based communications facilities.

I would appreciate this information and your recommendations by September 23.

[signed Kenneth Rush]
Deputy

I-26697/72

MEMORANDUM

FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

SUBJECT:

US Military Involvement in Morocco

The purpose of this memorandum is to assess the situation in Morocco following the abortive coup attempt of August 16, to examine the level of US military involvement and to propose certain interim actions you may wish to consider toward reorienting our military posture there.

Political Assessment

The situatation is outwardly calm but more ominous and ominous toward Hassan's longevity than after last year's attempted coup. Few believe any longer that required reforms are likely to be made, and the military's loyalty to the regime is more suspect than ever.

MOD OUKFIR's complicity and alleged suicide, the inept (if not poorly conceived) assassination attempt by the F-5 squadron, the King's chastisement and usurpation of direct control of the military and prospects of yet another purge of the officer staff, has completely shattered the military's morale. The military was the main prop of the regime. OUKFIR was the most qualified leader considered capable of maintaining the military's cohesiveness and loyalty. His adventure against Hassan probably reflected his growing awareness of his own pre-eminent personal authority among the military and belief that the King could not or would not alter the regime's style. OUKFIR was among the diminishing few who spoke frankly to the King about the regime's shortcomings, and their relationship appeared to be under increasing tension in recent months. While there is still much monarchist sentiment among the poorer classes, Hassan's lavish life style, widespread official corruption, critical unemployment, prospects of increased autocratic rule and military disaffection are likely to accelerate the process of the regime's disintegration.

With the demise of Oukfir and his almost embarassingly demonstrative pro-US attitudes and apparent desire to maintain the monarchical structure under his own regency, the next coup attempt is more likely to be radical and republican in nature and not as favorably disposed to the US. The chance of our being able to hang on to our naval communications station under such circumstances, coupled with the new regime's likely propensity to look for ways to rally domestic support and establish its Arab legitimacy, would be greatly diminished. In the short run, however, while Hassan rules, our Ambassador believes, and we agree, that there may be some opinion favoring our withdrawal from Kenitra but that the King is more likely to want to retain our presence as a gauge of our
continued support for the regime.

US Military Involvement

We have about 1350 DOD personnel (mostly Navy and Marine) and 1500 dependents located in Morocco at the Kenitra complex that includes the Moroccan air facility (597 US personnel) and two outlying communications sites at Sidi Yahia and Bouknadel (647 US personnel). The Navy communications station serves as the master station for the area, controlling and coordinating all ship-to-shore communications with US Naval forces operating in the Mediterranean. We also have a 25-man MAAG, including a five-man F-5 augmentation team at the airstrip, associated with a small grant MAP training program (about $0.8 million a year) and a credit sales program (about $15 million a year).

Our presence in Morocco was covered by an oral understanding between President Kennedy and King Hassan in 1963, when it was agreed that we could continue to utilize the communications facilities in exchange for our (i) putting Kenitra under Moroccan command, (ii) maintaining the same level of operational expenditures ($2.1 million) and (iii) training Moroccans in base management and telecommunications. (The sites of the US communications facilities at Sidi Yahia and Bouknadel were not “Moroccanized.”)

This week, after the Moroccan Government's initial indication that the USG was suspected of complicity in OUKFIR's attempted coup (apparently because of the impression that the US F-5 advisors and Navy personnel at the airstrip must have assisted in some way), the King publicly acknowledged that the GOM's investigation showed no foreign involvement. The King stated that American technicians are in Morocco to teach Moroccans to fly and communicate, that it would be irresponsible for him to incriminate them in the affair and that he was satisfied with the role of the Americans. Our own investigation shows that US personnel were ordered away from the operational area before the F-5s went off on their first strike. Nonetheless, US personnel at the airstrip, in the control towers and in supervisory management roles with the Moroccan facility (e.g. generator plant) are a risk to possible exposure or unwitting involvement in the future.

A major factor in the value of the station's location is the 250 frequencies Morocco makes available for our use that could not be entirely compensated for elsewhere. At its own initiative, Navy ran a test list last year on the impact of operating without the Moroccan frequencies. The Navy believes the need of these frequencies will be critical under our Fleet Satellite Communications Systems is operational (estimated FY 75/76) and may be of significant residual importance after them. Since last year's coup, and your request for the development of contingency relocation plans, the Navy has been attempting to reduce its dependence on Morocco in its future planning. As they identified in last year's plan, it would be possible to reduce the number of DOD personnel in Morocco significantly by remote-keying the Moroccan station from another location in the Mediterranean, while retaining use of the frequencies. Cost and degradation of capabilities are mitigating factors that will have to be weighed again in light of the present situation in Morocco.

Recommendations

Navy should examine immediately ways to reduce direct US involvement and operational participation in the base management of the Moroccan facility at Kenitra, shifting such functions to the Moroccans, with residual US presence limited to advisory roles. This excludes the actual sites of Navy's communications at Sidi Yahia and Bouknadel that are under direct Navy management and control and would be better left that way in the current situation. Also, given the uncertain prospects for the continuity of the regime, Navy's future requirements for the communications facilities should be reviewed with a goal of reducing our dependence and presence as quickly as practicable. I, therefore, recommend that you sign the attached memorandum to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff requesting that such reviews be undertaken.

The Assistant Secretary (Telecommunications) concurs with this recommendation.

Armistead I. Selden, Jr.
Acting Assistant Secretary
Attachment

Attachment

distr:

Orig & 1 - Addee

OSD File

R&C File

NA Chron Comeback

N

Signer's copy

ASD(T)

prepared by: ltc R. O. Walters/x79201/Africa Region/cnp/25 August 72

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files, FRC 75-0125, Box 15, Morocco 000.1, 1972. On September 22, Vice Director of the Joint Staff Martin Colladay responded to the request for alternatives to U.S. communications facilities in Morocco. He reported the Joint Chiefs of Staff's conclusion that “No precipitate action be taken to reduce US personnel assigned to NAVTRACOM Morocco which supports the Kenitra Air Force Base” but that “current US Navy plans to reduce telecommunications operations at Sidi Yahia complex in late FY 1975 continue as planned.” The Joint Chiefs also recommended that “When a Fleet Satellite Communications System is operational in the Atlantic and the Mediterranean Basin, approximately FY 1977, and lack of dependency on Moroccan-registered frequencies has clearly been established, the United States then inform the Government of Morocco of its intent to close C [text not declassified] facilities entirely.” (Ibid., OASD Files, (C) (A), FRC 77-0094, Box 65, Morocco 1972)

129. Memorandum From the Secretary of State (Rogers) to President Nixon, Washington, September 5, 1972 129. Memorandum From the Secretary of State (Rogers) to President Nixon, Washington, September 5, 19721

Washington, September 5, 1972

THE SECRETARY OF STATE
WASHINGTON
September 5, 1972

MEMORANDUM

FOR THE PRESIDENT

Subject:

MOROCCO: King Hassan's Difficult Position

In the wake of the unsuccessful attempt by the Moroccan Air Force to assassinate King Hassan August 16, the King is in a weak and difficult position. He has taken personal command of the army but cannot be sure of its loyalty. His overtures to the opposition parties to join the government and participate in parliamentary elections have thus far been rebuffed. The King recognizes his vulnerable situation and is working hard to reestablish his authority and control. He may succeed. On the other hand, given the fragile nature of the situation, another coup or assassination attempt could come at any time and create a dangerously unstable and unpredictable situation in Morocco.

U.S. Actions to Date. Your message of congratulations to the King was delivered on the day following the attack and received headlines in the Moroccan press. We have also asked Ambassador Rockwell to convey our deep and sympathetic concern to King Hassan regarding the current situation and to obtain the King's own assessment of his position. Meanwhile, our present policies and programs in Morocco are continuing without change for the time being. Our present posture is to continue to give the King all possible indications of our continuing support.

We have, in addition, requested the intelligence community to prepare by mid-September a Special National Intelligence Estimate on Morocco and the King's prospects. We have asked CIA to check its resources in Morocco for possible clues to future dissidence, particularly within the armed forces. The Navy is reviewing its plans for a possible transfer or evacuation of the Kenitra communications facilities on short notice. USIA is reviewing its plans with regard to the Voice of America Relay Station at Tangier. Contingency plans to evacuate the more than 5,000 Americans in Morocco are being reviewed and updated where necessary. We are also continuing to consult with the French and other interested governments on Morocco.

U.S. Options. Broadly speaking, we have three basic options with regard to the King: (1) On the grounds that Hassan's continuance offers the best protection to US interests in Morocco, we can support him strongly and try to shore up the Throne; or

(2) we can offer a more modest level of general support for the regime while maintaining a certain distance from the King and keeping lines of communication open to opposition leaders; or

(3) we can disengage more convincingly from the monarchy and focus on building relationships with possible successor governments.

In view of the important U.S. strategic and defense interests in Morocco, I recommend that you authorize preparation of a National Security Study Memorandum to examine options for U.S. policy with regard to King Hassan and Morocco. A draft NSSM is attached for your consideration.

Attachment:
Draft NSSM.

[signed]
William P. Rogers

Attachment:

Draft NSSM

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 MOR. Secret. For the draft NSSM as approved, see Document 133.

130. Telegram 4147 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, September 8, 1972, 1600Z. 130. Telegram 4147 From the Embassy in Morocco to the Department of State, September 8, 1972, 1600Z.1

September 8, 1972, 1600Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY RABAT 04147
R 081600Z SEP 72

50

ACTION AF-18

INFO OCT-01 EUR-20 T-03 OMB-01 PM-06 NSC-10 SS-14 RSC-01 CIAE-00 INR-06 NSAE-00 DODE-00 L-03 PRS-01 RSR-01/085 W 068234

R 0781600Z SEP 72

FM

AMEMBASSY RABAT

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 6892

INFO

AMEMBASSY PARIS

AMEMBASSY MADRID

RUESKRAXAMEMBASSY TUNIS 2441

AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

USINT ALGIERS

AMCONSUL CASABLANCA

AMCONSUL TANGIER

USCINCEUR

COMNAVTRACOM

SUBJECT:

AUDIENCE WITH KING HASSAN

1. SUMMARY: KING HASSAN CONVINCED THAT MEDBOUH AND OUFKIR WERE MANIPULATED BUT SAYS HE DOES NOT KNOW BY WHOM; IS DETERMINED TO CLEANSE MILITARY ESTABLISHMENT; DESIRES ESTABLISH DEMOCRATIC RULE BY MAJORITY UNDER LEGITIMACY OF MONARCHY; COUNTS ON ELECTIONS AND NEW PARLIAMENT TO PROMOTE THIS; LOOKED WELL AND REFLECTED CONFIDENCE IN HIS ABILITY TO CONTINUE MANAGING AFFAIRS OF STATE. END SUMMARY.

2. AT 8:00 P.M. ON SEPTEMBER 7 I WAS RECEIVED IN AUDIENCE BY KING HASSAN AT THE SKHIRAT PALACE. AS INSTRUCTED, I REITERATED TO KING OUR PLEASURE AND RELIEF THAT HE HAD SUCESSFULLY OVERCOME SHAMEFUL ATTEMPT AGAINST HIS LIFE, AND OUR DEEP AND SYMPATHETIC CONCERN WITH PROBLEMS HE NOW FACING. I ADDED THAT I HAD ALSO BEEN INSTRUCTED TO SEEK HIS PERSONAL ASSESSMENT OF CURRENT SITATION, WITH PARTICULAR REFERENCE TO ARMY AND POLITICAL PARTIES.

3. AFTER THANKING ME WARMLY FOR THESE SENTIMENTS, KING BEGAN BY SAYING THAT HE WAS CONVINCED THAT BOTH GENERALS MEOBOUH AND OUFKIR HAD BEEN “MANIPULATED.” HE WAS FRANK TO SAY, HOWEVER, THAT HE HAD NO EVIDENCE WHICH WOULD TELL HIM “WHAT NAME OR WHAT FLAG” TO ATTACH TO THE MANIPULATORS. WHEN I ASKED KING WHY HE WAS SO CERTAIN SOME OUTSIDE ELEMENT WAS BEHIND THE TWO UNSUCCESSFUL ATTEMPTS ON HIS LIFE, HE REPLIED THAT IT “HAD TO BE SO” BECAUSE NEITHER MEDBOUH NOR OUFKIR COULD HAVE MANAGED TO RUN THE COUNTRY BY THEMSELVES, LACKING AS THEY DID ANY POPULAR BASE WHATSOEVER. THEY MUST HAVE COUNTED ON SOMEONE OUTSIDE TO HELP THEM, SOMEONE WHO WOULD BE WILLING FOR HIS OWN PROFIT TO PROVIDE THE ASSISTANCE WHICH THE MEDBOUH-OUFKIR CLIQUES WOULD HAVE REQUIRED IN ORDER TO MEET MOROCCO'S NEEDS AND THUS MAINTAIN THEMSELVES IN POWER. IN ORDER TO AVOID CHAOS AND BECAUSE OF THE MOROCCAN PEOPLE'S CONCERN FOR LEGITIMACY, EITHER GENERAL WOULD ALSO HAVE HAD TO FIND A MEMBER OF THE ALAOUITE DYNASTY TO USE AS A PUPPET. “I HAVE LOTS OF COUSINS, OF COURSE, BUT INTELLECTUALLY WHAT ARE THEY?” THE GENERALS WOULD HAVE HAD LITTLE HELP KING SAID. THEY MUST HAVE COUNTED ON AN OUTSIDE ELEMENT.

4. THE KING HOPED THAT THE “LIVING FORCES” OF THE NATION WOULD COME TO UNDERSTAND THAT BOTH ATTEMPTS WERE NOT DIRECTED AGAINST THE MONARCHY PER SE OR “AGAINST HIM PERSONALLY” BUT RATHER AGAINST LIBERTY AND CIVILIZATION IN MOROCCO. HAD THE MEDBOUH OR OUFKIR GROUPS BEEN SUCCESSFUL, THEY WOULD HAVE SEEN TO IT THAT THE POLITICAL PARTIES WERE PUT OUT OF ACTION PERMANENTLY AND RULE BY MILITARY JUNTA FIRMLY ESTABLISHED. “NO ONE WOULD HAVE BEEN SAFE.”

5. THE KING SAID THAT HE WAS DETERMINED TO ESTABLISH DEMOCRACY BY MAJORITY RULE UNDER THE LEGITIMACY OF THE MONARCHY. HE LOOKED TO THE FORTHCOMING ELECTIONS AND THE RESULTANT PARLIAMENT TO PROMOTE THIS. HE COULD NOT SUBSCRIBE TO THE THESIS HELD BY OUFKIR THAT UNDERDEVELOPED COUNTRIES CANNOT HAVE DEMOCRACY: EVEN IF THE OPPOSITION POLITICAL PARTIES SHOULD FIND THEMSELVES IN A MINORITY POSITION IN THE PARLIAMENT AS A RESULT OF THE ELECTIONS, THIS WOULD NOT PRECLUDE THEIR REPRESENTATIVES FROM BEING APPOINTED TO THE GOVERNMENT POSSIBLY EVEN TO THE POSITION OF PRIME MINISTER. THE KING WAS ENCOURAGED BY THE HEAVY REGISTRATION FOR THE ELECTIONS WHICH HAD TAKEN PLACE. THE PARTIES, HE SAID, HAD ORDERED THEIR MEMBERS TO REGISTER.

6. WITH REGARD TO THE ARMY, THE KING SAID THAT IT HAD TO BE “CLEANSED.” HE HAS DETERMINED THAT THOSE GUILTY OF THE EVENTS OF AUGUST 16 SHOULD BE PUNISHED “TO THE LIMIT.” THE ARMY HAD TO BE BROUGHT UNDER CONTROL. I REMARKED THAT WE HAD RECEIVED THE IMPRESSION THAT THERE WAS MUCH RESENTMENT AMONG MILITARY OFFICERS, AND A NEGATIVE ATTITUDE TOWARD HIM PERSONALLY, AS A RESULT OF HIS SHARP WORDS TO THE MILITARY AFTER AUGUST 16 AND BECAUSE THE AMMUNITION HAD BEEN TAKEN AWAY FROM MILITARY UNITS. THE KING SAID THAT THE MILITARY, BY THEIR SHAMEFUL BEHAVIOR, HAD DESERVED THE DRESSING DOWN HE GAVE THEM. FURTHERMORE, IT WAS NOT NORMAL THAT MILITARY UNITS SHOULD HAVE THEIR AMMUNITION WITH THEM; IN MOST COUNTRIES IN PEACETIME AMMUNITION WAS KEPT APART FROM THE UNITS IN SPECIAL STORAGE PLACES.

50

ACTION AF-18

INFO OCT-01 EUR-20 T-03 OMB-01 PM-06 NSC-10 SS-14 RSC-01 CIAE-00 INR-06 NSAE-00 DODE-00 L-03 PRS-01 RSR-01/085 W 068234

R 0781600Z SEP 72

FM

AMEMBASSY RABAT

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 6892

INFO

AMEMBASSY PARIS

AMEMBASSY MADRID

RUESKRAXAMEMBASSY TUNIS 2441

AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

USINT ALGIERS

AMCONSUL CASABLANCA

AMCONSUL TANGIER

USCINCEUR

COMNAVTRACOM

SECTION 2 OF 3 RABAT 4147

7. THE KING CONCLUDED BY SAYING THAT HE WAS A “FREE MAN,” LOYAL BUT NOT SUBSERVIENT TO HIS FRIENDS. SOME PEOPLE MIGHT NOT LIKE THIS, BUT HE WAS DETERMINED TO PURSUE THIS COURSE.

8. AHMED OSMAN, WHO WAS THE ONLY OTHER PERSON PRESENT DURING THE AUDIENCE, DROPPED BY THE HOUSE AFTERWARDS TO CONTINUE THE DISCUSSION. WHEN I TOLD HIM THAT WE HAD ABSOLUTELY NO INDICATION OF ANY FOREIGN MANIPULATION Of EITHER MEDBOUH OR OUFKIR, AND THAT I REALLY DID WONDER WHY THE KING SEEMED SO CERTAIN THAT THERE WAS SOMEONE BEHIND THE GENERALS, OSMAN MERELY SAID THAT THE KING HAD DEDUCED THIS BY THE LOGIC OF THE SITUATION AS HE HAD EXPRESSED IT TO ME.

9. OSMAN WENT ON TO SAY THAT THERE WAS NOTHING THE KING WOULD LIKE BETTER THAN TO BE A CONSTITUTIONAL MONARCH LIKE QUEEN ELIZABETH. “DO YOU THINK HE ENJOYS BEING SHOT AT?” IF HE FELT THERE WERE A POLITICAL STRUCTURE CAPABLE OF RUNNING THE COUNTRY, HE WOULD RETIRE TO A CONSTITUTIONAL POSITION AT ONCE. HE MIGHT EVEN, IN SUCH CIRCUMSTANCES, STEP DOWN FROM THE THRONE AND RESIDE IN MOROCCO AS A PRIVATE CITIZEN, “AS ALL HIS PROPERTY IS HERE.” HOWEVER, SUCH A POLITICAL STRUCTURE DOES NOT EXIST AND MUST BE CREATED.

10. OSMAN SAID THAT IN HIS CHARACTERISTIC FRANKNESS WITH HIS AMERICAN FRIENDS, THE KING HAD TOLD ASSISTANT SECRETARY NEWSOM DURING HIS VISIT HERE LAST YEAR THAT HE EXPECTED WITHIN HOURS OR DAYS TO ANNOUNCE THE FORMATION OF A COALITION GOVERNMENT WITH OPPOSITION REPRESENTATIVES. THE KING SAID THIS BECAUSE HE REALLY BELIEVED THAT THE OPPOSITION HAD ACCEPTED HIS OFFER OF “TEN MINISTRIES, INCLUDING THE PRIME MINISTRY, AND EVEN AN UNDER SECRETARYSHIP IN THE MINISTRY OF THF INTERIOR.” HOWEVER, WHEN HE RECEIVED NATIONAL FRONT DELEGATES WITHIN MINUTES AFTER NEWSOM'S DEPARTURE, THEY TOLD HIM TO HIS STUPEFACTION THAT INSTEAD OF ACCEPTING WHAT HE HAD OFFERED, THEY WANTED “EVERYTHING, EXCEPT DEFENSE AND P.T.T.” THIS THE KING COULD NOT AGREE TO, SINCE THE NATIONAL FRONT HAD NOT GAINED THE RIGHT THROUGH ELECTIONS TO REPRESENT THE WHOLE COUNTRY; THUS THE NEGOTIATIONS HAD FAILED. THE KING'S READINESS TO GRANT SO MANY POSTS TO THE OPPOSITION SHOWED HIS SINCERE DESIRE TO SHARE POWER. IT HAD BEEN REVEALING THAT REPRESENTATIVES OF THE NATIONAL FRONT HAD FRANKLY CONFESSED TO THE KING THAT THEY COULD NOT AGREE AMONG THEMSELVES AS TO WHO AMONG THEM SHOULD BE THE PRIME MINISTER. OSMAN CAUTIONED THAT WHAT THE POLITICAL LEADERS SAY PUBLICLY OFTEN DOES NOT REFLECT WHAT THEY REALLY THINK.

11. OSMAN HOPED THAT MOROCCO WOULD BE SPARED ANOTHER OF THE TRAUMATIC EXPERIENCES IT HAD RECENTLY HAD AND BE GIVEN THE TIME TO WORK FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT BY THE KING OF MAJORITY-RULE DEMOCRACY THE KING SO EARNESTLY DESIRED. IT, AND THE KING, DID NOT DESERVE WHAT HAD HAPPENED. I COMMENTED THAT THE KING HAD A SERIOUS PROBLEM OF IMAGE. OSMAN AGREED.

12. OSMAN SAID THAT THE PEOPLE FAVORED THE CURBING OF THE MILITARY. IT WAS FEARED BECAUSE OF THE EXCESSES IT HAD COMMITTFD AGAINST CIVILIANS. THE GOVERNMENT HAD RECEIVED REPORTS OF RESENTMENT AMONG MILITARY OFFICERS SIMILAR TO THOSE I HAD MENTIONED TO THE KING.

13. THE KING, OSMAN SAID, IS AN INTELLECTUAL. HE WOULD WELCOME SOMEONE OF HIS STATURE COMING INTO AUTHORITY SO THAT PROBLEMS COULD BE MEANINGFULLY DEBATED.

14. OSMAN CONCLUDED BY SAYING THAT THEY COUNTED ON CONTINUING US SYMPATHY AND HELP.

15. COMMENT: THE KING LOOKED AS WELL AS I HAVE EVER SEEN HIM AND SEEMED FULLY IN COMMAND OF HIMSELF. HE WAS ELOQUENT AND SELF-ASSURED AS HE DISCUSSED THE SITUATION IN RESPONSE TO MY QUESTIONS.

16. I DO NOT BELIEVE THAT HE REALLY THINKS THAT THERE WAS A FOREIGN HAND IN THE TWO PLOTS. HE FINDS IT USEFUL To ADVANCE THIS THESIS, WHICH SO EXAGGERATES THE IMPORTANCE OF MOROCCO, TO DISTRACT PEOPLE FROM THE REAL CAUSES OF THF TWO ATTEMPTS. HIS STUBBORN REFUSAL TO ADMIT THAT ANY FAILING ON HIS PART COULD HAVE BEEN RESPONSIBLE FOR WHAT HAS HAPPENED WAS APPARENT IN THE CONVERSATION.

50

ACTION AF-18

INFO OCT-01 EUR-20 T-03 OMB-01 PM-06 NSC-10 SS-14 RSC-01 CIAE-00 INR-06 NSAE-00 DODE-00 L-03 PRS-01 RSR-01/085 W 068234

R 0781600Z SEP 72

FM

AMEMBASSY RABAT

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 6892

INFO

AMEMBASSY PARIS

AMEMBASSY MADRID

RUESKRAXAMEMBASSY TUNIS 2441

AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

USINT ALGIERS

AMCONSUL CASABLANCA

AMCONSUL TANGIER

USCINCEUR

COMNAVTRACOM

FINAL SECTION OF 3 RABAT 4147

17. AS TO HOW HE INTENDS TO PROCEED OVER THE COMING WEEKS TO ASSURE THE CONTINUATION OF ROYAL RULE IN MOROCCO, IT WOULD APPEAR THAT HE INTENDS TO TRY TO LURE THE POLITICAL PARTIES INTO PARTICIPATING IN THE ELECTIONS AND THAT HE MAY WELL BE PREPARED TO SEE THE RESULTANT PARLIAMENT EXERCISE A WIDER DEGREE OF AUTHORITY. MEANWHILE, HE WILL PURGE THE ARMY IN ORDER TO TRY TO REMOVE ANY FURTHER DANGER FROM THAT QUARTER. I DO NOT THINK THAT HE HAS ANY INTENTION OF ABDICATING, AND I SHOULD IMAGINE THAT IF A PARLIAMENT WITH BROADER POWERS SHOULD BE ESTABLISHED, IT WILL HAVE SOME DIFFICULTY IN PREVENTING ROYAL ENCROACHMENT UPON ITS PREROGATIVES.

18. I NOW AM GLAD THE DEPARTMENT INSTRUCTED ME TO SEE THE KING. I HAD BEEN RELUCTANT TO SEEK AN AUDIENCE FOR FEAR THAT UNDER THE LINGERING EFFECTS OF AUGUST 16 HE MIGHT SAY SOMETHING UNPALATABLE ABOUT OUR MILITARY PRESENCE. HOWEVER, HE WAS EXCEEDINGLY CORDIAL AND MADE NO REFERENCE WHATSOEVER TO OUR MILITARY OR TO ANY EMBARRASSMENT ARISING FROM THE AMERICAN ANGLE TO THE AUGUST 16 EVENTS. NONETHELESS, THE THESIS HE SET FORTH WITH REGARD TO THE “NAME OR FLAG” WHICH WAS BEHIND THE PLOTTERS COULD OBVIOUSLY BE APPLIED TO THE UNITED STATES IF ONE WISHED TO DO SO. WE BELIEVE THERE ARE THOSE IN HIS ENTOURAGE WHO ARE ALLEGING US COMPLICITY IN THE AUGUST 16 ATTACK. I REITERATE MY BELIEF, HOWEVER, THAT THE KING DOES NOT REALLY THINK WE WERE INVOLVED; HE IS USING THE FOREIGN FACTOR THEORY TO DISTRACT ATTENTION FROM THE REGIME'S AND HIS PERSONAL FAILINGS AND TO KEEP PEOPLE, INCLUDING OURSELVES, OFF BALANCE.
GDS

ROCKWELL

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 MOR. Secret. It was repeated to Paris, Madrid, Tunis, Tripoli, Algiers, Casablanca, Tangier, USCINCEUR, and COMNAVTRACOM.

131. Special National Intelligence Estimate 61-1-72, September 14, 1972 131. Special National Intelligence Estimate 61-1-72, September 14, 19721

September 14, 1972

SPECIAL NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
SNIE 61-1-72
14 September 1972

PROSPECTS FOR THE MOROCCAN MONARCHY

SUMMARY NOTE

This estimate was requested by the Department of State to assess the outlook for the Moroccan monarchy in the light of the 16 August coup attempt. It is not intended to supersede NIE 61-72, “The Outlook for Morocco”, dated 15 June 1972, SECRET, since the analysis of underlying social, political, and economic issues in that paper remains generally valid.

This paper concludes that King Hassan is in a seriously weakened position and that a successful attack on him could take place at any time. He retains some assets and is a skillful political manipulator, but he devotes insufficient effort to governing. The loyalty of the military establishment, on which the throne has traditionally relied, is severely strained and the King can no longer count upon his inherited role as religious and temporal leader to sustain him.

In the near term, an attempt against Hassan is most likely to come as a blow by a handful of military officers bent on ousting a monarch whom they now believe is an obstacle to Morocco's progress. Over the longer term, a move against Hassan could come as a part of broader deterioration in the body politic, perhaps including a breakdown in public order or the development of a revolutionary movement. Since Hassan has isolated himself from most significant sources of support in the country the odds are that one or another attempt against him will succeed.

THE ESTIMATE

1. In little more than a year, there have been two attempts to eliminate King Hassan. The details of the 16 August attack on his plane and the planning behind it are still unclear, but there is good evidence that the Minister of Defense and strong man of the Moroccan Armed Forces, Major General Mohamed Oufkir, was implicated in the plot. In any case, it is widely believed in Morocco that he directed the attempt and that he was killed for this reason. There do not appear to be any officers capable of replacing Oufkir as a strong commander of the Moroccan Armed Forces. King Hassan has abolished the position of Defense Minister and has assumed direct control of the military establishment.

2. It is noteworthy that both the July 1971 attempt to overthrow the King and the August 1972 effort were carried out by small groups of military officers. We have little hard evidence about the beliefs and ultimate aims of these men. Morocco has fundamental social and economic problems, and discontent is growing in many parts of the population, a state of unease which is reflected—though rather ineffectively—in the political parties. As far as we know, however, there were no contacts between the plotters and the civilian political leaders. The military plotters were almost exclusively conservative, rural Berbers—the majority element in the officer corps. Available evidence indicates that the would-be regicides aimed at eliminating the King and getting rid of the corrupt and wasteful entourage that surrounds him. The officers did not appear bent on bringing about sweeping social and economic change, although they sought to constrict the monarchy's power secretly at least. Relatively few officers were directly involved in each attempt, and among others who may have had advance knowledge none appears to have been sufficiently loyal to report the plans to the palace.

3. Both attempts took place in almost complete isolation from the general public. There was little enthusiasm expressed for either, and few among the populace seem to care whether Hassan survives or not. In his 11 years in power, Hassan has expended much of the political capital he inherited from his father—the religious and political legitimacy of a three hundred year-old dynasty, the throne's prominent role in the struggle for independence, and a measure of popular regard for the monarch's effectiveness as a ruler.

4. Following the two attempted coups, King Hassan has expressed his determination to go on ruling his country as before, but he cannot be sure who is loyal to him and who is not. Members of the officer corps cannot be sure of their own position or that of their brothers in uniform. The ministers and senior officials for whom service to Hassan has been the route to riches are bound to consider whether their fortunes are now tied to a waning star. Opposition political leaders will consider whether recent events have made the time ripe for them to press Hassan for a share of power in the government or whether they should bide their time. These and other forces—students, labor organizations, religious leaders—will be jockeying for advantage in the months to come.

Hassan's Position: Liabilities and Assets

5. The key question of what effect this second coup attempt will have on Hassan himself is yet to be answered. He has twice shown an admirable capacity to escape from a hail of bullets and take charge of the situation. He has also over the years demonstrated great ability at political manipulation, balancing this political party, that clique or that person off against one another. But he has also devoted a large part of his time to the pursuit of pleasure. If Hassan cannot buy the loyalty of his officers and administrators nor count upon his inherited role as religious and temporal leader to win him popular support, his future would seem to lie in changing his method of governing and giving the appearance at least of having the welfare of his people at heart. The coup attempt of 1971 did not teach him anything in this regard. The attempt of 1972 may, but we doubt it strongly. His initial response has been to blame virtually everyone else in Morocco for the conditions that brought attempts on his life. He does not seem to recognize that his own performance can be faulted; he is a very traditional monarch in the sense that he believes authority is his by right of inherited status and does not need to be earned by effective governing of his realm.

6. Traditionally the Moroccan military establishment has been a basic prop for the throne, providing not only the power to maintain internal security but a cadre of favored people from which appointments to key provincial administrative positions were made. There are no doubt many officers who remain loyal to the King, but he cannot be sure who they are. He reacted to the disloyalty of a few by giving a scathing talk to senior officers of the Royal Moroccan Forces in which he impugned their integrity and that of the institution of which they are a part. Furthermore, this denunciation was broadcast to the entire population. He has taken over the running of the military establishment on grounds that he cannot trust any of his military subordinates; in these circumstances the loyalty of the military has been put under severe strain.

7. Since Hassan's reliance on Oufkir (who had been close to King Hassan and to his father) turned out to have becn misplaced, Hassan must worry deeply about the loyalty of others. With Oufkir dead there is a gap in the administration which cannot be readily filled. Temporarily, the King has appointed General Driss Ben Omar to assist him in administering the armed forces. But the General is not considered to be a strong person; moreover, he is not in good health and has the further disadvantage of being an Arab in charge of a largely Berber officer corps.

8. In the aftermath of the two coup attempts there has been considerable weeding out of top levels in the Moroccan Armed Forces. In contrast to the 15 generals serving in June 1971, there are now only four. By purging the top echelon of the armed forces, however, Hassan also runs the risk of putting into important positions officers in the ranks of major to colonel who may be even more disaffected with the monarchy. The younger of these men, frequently better trained and educated than their seniors, appear to have chafed under the command of older generals, many of whom were pampered by the King and had become tainted with his dissolute life style. The purge has removed, however, virtually all the senior officers who had followings, and it may take some time before new leading personalities appear and cliques form around them.

9. We have at present very little direct evidence as to attitudes of individuals or groups within the Moroccan officer corps. The fact that two groups, within a period of little more than a year, have taken the risks involved in an assassination attempt should be convincing evidence of deep dissatisfaction in the officer corps with Hassan's rule. We doubt that Hassan's purges have eradicated this dissatisfaction. Indeed, there are signs that his tongue-lashing and withdrawal of ammunition from military units has turned others against him. The attempts of 1971 and 1972 were made by officers who evidently sought more efficient government, but were conservative in political outlook. As younger officers move up in seniority we believe the attitude of would-be coup-makers is likely to change, moving toward more radical social and political forms.

10. There are more persons of Arab origin among younger officers and thus a greater chance of any given individual being influenced by political ideas in other Arab states. Libya has been loud in praise of Moroccan plotters, although there is no evidence of Libyan contact with either the 1971 or 1972 plotters. The Libyans are assisting Moroccan civilian exiles, but they appear to have no direct working relationship with dissidents inside Morocco. Moreover, Qaddafi's regime commands little respect in the Moroccan Armed Forces. The Algerians, who are more likely to have influence in Morocco, have no love for Hassan or the monarchy, but are concerned that a successor might be worse from their point of view. Hence, Algiers will be cautious about supporting anti-Hassan elements.

11. Hassan does have some assets. The countryside, loyal to the monarchy in a passive way, provides a backdrop of stability. The King cannot count on rural support to deter opposition initiatives, however. Such support as he derives from these grass roots is diffused and disorganized and, in the King's mind, probably exaggerated. Moreover, the rural populace is largely unarmed and would not constitute an effective counterforce in the event of further blows at him.

12. There is a substantial number of court officers, senior officials and ministers, such as Prime Minister Karim-Lamrani and the Benhima brothers (Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Interior), who owe their positions and frequently their wealth to Hassan's favor. Some of these will serve him well, either out of conviction that his way is correct or perhaps as a consequence of seeing no alternative for themselves but to support his rule. Others probably will distance themselves somewhat in an effort to avoid ruination if the royal house is overthrown. But virtually all of these people will devote a certain amount of time and energy to insuring that they appear loyal to King Hassan, to assessing the loyalty of others, and to putting assets away abroad for the future. This, plus Hassan's assumption of more direct control of day-to-day decisions, is likely to result in a decline in governmental efficiency. The King himself has set a poor standard of attention to administration, budgetary matters, and the like, and shows no sign of changing.

13. The intelligence apparatus of the government is likely to absorb a great amount of the King's attention. It has already failed to alert him of two potentially disastrous blows at the throne and he must try to insure that he is not taken by surprise a third time. His principal intelligence officer is the experienced Colonel Ahmed Dlimi who heads the palace intelligence service. Dlimi has served Hassan in a variety of intelligence and security posts over the past 10 years. We presume, however, that Hassan will not depend on one service alone but will also try to place loyal officers in charge of the military intelligence department and of the security apparatus within the Ministry of Interior. He will no doubt be willing to put up with the inefficiency of a number of competing services in the hope of increasing the chances of receiving warning of impending danger.

14. The King will seek to maintain his control by balancing various military and security forces. He reportedly plans to reduce the size of the regular army (now about 50,000) and may lean more on the gendarmerie and other internal security forces. In the near term at least, Hassan probably could count on these forces, which total 12,000 men spread around the country, and on various elite units of the army to crack down on manifestations of public disorder. The gendarmerie has received more favorable treatment than the armed forces and has shown no signs of disloyalty in either the 1971 or 1972 coup attempts.

15. Hassan also benefits from the lack of unity and common purpose among those who oppose him. The legal civilian political parties in Morocco wish to share some of Hassan's power. They have little in common with the military establishment. Moreover, neither the politicians nor the military are likely to believe that they can force Hassan into the role of a constitutional monarch. The parties, principally the Istiqlal and its offshoot the National Union of Popular Forces, have steadily lost effectiveness over the last 10 years or so. They have had little success in attracting support from an apathetic populace. Their very poor performance in office in the late 1950s and early 1960s made it relatively easy for Hassan to push them aside even before he assumed direct rule and suspended parliament in 1965. The leadership of both parties is far from inspiring, is given to quarrels, and has been readily out-maneuvered by the King.

16. Hassan's technique has been to hint at certain limited reforms, to dispense some royal favors, and to promise a chance at office—and the perquisites that go with it—for political leaders willing to collaborate or cooperate with him. He has generally held out just enough promise to attract the more venal party leaders and to divide party councils about the advisability of going along with him. And on at least one occasion he has double-crossed the parties by making a political move during a period when they understood him to be awaiting their reply on a royal offer.

17. In present circumstances the political leaders face a dilemma. If the King offers them some role in the government, as he may well do if he permits elections under the new constitution, they would risk alienating some of their supporters by accepting, since Hassan almost certainly would not offer them truly meaningful political power, nor even a chance at it through free elections. If, on the other hand, they choose to go into outright opposition, say employing tactics of public meetings and demonstrations, they risk severe and violent repression from the security forces. In this situation our best guess is that, while some political leaders may reach an accommodation with the King, most will try to straddle the fence as long as possible and in effect do very little but make some verbal remonstrations against the monarchy. They may be influenced in this course by a judgment that the King will not last for long.

Can Hassan Survive?

18. Hassan will be disposed to employ every manipulative weapon at his command—including the rearrangement of foreign ties—in order to maintain his throne. Morocco presently has close bonds to France and to the US. The former is the major source of foreign investment and is the principal foreign cultural influence in Morocco; the latter supplies some $45 million annually in aid, mostly in surplus food. Hassan himself is a Francophile, and he is basically friendly to the US, but the foreign ties he favors are not generally popular in Morocco. Prior to the latest coup attempt, he had been increasing the French role in his internal security apparatus; he may now attempt to engage the US more firmly in defense of his regime, calling for greater intelligence support and other forms of assistance in the security sphere, despite the domestic opposition that would follow such a move.

19. If he comes to sense that political party leaders are making headway against him, however, he probably would want to divert attention to other matters. The classic maneuver in such circumstances is pandering to xenophobic sentiment. He might well choose to move against French investment in Morocco or to reassert Moroccan claims to Spanish territories in North Africa. In addition, the US military presence in Morocco,* principally the communications facilities at Kenitra, could appear to him as a particularly inviting target. Hassan probably has a nagging suspicion that somehow one of the scores of Americans at the training mission in Kenitra could have given warning of impending trouble on 16 August. In any event, he knows that civilian political forces, particularly the Istiqlal Party, are opposed to the US military presence. Hassan is aware that some circles in Morocco favor the US presence, but circumstances might develop in which he concluded that he would gain important nationalist support by ejecting the Americans.

20. The elements of classic tragedy are present in Morocco. Some monarchs—Hussein and the Shah come to mind—have faced similarly parlous situations and survived. But they had such assets as a body of loyal subordinates, a disposition to work at the business of governing, and a willingness to make the throne an agent of change. Hassan has lost the support of most important groups in the country and the people generally are apathetic as to his fate. Moreover, he is a dilettante, is convinced of his own righteousness and seems unable to comprehend that his survival and that of his dynasty depends, at the very least, on winning the support of some influential groups and on administering the country more effectively.

21. Another effort to remove Hassan could come very shortly or it could be delayed for years. In the near term, it is most likely to come as those of 1971 and 1972 have a blow by a handful of military officers bent on removing a monarch whom they now believe is an obstacle to Morocco's progress. In short, further blows at the King appear certain; he is not of a character to abdicate and go into exile. He will stay and try to ward off blows, even though there is no way of knowing when or where they will come. But since Hassan has cut himself off from most significant sources of support in the country, the odds are that one or another attempt against him will succeed.

22. Even if Hassan stays in power for a year or two, there are potential sources of formidable political trouble in Morocco. Unemployment and poverty are endemic and growing in the cities which, with their large numbers of impoverished slum dwellers and frustrated students and intellectuals, are breeding grounds for dissent. Organized labor, the student organizations, or radical political groups such as the communists' illegal Party for Liberation and Socialism may come to believe that the recent blows show King Hassan's weakness. They could try to further weaken the King by such revolutionary tactics as mass demonstrations, general strikes, and riots, and perhaps even by turning to urban terrorism. Hassan would certainly respond to such development with vigor. There is a chance that some of the forces he relies on to maintain order might be unwilling to take serious risks on behalf of a King to whom they are no longer loyal. And if violence were to persist over an extended period, it could add a very unsettling element to Hassan's control, perhaps leading to a breakdown in public order.

After Hassan?

23. Just what Morocco would look like without Hassan is most difficult to delineate at this point in time. The makeup of the forces that toppled him would of course do much to determine the nature of the regime that succeeds him. A successful coup by another group of conservative Berber officers could produce a government not notably different in political outlook than the present one, but presumably less corrupt and possibly more efficient. On the other hand, the initiative might be seized by more socialist-minded officers from the middle or lower ranks. Their orientation could be basically “Morocco-first” and reformist, or it could be of a revolutionary cast and more militantly Arab.

24. Any successor government, even a regency, would encounter an increase in the divisive tendencies characteristic of the country. For all Hassan's extravagance and inattention to the nuts and bolts of government, the royal house has provided a certain focus for the disparate elements of Moroccan society.

25. Given the problems it would face, almost any government that took over from Hassan would seek to increase its own popularity by a cheap and easy victory. The foreign presence in Morocco would almost certainly come under attack. Inviting the US to leave its military communications facilities would be an obvious move for any government. A nationalist one would almost certainly do this—and probably also reduce the French presence. Even a conservative regime would be tempted to take anti-foreign measures to attract the support of political elements in the cities. Under almost any conceivable circumstances, there would be substantially less willingness to permit a continued US military presence than we have enjoyed since Morocco became independent.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 361, Subject Files, National Intelligence Estimates. Secret; Controlled Dissemination. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, Defense, and NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. The Director of CIA submitted this estimate with the concurrence of all members of the USIB with the exception of the representatives of the FBI and the Treasury who abstained on the grounds that it was outside their jurisdiction.

* The US military presence in Morocco consists of a training team for the Moroccan Air Force and a communications school at Kenitra, plus a naval communications facility at two sites near Kenitra, which serves the Sixth Fleet. Some 4,000 personnel and dependents are present in the country.

132. National Security Study Memorandum 160, Washington, September 14, 1972 132. National Security Study Memorandum 160, Washington, September 14, 19721

Washington, September 14, 1972

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
September 14, 1972

TO:

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT:

Policy Toward Morocco

National Security Study Memorandum 160

The President has directed a study of US policy toward Morocco and the options open to the United States in light of possible developments in Morocco following from the recent attempted coup-d'etat.

This study should identify US interests in Morocco as precisely as possible, evaluate their relative importance and, based on our best estimate of the future, delineate the possible approaches we might take to best serve these interests. The study should include but not be limited to consideration of the following factors: —the political, economic and strategic importance of Morocco to the United States; —the prospect for the continued role of King Hassan and the implications of both his demise or continuance in power for US interests;

—possible successor governments to the monarchy and their implications for US interests;

—the importance of the US naval communications complex at Kenitra and the VOA relay station at Tangier and the prospects for their continuance in Morocco;

—the programs and resources we are likely to have available to devote to Morocco in the future;

—the role of influential third parties such as France and Algeria.

The study should be prepared by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for Africa and should be submitted not later than October 5 for consideration by the Senior Review Group.

[Haig signed for] Henry A. Kissinger

cc: Director, Office of Management and Budget Administrator, Agency for International Development Director, U.S. Information Agency

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 365, Subject Files, National Security Study Memoranda (NSSM's), Nos. 104-206. Secret.

133. Telegram Secto 80/3838 From Secretary of State Rogers to the Department of State, October 12, 1972, 1744Z. 133. Telegram Secto 80/3838 From Secretary of State Rogers to the Department of State, October 12, 1972, 1744Z.1

October 12, 1972, 1744Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
USMISSION USUN NY 3838
R 121744Z OCT 72

51

ACTION SS-25

INFO OCT-01 CCO-00 SSO-00 FILE-01/027 W 063459

R 121744Z OCT 72

FM USMISSION USUN NY

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 3970

INFO

AMEMBASSY RABAT

AMEMBASSY MADRID

USUN 3838
SECTO 80

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION:

FM BENHIMA (MOROCCO)
OCTOBER 11, 1972, 3:00 PM.
WALDORF 35A

1. PARTICIPANTS: MOROCCO—FM BENHIMA; AMBASSADOR SNOUSSI; US-THE SECRETARY; MR. NEWSOM; MR. CONNORS (REPORTING OFFICER); MR. DE SEABRA (INTERPRETER).

2. SUMMARY: FM BENHIMA SAID THAT KING HAS ABSOLUTE CONFIDENCE IN US AND ALL PRESS REPORTS TO CONTRARY ARE FALSE. BENHIMA SAID THAT AS KING MOVES TO BROADEN GOM BY DRAWING IN OPPOSITION ELEMENTS, MOROCCO'S POSITION ON CERTAIN ISSUES WILL HARDEN. IN THIS REGARD, FM SAID IT IS IMPERATIVE THAT QUESTION OF US BASES IN MOROCCO BE RE-EXAMINED BEFORE PRESSURES RISE FROM NEW GOVERNMENT LIKELY TO EMERGE IN COMING MONTHS.

3. FM BENHIMA EXPRESSED KING'S HOPE THAT SECRETARY VISIT MOROCCO. SECRETARY REPLIED HE IS LOOKING FORWARD TO ANOTHER VISIT AND WOULD ENJOY ROUND OF GOLF WITH KING. BENHIMA REPLIED THAT KING IS NOW TOO OCCUPIED TO PLAY VERY OFTEN PUT WOULD BE PREPARED TO ARRANGE A MATCH.

4. POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: FM BENHIMA REVIEWED POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS IN MOROCCO, DESCRIBING TWO ATTEMPTS ON KING'S LIFE WITHIN PAST TWO YEARS AS EFFORT BY CERTAIN TRUSTED MEN WITHIN ARMY TO OVERTURN KING FOR REASONS NOT COMPLETELY CLEAR. HE SAID ARMY AS WHOLE WAS NOT INVOLVED. BENHIMA SAID HASSAN HAS TAKEN ENLIGHTENED ATTITUDE IN EXAMINING WAYS TO ENSURE STABILITY. FM SAID WORLD PRESS HAS NOT PROVIDED ACCURATE DESCRIPTION OF CURRENT MOROCCAN POLITICAL SCENE. KING IS NOW SEEKING CLOSER COOPERATION WITH THOSE ELEMENTS OF OPPOSITION WHICH SUPPORT FUNDAMENTAL MOROCCAN INSTITUTIONS. BENHIMA SAID GOM HOPES THAT TALKS WITH OPPOSITION WILL LEAD TO BROADENING OF GOVERNMENT AND RETURN TO PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM. BENHIMA SAID THAT FRENCH AND THIRD WORLD PRESS HAS CARRIED MANY FALSE STORIES CONCERNING MOROCCAN/US RELATIONS.FM EMPHASIZED THAT KING HAS ABSOLUTE CONFIDENCE IN US AND ALL REPORTS TO CONTRARY BELONG IN WORLD OF FANTASY. SECRETARY TOLD FM THAT US PLACES HIGH VALUE ON ITS RELATIONS WITH MOROCCO AND WISHES SEE MOROCCO MAINTAIN STABILITY AND CONTINUE PROGRESS IT HAS MADE. SECRETARY SAID PRESIDENT AND OTHER MEMBERS OF USG HAVE HIGHEST REGARD FOR KING. RECOUNTING PRESIDENT EISENHOWER'S GREAT RESPECT FOR KING, SECRETARY SAID PRESIDENT NIXON HAS SAME FEELINGS. SECRETARY EXPRESSED HOPE THAT KING WILL CONTINUE HAVE SUCCESSFUL CAREER AND THAT UNFORTUNATE EVENTS OF PAST WILL NOT BE REPEATED.

5. US BASES: FM BENHIMA SAID THAT AS GOM BROADENS AS RESULT INCREASED PARTICIPATION BY OPPOSITION, ITS POSITIONS ON CERTAIN ISSUES MAY HARDEN. ONE ISSUE IS THAT OF US BASES IN MOROCCO. BENHIMA SAID THAT WORLD SCENE HAS CHANGED SUBSTANTIALLY SINCE 1963 WHEN JOINT COMMUNIQUE ESTABLISHED US BASES IN MOROCCO, NEED FOR BASES IS NOT NOW SO IMPERATIVE. IN THESE CIRCUMSTANCES, GOM WOULD LIKE EARLY OPPORTUNITY TO RE-EXAMINE ENTIRE QUESTION WITH US. BENHIMA SAID IT IS NOT QUESTION OF CLOSING ALL BASES OR REMOVING ALL US TECHNICIANS. HOWEVER, THREE BASES NOW IN MOROCCO (INCLUDED KENITRA) MIGHT BE REDUCED TO TWO. FM SAID THAT WHEN KING PARTICIPATES IN AFRICAN OR NON-ALIGNED GATHERINGS, OTHERS CRITICIZE HIM FOR PERMITTING US TO MAINTAIN BASES IN MOROCCO. KING CANNOT ARGUE FROM POINT OF VIEW OF SELF-INTEREST. US IS NOT IN MOROCCO DEFEND IT. IN SPAIN, THERE ARE WELL-KNOWN ARRANGEMENTS FOR US FINANCIAL AND MILITARY ASSISTANCE. IN MOROCCO THERE IS NO SUCH JUSTIFICATION; GOM PROVIDES BASES TO US ONLY BECAUSE OF ITS FRIENDSHIP FOR US. BENHIMA ADDED THAT MOROCCO ECONOMY DOES NOT EVEN BENEFIT INDIRECTLY FROM BASES: US TECHNICIANS AT KENITRA RECEIVE ALL THEIR SUPPLIES FROM US. SECRETARY ASKED WHETHER CRITICISM BY OTHER COUNTRIES OF US BASES IN MOROCCO DOES NOT CONSTITUTE INTERFERENCE IN MOROCCAN INTERNAL AFFAIRS. BENHIMA AGREED BUT RETURNED TO ARGUMENT THAT CONDITIONS OVER PAST TEN YEARS HAVE CHANGED NOTING THAT US HAS CLOSED BASES MENTIONED (WHEELUS) AND ALTERED BASE ARRANGEMENTS ELSEWHERE.FM SAID KING HAS SHOWN HIS INDEPENDENCE BY MAINTAINING BASES IN FACE OF PRESSURE. BENHIMA SAID THAT SITUATION SHOULD BE RE-EXAMINED NOW SO THAT MOROCCO CAN TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION INTERESTS OF US BEFORE PRESSURES RISE FROM NEW GOVERNMENT. SECRETARY ASKED WHEN NEW GOVERNMENT LIKELY TO EMERGE. BENHIMA SAID IT IS NOT YET CLEAR BUT SUGGESTED PROBABLY BEFORE APRIL. SECRETARY SAID WE WOULD BE BACK IN TOUCH ON THIS MATTER.

6. SPANISH SAHARA: FM SAID ADDITIONAL ISSUE OF CONCERN TO KING IS THAT OF SPANISH SAHARA. MOROCCO IS CONCERNED THAT SPAIN IS NOT APPROACHING MATTER IN REASSURING WAY. WHILE MOROCCO AGREED WITH SPAIN TO TAKE MATTER TO UN, SPAIN HAS ABSTAINED ON ALL UN RESOLUTIONS FOR PAST TWO YEARS. OPPOSITION PARTIES ARE VERY CONCERNED, AS ARE OTHERS IN MOROCCO. BENHIMA SAID KING COULD ACHIEVE NATIONAL UNITY VERY QUICKLY BY CHALLENGING SPAIN ON THIS ISSUE, BUT WOULD OF COURSE NOT PRECIPITATE SUCH ACTION. FM SAID MOROCCO IS PREPARED TO GIVE SPAIN PARTICIPATION IN SAHARA PHOSPHATES AND EVEN TO ALLOW BASES TO PROTECT ITS POSITION IN CANARY ISLANDS. BENHIMA SAID THAT MOROCCO IS VERY CONCERNED ABOUT INCREASED LIBYAN ACTIVITY IN SPANISH SAHARA, NOTING THAT IF LIBYANS PROVIDED ARMS SO WOULD MOROCCO. FM NOTED THAT PRC AND USSR ARE ALSO ACTIVE IN AREA, AS WELL AS ALGERIA. BENHIMA EXPRESSED HOPE THAT US COULD HELP PERSUADE SPAIN TO TAKE MORE RESPONSIBLE POSITION ON ISSUE. SECRETARY SAID THAT US CANNOT BECOME INVOLVED IN THIS MATTER; THAT IT IS SOMETHING TO BE WORKED OUT BETWEEN SPAIN AND MOROCCO. SECRETARY NOTED HE HAD COMMUNICATED SAME WORD TO SPAIN.
GES

ROGERS

1 Source: National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, DEF 15 MOR-US. Confidential; Exdis. It was repeated to Rabat and Madrid.

134. Analytical Summary, Washington, November 28, 1972 134. Analytical Summary, Washington, November 28, 19721

Washington, November 28, 1972

ANALYTICAL SUMMARY - NSSM 160
Policy toward Morocco

Following the second coup attempt in a little over one year against King Hassan of Morocco, NSSM 160 was issued asking for a study of US policy toward Morocco and an evaluation of our interests there. The study prepared [next tab - “NSSM 160 Study"] was to identify US interests as precisely as possible, evaluate their relative importance, and delineate alternative approaches that we might take to serve those interests. Attached to the NSSM 160 options paper [small tab marked “SNIE”]are a Special NIE, “Prospects for the Moroccan Monarchy,” as well as a detailed fact sheet on Morocco and contingency papers on the Kenitra communications complex and the Voice of America relay station at Tangier.

The operational situation with which we are dealing is this: Foreign Minister Benhima told Secretary Rogers at the UN that the King would like to review the US military presence in Morocco at an early opportunity. Since then, the general outline of Moroccan thinking has emerged as follows: —They would like the US to consolidate its facilities from three to two. This means closing the Kenitra training base (of little intrinsic importance to us, but of high visibility), but continuing at Sidi Yahia and Bouknadel, two important elements in the US naval communications network in the Mediterranean and eastern Atlantic.

—Morocco would like a higher “rent” payment for the remaining facilities. Our current aid effort is not formally linked to the use of the three facilities, and the Moroccans would like to establish this link, citing our arrangements with Spain as a model.

—Finally, Morocco wants more control of the US facilities. Some Moroccans still have lingering doubts over the US role in the most recent assassination attempt against the King.

This analytical summary will be organized around the assessment of the situation contained in the options paper and the SNIE; the evaluation of US interests; and the policy options proposed.

Current Situation in Morocco and Outlook for the Future

—The August 16 coup and assassination attempt against Hassan has left the Moroccan military divided and badly shaken. Hassan has taken direct control of the armed forces, has withdrawn their ammunition, has publicly berated them, and has relieved senior officers of their commands. Morale and loyalty are both low, and another coup attempt from within the armed forces could come at any time.

—The King's reaction to the most recent attempt on his life has been to blame everyone but himself. He shows no signs of preparing to change his style of rule, nor does he devote much time or energy to the business of governing. Unlike Jordan's King Hussein and the Shah of Iran, King Hassan does not sense the need to bring about reforms as a way of bolstering the monarchy. He does not readily take advice, and shows no signs of changing his ostentatious personal life-style.

—The King is unlikely to make a real opening to the opposition that would allow it to share power and responsibility with him. After going through the motions of consulting with opposition parties with a view toward broadening the base of the regime, the King has named his brother-in-law as Prime Minister, who in turn has formed a government of unimpressive technicians and totally lacking in opposition members. Elections are promised for next spring, but for the moment the political atmosphere in the country is rather bleak.

—The French and Algerians, as influential third parties, continue to support Hassan, but are hedging their bets in case he falls by keeping in touch with possible successor leaders. The Libyans remain actively hostile to Hassan, but with little capability to act. The real danger to Hassan is internal, not external.

—As a means of staying in power by striking a nationalist pose, the King may try to move against the large foreign presence in Morocco, although the urgency of his doing so is less now that his attempt at reconciliation with the opposition has failed. US facilities at the Kenitra complex would be particularly vulnerable. Already the King has said that the American presence should be the subject of new talks with the US. Any successor government would be even more likely to move against the US presence.

—Despite the apparent odds against him, Hassan still has some assets that may help him stay in power. The countryside appears to remain passively loyal; the Gendarmerie seems to be a reliable instrument for maintaining internal order; the opposition political parties are divided and not particularly effective; this year the economy has performed reasonably well, although long-term social and economic problems remain; new governors have been appointed in the countryside and may help improve administration there; finally, the King, on occasion, shows himself to be a skillful political manipulator, and has been able to eliminate many of his powerful opponents following two unsuccessful coup attempts.

—This evaluation adds up to a rather pessimistic assessment for Morocco. Another coup attempt seems likely in the near future, and the odds are that eventually one will succeed. The character of any new government after a successful coup is difficult to predict. A successor government is perhaps more likely to be conservative or moderately nationalist than revolutionary, but in any case it would seek to reorder its relations with influential outsiders like France and the US.

US Interests in Morocco

The options paper concludes that US interests in Morocco are important, but not vital to US security or to global and regional policy objectives.

In particular, US interests, in order of priority, are: —General Political/Diplomatic. It is in the US interest to have friendly relations with the Moroccan government as a means of furthering US objectives in the Mediterranean, Africa and the Arab world. A hostile government in Morocco could pose problems for naval access through the Strait of Gibraltar in times of crisis, and an increased Soviet presence in the country would be of concern to NATO and the Sixth Fleet. A friendly government is likely to continue to allow the US to use the VOA transmitter in Tangier, and to protect more substantial US security interests described below as well. [Comment: As imprecisely defined as it is, this interest in cordial political/diplomatic relations probably deserves its place at the top of the list. The problem is that it is not clear whether King Hassan's regime serves this interest any better than a possible successor.]

—National Security. The United States has an informal agreement with Morocco dating from 1963, whereby we provide training for the Moroccan air force on a base at Kenitra (a “Moroccanized” facility), while retaining full control over two naval communications stations at Sidi Yahia and Bouknadel. Kenitra is large and visible, but not very important to US interests, while the smaller facilities provide an essential link in the naval communications network in the Mediterranean and eastern Atlantic. Because of the presence of the facilities in Morocco, the US has use of 293 Moroccan registered frequencies. Their loss would “significantly degrade” the Navy's communication capabilities in the area. DOD is planning to complete a Fleet Satellite Communications System by early FY 1977, but until that time they view the retention of Sidi Yahia and Bouknadel, but not Kenitra, as highly important. [Comment: The DOD view tends to downplay several aspects of the communications facilities and the Moroccan frequencies. First, much of the normal naval communications load is not absolutely essential. In an emergency or crisis, the Navy, without Moroccan facilities, could communicate with the Sixth Fleet, provided that it limited its messages to those of priority importance. In a crisis, the US would also probably feel free to use Moroccan-registered frequencies, even if formal permission was lacking. Second, the Fleet Satellite system could go into effect somewhat earlier than FY 1977 if this became an urgent issue. Planning for FY 1977 assumes normal procedures and funding. Third, DOD is reluctant to admit that the Moroccan facilities can be phased out gradually and relocated elsewhere, such as in Spain. Their own contingency paper, however, indicates that in an emergency they could move to Rota, Spain, in a little over three months at a cost of well under $10 million.]

Economic-Commercial. American direct private investment in Morocco amounts to about $50 million (in contrast to French investments of nearly $3 billion). US exports to Morocco have totaled about $100 million annually in recent years, while imports have been under $10 million.

—Development. The United States has been closely involved with Morocco's development efforts through AID programs and the Peace Corps. As part of a broader interest in Morocco's stability and friendly ties to the US, we have tried to promote economic growth and some social development. Morocco's long- term prospects are closely related to progress in these areas. The US has an interest in being associated with programs that add to the well-being of ordinary Moroccans, not just to that of the monarchy.

Policy Options

The key question for the US in Morocco is how best to protect its interests: by continuing current policy or even increasing support for the monarchy; or by disengaging, at least selectively. The King himself may move against US interests if it suits his political needs, or he may be replaced soon by a government that would ask the US to cut back on its presence.

A basic judgment is needed to inform policy choices at this point: Should the US protect against the impact of abrupt loss of its interests in Morocco by hedging its bets and, in the case of the communications facilities, transferring some functions to other locations: or are our interests of such importance and so difficult to assure without a friendly regime in Morocco that we should continue, or perhaps increase, our support for Hassan. In the former case, the risk is that our moves toward disengagement may weaken Hassan and lead him to retaliate; in the latter case, however, the problem is that if Hassan disappears, we have no strong fallback position to protect both tangible security interests and less tangible political ones.

The key issues in formulating policy toward Morocco are the US posture toward the King; the US military presence at the Kenitra complex; levels of US aid; contacts with opposition groups; and the VOA presence at Tangiers.

The paper suggests four broad alternatives: —Continue Current Policy. No changes would be made in US official or civilian presence in Morocco and US economic and military programs would continue at their present levels. Close contacts would be retained with the Palace, and occasional displays of special favors for Hassan would continue. Minimal contacts with the Opposition would go on. This option assumes that Hassan has a good chance to survive; is the best guarantor of US interests; and that any change from the status quo now would be misread by the King and his enemies. On the other hand, this policy would keep the US closely committed to Hassan, which could hurt relations with his successors; it does nothing to provide a fallback position in case the communications facilities are lost; and it ignores the volatile situation in Morocco. [Comment: Moroccan Foreign Minister Benhima has already indicated that some changes in the US military presence will be needed, or at least a larger quid pro quo will be demanded if the present arrangements are to be maintained.]

—Expand US programs in Morocco to Shore Up the King. US resources, in larger quantities, would go to Morocco to strengthen the Monarchy insofar as outside help can do so: Economic and social reforms would be pressed; displays of friendship for the King would increase. In short, the US would try to seduce Hassan into doing what is needed to protect his throne. [Comment: This is pretty much a throw-away option. Very few in the bureaucracy favor it; it probably would not work; and it ignores the squeeze on US resources for aid. In addition, it does nothing to alleviate the basic problem in Morocco—the lack of effective leadership. If the Nixon Doctrine is to be taken seriously, we cannot be expected to help Monarchs who are unwilling or unable to help themselves.]

—Disengagement. The US would begin a phased reduction in official US programs and presence in Morocco. We would plan to withdraw from the communications facilities by the end of FY 1975. The Peace Corps and AID would be cut back from their currently high levels.VOA Tangier would be partly “Moroccanized” to decrease its visibility as a US institution. Since the US already has the largest presence in Morocco of any foreign country, some cutbacks seem feasible and desirable. The King may even profit by being less vulnerable to the charge of being too close to the US. The danger, however, is that this policy could unravel rapidly. The King might retaliate if he felt we were deserting him. This policy also would force the Navy to accept some degradation of its communications. [Comment: The problem with this option is not so much its underlying assumptions as the implied rigidity of cutting all programs across the board. It may make sense to cut some of the politically sensitive military presence at Kenitra, while maintaining or even expanding non-official programs as a hedge against a change in regimes.]

—Selective Disengagement. This policy would begin by reducing the most prominent and politically sensitive aspects of the US presence in Morocco. The communications facilities would be phased out in stages, with full withdrawal completed in FY 1977. The US would treat the King with usual courtesy, but would also open new contacts with opposition groups. This policy would seek to protect essential interests, without a massive expenditure of resources or heavy involvement in Moroccan politics. [Comment: Recent Moroccan statements suggest that selective disengagement may be forced on us whether we want it or not. Again the question need not be one simply of disengagement or involvement, but rather the mix and the issues on which we concentrate efforts and resources. If the Moroccans ask us to leave Kenitra, this need not necessarily lead to a cutback in all other US programs. There are likely to be some official programs and many private sector relationships that will be welcome under virtually any regime and that would make a useful contribution to the overall US-Moroccan relationship.]

The Immediate Issue

Foreign Minister Benhima has asked for a review of the US military presence in Morocco. He has hinted that perhaps the three facilities we now have could be consolidated, thereby lowering the US profile. The choice for the US seems to be whether to seize the opportunity offered by the Moroccans to disengage gradually at their initiative, allowing an orderly transfer of the communications facilities to other locations, or whether to pay a higher price to retain the current arrangements.

The options paper stops short of spelling out the concrete choices as they now present themselves. Three specific decisions that could usefully emerge from this policy review are: —A directive to Defense to plan to close down the Kenitra Training base in response to Moroccan requests. All communications functions would be consolidated at the remaining two facilities and would be operated with a low visibility US presence. Until alterna tive communications networks are available, we will try to hold onto these facilities.

—Ask Defense to examine the possibility of bringing the Fleet Satellite System into operation before FY 1977. If this is primarily a budgetary or bureaucratic problem rather than a technical one, a high-level directive should be able to speed up the acquisition of this alternative communications channel.

—Ask State to prepare an aid package for Morocco that will conform to the situation following the closure of the US Naval Training Command at the Kenitra base. In return for allowing us to continue at the other two facilities, the Moroccans will expect at least as much aid as in the past. To reach this level, we may need to come up with some new programs, perhaps concentrating more heavily on the development side where the regime is particularly weak.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-66, National Security Study Memoranda, NSSM 160. Secret. The full NSSM 160 study, dated October 25, is not printed. (Ibid., NSC Files, Box 100, Senior Review Group Meeting, Morocco, NSSM 160) The Special NIE is printed as Document 132.

135. Minutes of a Senior Review Group Meeting, Washington, November 30, 1972, 3:38-3:55 p.m. 135. Minutes of a Senior Review Group Meeting, Washington, November 30, 1972, 3:38-3:55 p.m.1

Washington, November 30, 1972, 3:38-3:55 p.m.

SENIOR REVIEW GROUP MEETING
November 30, 1972
Time and Place: 3:38 p.m. - 3:55 p.m., White House Situation Room

Subject:

U.S. Policy Toward Morocco, NSSM 160

Participants:

Chairman Henry A. Kissinger CIA L/Gen. Vernon Walters

State U. Alexis Johnson William Parmenter

Claude Ross Treasury John McGinnis

James J. Blake

Herbert J. Spiro NSC Richard T. Kennedy

Harold Saunders

Defense G. Warren Nutter James T. Hackett

James Noyes

JCS V/Adm. John P. Weinel

B/Gen. K.L. Christensen

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

It was agreed that: — It is strategically important for the United States to maintain friendly relations with Morocco. If it came to a choice, we would definitely sacrifice our communications facilities for the sake of our overall relationship.

— The King is still the focal point of authority and we should support him and be responsive to his needs. While he is in power, we should not actively disengage from our relationship with his regime.

— We should begin reducing our profile and presence at Kenitra, make contingency preparations for the transfer of our facilities out of Morocco in the event that becomes necessary and in the long term reduce our dependence on the Moroccan facilities.

Mr. Kissinger: (to Gen. Walters) Do you want to give your presentation on Morocco?

Gen. Walters: King Hassan is still the focal point of authority…

Mr. Kissinger: I know how he feels!

Gen. Walters then read a prepared statement (copy attached).

Gen. Walters: I have some knowledge of the King and I want to emphasize that he is a very resilient individual. Whatever you do, don't underestimate him.

Mr. Kissinger: You said that he rules with the support of the Army and then you said he is purging the senior officers. How can he do that?

Gen. Walters: His support is based on loyalty to him as the King. It is loyalty to the institution of royalty. Besides, there aren't many alternatives.

Mr. Kissinger: Then why won't they support him more fully?

Gen. Walters: Because he hasn't reassured them. They don't know what he is going to do next.

Mr. Ross: That's right, he hasn't given them any assurances.

Mr. Kissinger: Is it the Navy's turn now? The Army and the Air Force have both had a crack at him.

Gen. Walters: No, the Navy is small and mostly-off shore. There is a certain amount of negativism in what I am saying, but the King is the only significant force in the country. He represents the only force with any tradition, and that's an important factor here. Popular support for the military isn't so great either. I would not underestimate the King; he is a very shrewd operator. He has now escaped two attempts on his life, both of which should have killed him. I can imagine that the thought may be prevalent in Morocco today that, “is Allah trying to tell us something?”

Mr. Kissinger: (to Mr. Ross) What is your view?

Mr. Ross: Well, I agree with what that gentleman (Gen. Walters) has been saying. The King, by his highly personal and arbitrary style of rule, has alienated some of his supporters, but the monarchy is still the only strong force in the country.

Mr. Kissinger: What should we do about it?

Mr. Ross: I don't know.

Mr. Johnson: We'd like to be responsive to the King and supportive of him, but not get too close to him, or too closely identified with him. Nor do we want to get involved in supporting or appearing to support any of the opposition groups that are plotting against him.

Mr. Kissinger: Have we done that?

Gen. Walters: No, but he thinks we didn't tell him things we may have known about the plot against his life. [text not declassified]

Mr. Kissinger: Is that true?

Mr. Johnson: No, it's not. We are maintaining a policy of friendly relations with Morocco, and we want to maintain friendly relations with the King. If he is going to be displaced, we will continue to support him until that time. Meanwhile, we have interests at Kenitra and it would be prudent for us to reduce our presence there to the extent that we can. If the opposition to the King comes to power, we may not be able to keep our installations at all. We have two choices here, we could begin a crash program to phase everything out by 1976 or sooner, or we could begin a gradual disengagement.

Kissinger: That is the training base, the one at Kenitra?

Mr. Johnson: No, it's a communications facility. One plan is that it might be moved to Spain, but I doubt the Spanish will greet an American base with open arms. The Moroccans wouldn't be happy about the base moving to Spain and may pressure Spain not to accept it.

Mr. Kissinger: Why would the Moroccans care whether or not we had a base in Spain?

Mr. Johnson: Well, they may not, unless the “Spanish Sahara” became an issue. In any case, Spain would demand a high price. The King is pressing us to reduce our profile. I understand we have some 600 to 650 people currently at Kenitra.

Mr. Kissinger: What about the other two bases?

Adm. Weinel: [text not declassified] There are 450 personnel at one and 170 at the other.

Gen. Walters: I think it's a good paper (response to NSSM 160), although I think the pressure on the French would be greater than is portrayed in the paper.

Mr. Johnson: I have no view on that. The paper actually does not suggest any departures from present policy.

Mr. Kissinger: (to Mr. Nutter) What do you think?

Mr. Nutter: We agree. It may be necessary to do some profile changes at our installations, but above and beyond Kenitra is the strategic value of Morocco itself. We'd like to see a friendly regime remain in power there and we'll alter our bases if that's required.

Mr. Johnson: That's right. We want a moderate, friendly regime in Morocco, and that's more important than Kenitra.

Mr. Nutter: We would trade Kenitra for that if we had to, but that is not at issue now.

Gen. Walters: You know, the Navy took me to Morocco thirty years ago, in 1942, and the objective I was given then is exactly the same as the objective we are pursuing now.

Mr. Kissinger: Alex (Johnson), you have finally succeeded in changing the Senior Review Group into a ratifying instrument for existing policy.

Mr. Johnson: I don't know about that. I'll wait until the NSDM comes out.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-66, National Security Study Memoranda, NSSM 160. Secret. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room. The CIA statement is ibid., NSC Files, Box 100, Senior Review Group Meeting, Morocco, NSSM 160.

136. Memorandum From Harold Saunders and William Quandt of the National Security Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, December 29, 1972 136. Memorandum From Harold Saunders and William Quandt of the National Security Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, December 29, 19721

Washington, December 29, 1972

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION
MEMORANDUM
December 29, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR:

DR. KISSINGER

FROM: HAROLD H. SAUNDERS [HHS initialed]

WILLIAM B. QUANDT [WBQ initialed]

SUBJECT:

Wrapping Up Several Actions on Morocco

General Walters has sent you three memoranda [Tab A] reporting that King Hassan, via an intermediary, has made known his desire to send an emissary in the near future to communicate to you the King's wishes to “improve” relations. He is also pressing for a state visit in 1973. The two separate purposes of this memo are (a) to seek your decision on handling this emissary and (b) to seek your signature on a NSDM to record the judgments that came out of the recent SRG meeting on Morocco.

In particular, the memoranda at Tab A say the King wants us to know that: —The present “deterioration of relations” between us is isolating Morocco, leaving no alternative but to turn to the French. Since the US has been a “willing spectator” to several attempts to overthrow the monarchy, it is up to us to reverse this trend. The King apparently does not believe we had no prior knowledge of the August 16 coup attempt.

—The USG should send a high-level representative to Morocco to propose “conciliatory changes in the status of US bases.” Once again, the US should take this initiative. During this visit we should arrange to invite the King to the US sometime in 1973. This visit would be in the context of re-negotiating US assistance programs.

—King Hassan wishes to send Colonel John S. Canton, USMC (Ret) to visit you at the White House. The King was scheduled to meet with Canton December 26 or 27 to discuss the visit. (Canton was close to Hassan when he served in Morocco. The White House used him during the flap over Strausz-Hupe's proposed appointment to Morocco.) The King apparently wants him to discuss revision of our communications presence in Morocco as well as an envoy to Morocco and a state visit for him.

—The King hopes that Ambassador Rockwell will soon be replaced, and goes so far as to suggest that Rockwell may have had some role in the two recent coup attempts.

This report has been communicated to State and to Ambassador Rockwell.

Along these same lines, Rose Mary Woods has sent you a memorandum [Tab B]saying that Bob Kleberg (King Ranch, Texas), has recently seen the new Moroccan Prime Minister, Ahmad Osman, and that Osman would like to see the President soon after the inauguration.

Comment: King Hassan and his new Prime Minister are feeling insecure and are grasping for reassurance from the United States. Objectively, the relationship between the US and Morocco has not “deteriorated, although the King's own position has. The problem we face is that the present uncertainty and insecurity in Morocco are largely the result of the King's policies and there is little we can do to help bolster his domestic political standing.

The King has made it clear that he believes we were somehow involved in recent coup attempts against him, which is not true, and is threatening to turn to France if we do not take initiatives to improve relations. We have no reason to be unhappy with the idea of his turning to France, whatever that may mean, nor can we dispel his suspicions of our involvement in plots against him. What we can and should do is to carry forward the dialogue on our mutual interests begun by Foreign Minister Benhima in New York this fall, especially on revising our communications presence as the King wishes.

It would seem better for the Department of State to handle this task, however, rather than the President. State had already sounded out Robert Murphy about visiting Morocco as a special emissary to King Hassan early next year, and this seems like a reasonable approach. You may recall that he did this once before in similar circumstances. Our recommendation below is cast in this vein.

AS a general backdrop for any new actions on Morocco, we have prepared a National Security Decision Memorandum [Tab C] for your signature based on the SRG meeting of November 30, 1972 on Policy Toward Morocco. At this tab you will also find the minutes of the SRG meeting for reference. This NSDM should encourage State to focus on the issue of our bases and the overall context of our policy toward Morocco.

We may eventually have to deal with King Hussants desire to meet with the President but that does not need to be dealt with now. In any event, it would seem best not to be overly responsive to the King's ill-tempered comments relayed through an intermediary or in reply to an indirect bid from the Moroccan Prime Minister through Kleberg.

RECOMMENDATIONS:

1. That Walters be told that you or a member of your staff will see Col. Canton. Preferably Saunders should see him and then ask him to see Assistant Secretary Newsom.

Approve [HK initialed (Saunders)]Other

2. That Saunders call Kleberg to tell him tactfully that this is being handled through our own contacts and an emissary will be in Morocco soon. We will inform Rose Mary Woods.

Approve [HK initialed] Other

3. That you sign the NSDM at Tab C giving general guidance for our relations with Morocco. The main point is that we should now open negotiations on the US bases. We would support State in sending an emissary (Robert Murphy) to Morocco early next year to open discussions on the consolidation of our bases there and to reassure the King.

Approve [HK initialed] Other

Concurrence: Jeanne W. Davis [JWD initialed]

Richard T. Kennedy
[RK initialed]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, National Security Decision Memoranda, NSDM 200. Secret. Sent for action. Tabs A and B are attached but not printed. The minutes at Tab C are printed as Document 136. The NSDM at Tab C is printed as Document 138. Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Kissinger approved all recommendations and indicated that he wanted Saunders to meet with Canton.

137. National Security Decision Memorandum 200, Washington, January 5, 1973 137. National Security Decision Memorandum 200, Washington, January 5, 19731

Washington, January 5, 1973

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
January 5, 1973

TO:

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT:

Policy Toward Morocco, NSSM 160

National Security Decision Memorandum No. 200

Following the meeting of the Senior Review Group on Policy Toward Morocco November 30, 1972, the President has decided that the following views should guide our course of action in the coming months: —Our ties with Morocco are of sufficient importance that we should be responsive to Moroccan requests that we reduce our presence at the communications facilities if this is needed to preserve our overall relationship. To this end, we should engage in negotiations with the Moroccan government at an early date concerning our continued use of communications and base facilities.

—We will continue to deal with the King as the focal point of authority and should take some steps to reassure him of continued U.S. support.

—In addition to reducing our presence and profile at the communications facilities we should make contingency preparations for transferring some communications activities outside of Morocco as early as possible.

[signed] Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, National Security Decision Memoranda, NSDM 200. Secret.

Ch. 5. TunisiaCh. 5. Tunisia

138. Intelligence Note 198 From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, March 20, 1969

Washington, March 20, 1969

The report speculated on possible successors to aging Tunisian President Habib Bourguiba. It predicted that the transfer of power was likely to be orderly, however, indecision over the succession procedure and the multitude of candidates vying for the position produced concerns for U.S. interests in the region.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 745, Country Files, Africa, Tunisia, Vol. I. Secret; Noforn; Controlled Dissemination.

139. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 3, 1969, 11:30 a.m.

Washington, April 3, 1969, 11:30 a.m.

In a meeting with Secretary of State Rogers, the Tunisian Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Habib Bourguiba, Jr., emphasized the importance of close relations with the United States during the upcoming transfer of power and given the unstable political situation facing one of its closest neighbors, Algeria. Bourguiba then requested greater American military assistance.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL TUN-US. Confidential. Drafted by Root and approved on April 15 in S. The conversation took place in the Secretary 's Office.

140. Telegram 63195 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Tunisia, April 23, 1969, 2313Z.

April 23, 1969, 2313Z

This joint State and Defense message reported on Bourguiba's talks with Secretary of State Rogers and Secretary of Defense Laird. It instructed the Embassy to respond positively to Bourguiba's hope for dialogue with the new administration, but make clear that no greater American military effort was likely.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967- 69, POL 7 TUN. Secret. Drafted by Root; cleared by ISA/AF, JS, ISA/PPS, and J/PM; and approved by Palmer. In telegram 52187 to Tunis, April 5, the Department reported that in their meetings with President Nixon and other American officials,“President [Bourguiba]and Bourguiba Jr. expressed concern growing Soviet naval presence Mediterranean and continued fear of Soviet-armed Algeria. Tunisia's pro-Western stand had heightened its isolation and vulnerability.” (Ibid., POL 7 TUN) According to Nixon's Daily Diary, on April 1 from 3:23-3:46 p.m., the President met with President Bourguiba and Bourguiba Jr., who were in Washington for the funeral of President EISENHOWER. No memorandum of the conversation was found. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Central Files, Staff Members and Office Files, President's Daily Diary, April 1, 1969-May 31, 1969)

141. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 15, 1969, 11 a.m.

Washington, September 15, 1969, 11 a.m.

In his discussions with Secretary of State Rogers, Foreign Minister Bourguiba Jr. outlined Tunisia's security concerns relating to the September 1 Libyan coup and the perception of American global disengagement.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967- 69, POL TUN-US. Secret. Drafted by Root and approved on September 22 in S. The conversation took place at the Department of State. In telegram 163880 to Tunis, September 26, Rogers followed up with Bourguiba Jr. by expressing Washington's willingness to review Tunisian defense requirements within the context of the current assistance program. (Ibid., POL 7 TUN)

142. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, September 18, 1969, 2:25 p.m.

New York, September 18, 1969, 2:25 p.m.

In a meeting with Foreign Minister Bourguiba Jr., President Nixon assured him the United States would do what it reasonably could to help Tunisia meet its military needs, adding that the Administration was prepared to cope with the political difficulties which additional aid, currently under review, was likely to cause.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL TUN-US. Secret. Drafted by Root. The conversation took place at the Waldorf Astoria during the annual meeting of the UN General Assembly.

143. Airgram CA-6414 From the Department of State to the Embassies in the United Kingdom, France, West Germany, Italy, and Turkey, December 2, 1969

December 2, 1969

The Department provided guidance for consultations on Tunisia. It outlined the Department of State's objectives in Tunisia, and offered a political, economic, and military assessment of the country.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967- 69, POL 1 TUN-US. Secret. It was repeated to Tunis, Rabat, Algiers, Tripoli, and USNATO. Drafted on November 21 by Wisner; cleared by INR/NEA, EUR/FBX, EUR/BMI,DOD/ISA, EUR/AIS, NEA/TUR, AID/AFR/NA, EUR/GER, and AF/N; and approved by Newsom. The background material is not printed.

144. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, February 13, 1970

February 13, 1970

Kissinger summarized Secretary of State Rogers' report of his meetings with Tunisian officials. At this meeting, Prime Minister Ladgham and Foreign Minister Bourguiba, Jr. reiterated their desire for close relations with the United States and voiced concern about the situations in the Middle East and Libya.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 745, Country Files, Africa, Tunisia, Vol. I. Secret. Attached but not printed at Tab A is telegram Secto 39/591 from Addis Ababa, February 12. In the full February 10 memorandum of conversation, Rogers had asserted that “The US is not pro-anybody' but rather pro-peace'” in the Middle East conflict, adding that he had made clear the opposition of the United States to the expansion of Israel in his own December 9 speech. The Tunisian Foreign Minister “remarked that indeed the Secretary's speech of December 9 had opened hopes. It was a shame that President Nixon's speech about additional arms to Israel had looked to so many like backtracking.” (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, ORG 7 S)

145. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Eliot) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, August 24, 1970

Washington, August 24, 1970

Eliot sent an information memorandum prepared in the Bureau of African Affairs, which observed that, under Foreign Minister Masmoudi, Tunisia had reasserted its non-aligned standing and harmonized its foreign policy with that of the Arab and Third World countries.

Source: National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 1 TUN. Confidential. Cleared by Wisner. In Airgram A-155 from Tunis, August 18, the Embassy noted that the “special relationship” that Washington had enjoyed with Tunis was likely to end with the demise or retirement of Bourguiba. (Ibid., POL 15-1 TUN)

146. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, October 7, 1970

Washington, October 7, 1970

Kissinger agreed with Rogers' suggestion that the President reassure Bourguiba that necessary reductions in U.S. assistance would be minimized in view of American interest in Tunisian development and security.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 745, Country Files, Africa, Tunisia, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for information. A note on the first page reads, “The President has seen.” The attached September 11 memorandum from Rogers to the President is not published.

147. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), October 29, 1970

October 29, 1970

For his 4 p.m. meeting with Foreign Minister Masmoudi, Saunders briefed Kissinger on Tunisian views of the Middle East crisis and domestic security and development.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 745, Country Files, Africa, Tunisia, Vol. I. Confidential. Sent for information. The attached Department of State memorandum is not printed.

148. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 29, 1970

Washington, October 29, 1970

In a meeting with President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger, Foreign Minister Masmoudi requested U.S. support in keeping the Soviets out of the Mediterranean and achieving a Middle East settlement.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Box CL 268, Memoranda of Conversation, Chronological File, October 1970. Confidential. Drafted by Saunders. The meeting took place in Kissinger's office. In telegram 182778 to Tunis, November 6, the Department provided a memorandum of a conversation between Rogers and Masmoudi, October 28, in which the latter expounded on the need for Washington to put pressure on Israel to achieve Middle East peace, and to take account of the Palestinian movement as a political force. (National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 7 TUN)

149. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, November 12, 1970, 3 p.m.

Washington, November 12, 1970, 3 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files, Box 24, FRC 73-A-1975, Tunisia 1970, 000.1, Jan---. Secret

150. Telegram 1 From the Embassy in Tunisia to the Department of State, January 1, 1971, 1800Z.

January 1, 1971, 1800Z

The Embassy transmitted a report by a special team of U.S. doctors which had diagnosed President Bourguiba with “involutional melancholia” and, possibly, arteriosclerosis. It then goes on to discuss Bourguiba's mental state, the possibility for political succession, and potential requests to the U.S. Government for assistance.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 TUN. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. In telegram 6097 from Rabat, December 26, the Embassy had conveyed the urgent request of Prime Minister Nouira for a U.S. psychiatric team to be dispatched to Tunisia to treat Bourguiba. (Ibid.) In telegram 209981 to Rabat, December 29, the Department advised the Embassy that an American internist and psychiatrist would arrive in Tunis on December 31. (Ibid.)

151. Telegram 9 From the Embassy in Tunisia to the Department of State, January 3, 1971, 0200Z.

January 3, 1971, 0200Z

In this telegram, the Embassy conveyed Prime Minister Nouira hope that President Bourguiba would be welcomed into the United States, via American transport, for further medical treatment. Nouira also requested any assistance the United States could offer with regards to improving Bourguiba's health.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 TUN. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. In telegram 261 to Tunis, January 3, the Department, “in view great esteem USG has for Bourguiba and in recognition President's long friendship for US,” offered military evacuation aircraft to carry Bourguiba to Walter Reed Army Hospital. (Ibid.) The physicians at Walter Reed confirmed the President's involutional depression and “mild but definite arterial brain damage.” (Ibid.)

152. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 4, 1971

Washington, March 4, 1971

Kissinger briefed the President on the internal political situation in Tunisia and the implications for bilateral relations of the expected departure of President Bourguiba from the political scene.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 745, Country Files, Africa, Tunisia, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for information. This document is an unsigned copy. Attached but not printed is the January 22 memorandum from Rogers to the President on the “Transfer of Power in Tunisia.”

153. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, April 13, 1971

Washington, April 13, 1971

Saunders forwarded a memorandum from the Departments of State and Defense, notifying Tunisia that the United States would provide an additional $1 million for their $3 million military assistance program for 1971.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 745, Country Files, Africa, Tunisia, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for action. Kissinger approved the recommendation. The attachments are not printed.

154. Airgram A-41 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Tunisia, June 22, 1971

June 22, 1971

The Department sent copies of a Policy Planning Paper for Tunisia as approved by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for Africa. The paper was to be an official statement of U.S. policy toward Tunisia and was to be used as a guideline by all elements of the Embassy in the preparation of policy statements, action plans, and future budgetary projections.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 1 TUN-US. Secret; Noforn; Limdis. Drafted on June 21 by Nancy Rawls (AF/NSC-IG) and approved by Carter.

155. Telegram Secto 7/3076 From Secretary of State Rogers to the Department of State, October 2, 1971, 2231Z.

October 2, 1971, 2231Z

The telegram contained a memorandum of conversation between Rogers and Foreign Minister Masmoudi on the subject of the Middle East. Masmoudi outlined his concerns for Tunisia and emphasized the importance of maintaining a close relationship with the United States. Rogers outlined the U.S. position highlighting the importance of an interim peace agreement before the United States would consent to any further assistance.

Source: National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 7 TUN. Confidential; Exdis. It was repeated Priority to Tunis and to Cairo and Tel Aviv. In telegram 4608, September 11, Calhoun reported Masmoudi's plea for U.S. support in achieving a political solution, which he passed along from Egyptian President Sadat. (Ibid., POL TUN)

156. Intelligence Memorandum 2101/71, Washington, December 8, 1971

Washington, December 8, 1971

Anticipating an end to President Bourguiba's rule, this 18 page report, titled “Tunisia: The Hour of Separation Approaches” analyzed Bourguiba's four decade rule of Tunisia and his philosophy of government, it outlined the most pronounced forces of change emerging within the power structure, and examined probable successors.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 16, DI/OCI Files, Job 79-T00831A, Box 8. Secret; Noforn. Prepared in the Office of Current Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency. In requesting preparation of a study of current political dynamics in Tunisia, a March 18 CIA memorandum noted that, “We believe there is need for a critical and unorthodox analysis of the political situation that will re-examine current assumptions to the effect that existing institutions in Tunisia are sufficient to insure an orderly transition to a stable and moderate post-Bourguiba Government.” (Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 79-01229A, Box 1, AA-1, AF DIV, 1971)

157. Intelligence Note RAFN-62 Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Washington, December 23, 1971

Washington, December 23, 1971

This 5 page report analyzed the internal and external security threats to Tunisia and concluded that Tunisian claims of a heightened danger from Algeria and Libya were exaggerated.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23 TUN. Secret; Noforn; Controlled Dissemination. Drafted by Hoffman and cleared by Rives.

158. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, February 17, 1972

Washington, February 17, 1972

Ambassador El Goulli thanked Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Newsom for helping to arrange a meeting with President Nixon, and hoped that the evident good will towards Tunisia would produce the requested internal security assistance.

Source: National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 17 TUN-US. Confidential. Drafted on February 22 by Michael V. Connors (AF/N); cleared by Harry I. Odell (AF/N); and approved by Newsom. According to the President's Daily Diary, Goulli met with the President from 3:05-3:06 on February 14. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Central Files, Staff Members and Office Files, President's Daily Diary, February 1, 1972-March 31, 1972) The Ambassador delivered a letter from President Bourguiba, not printed, in which Bourguiba expressed appreciation for Nixon's update on his Peking trip and his assurances of continuing U.S. interest in Tunisian development and North African security. Bourguiba concluded by hoping for high-level discussions to review bilateral relations and the international situation. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 TUN)

159. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, February 29, 1972

Washington, February 29, 1972

Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Newsom informed Ambassador El Goulli that the United States would be unable to comply with Tunisia's request for internal security assistance.

Source: National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 23 TUN. Secret. Drafted on March 3 by Michael Connors and cleared by Newsom.

160. Letter From President Nixon to President Bourguiba, Washington, March 14, 1972

Washington, March 14, 1972

Nixon authorized Ambassador John Calhoun to advise Bourguiba of the outcome of his talks in Peking and Moscow, and pledged as much Tunisian development assistance as resources allowed.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL TUN-US. Unclassified. In a February 24 memorandum to Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Kissinger, Eliot had recommended that the President respond to Bourguiba's hand-delivered letter, in recognition of Bourguiba's status as a long-standing ally and to soften the blow of the U.S. refusal to provide a requested $7.3 million in internal security assistance. (Ibid., POL 15-1 TUN)

161. Telegram 1963 From the Embassy in Tunisia to the Department of State, April 24, 1972, 1015Z.

April 24, 1972, 1015Z

In this 6 page telegram, Ambassador John Calhoun offered an overview statement on the PADM and PARA review for Tunisia in 1972, praising Tunisia's alignment with the United States and friendly voice in Arab, Mediterranean, and Third World councils.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 1 TUN. Secret.

162. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, October 13, 1972, 5 p.m.

New York, October 13, 1972, 5 p.m.

Foreign Minister Masmoudi asked U.S. Ambassador to the UN William Witman why the United States had written off the Palestinians and become totally wedded to the Israelis, leaving Washington's friends in an untenable position.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 7 TUN. Confidential. Drafted on October 17 by Witman. The conversation took place in the UN General Assembly Delegates' Lounge. In telegram 188159 to Tunis, October 16, the Department transmitted a memorandum of conversation between Masmoudi and Rogers in which the two disagreed over U.S. policy toward the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. (Ibid.)

163. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, December 11, 1972

Washington, December 11, 1972

Kissinger recommended that Nixon respond to President Bourguiba's recent letter by reassuring him of U.S. interest in Tunisia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 762, Presidential Correspondence, President Bourguiba. Confidential. Sent for action. In his October 25 letter, not printed, Bourguiba renewed his request for a bilateral review of U.S.-Tunisian relations and the international scene. In Nixon's December 12 reply, not printed, he agreed that a dialogue on bilateral matters was important, and that, while much could be communicated at the ambassadorial level, he welcomed Bourguiba's views at any time.

138. Intelligence Note 198 From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, March 20, 1969 138. Intelligence Note 198 From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, March 20, 19691

Washington, March 20, 1969

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE
DIRECTOR OF INTELLIGENCE AND RESEARCH
INTELLIGENCE NOTE-198
March 20, 1969

To:

The Secretary

Through:

S/S

From: INR -Thomas L. Hughes [TLH initialed]

Subject:

TUNISIA: Succession Question Again to the Fore

This report was produced by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research. Aside from normal substantive exchange with other agencies at the working level, it has not been coordinated elsewhere.

President Habib Bourguiba is expected to break his long silence on plans for the succession by the end of March. The prospects are that the transfer of power, whenever it occurs, will be orderly. Shortly, thereafter, however, divisions within the party-government apparatus may break into the open. In such a contest, economic czar Ahmed Ben Salah is likely to emerge on top, although perhaps within a collegial leadership. The pragmatic and essentially Western orientation of the regime is likely to continue, although no successor can be expected to be as firmly in control—and as outspokenly pro-US—as Bourguiba.

Bourguiba's Health—A Question Mark. Medical experts believe that while a recurrence of the coronary thrombosis he suffered in March 1967 is probable, Bourguiba —now 65—can probably look forward to several years of active leadership. A recent bout with the flu—for which a leading French heart specialist flew to Tunis—caused concern mainly because it came only a week after his annual month's vacation in Switzerland.

Indecision on Succession Procedure. Bourguiba had the National Assembly pass an amendment to the succession provision of the constitution in 1966, but he never signed it, apparently fearing it would reduce his maneuverability. In January 1968 Bourguiba said he would announce a new plan for designating a successor prior to the 1969 meeting of the Party's Central Committee. That meeting, twice postponed, is now scheduled for later this month. The impression prevails that Bourguiba will for the first time name a prime minister, and that whoever holds that post will succeed to the Presidency.

Ladgham Still Primus Inter Pares, But… Until recently, 56 year-old Bahi Ladgham, who acts as chief of State during the President's absences, was considered, the almost inevitable successor, at least for the medium term. Although a colorless figure, long content to live in Bourguiba's shadow, Ladgham is influential, hard-working, and a man with few enemies. He would be the candidate best suited to emphasize stability and continuity.

…Ben Salah is Rising Fast.In recent years power has steadily accrued to Ahmed Ben Salah, the young (43) and dynamic architect of Tunisia's planned economy. He heads a super-ministry comprising the former ministries of Plan, Finance, Agriculture, Industry, and Commerce. Last July Bourguiba added the Ministry of Education as a mark of special confidence. While still dependent upon Bourguiba's support, Ben Salah has placed loyal proteges throughout the government and party machinery. The greatest obstacle in his path is probably the number of enemies he has accumulated among conservatives, businessnen, trade unionists, and small farmers—all of whom have been hurt by his reforms. These elements might well succeed in preventing his selection.

Dark Horses. Ben Salah has outdistanced other contenders like former UN General Assembly President Mongi Slim and Foreign Minister Habib Bourguiba, Jr. Slim, already slowing down, suffered a heart attack in 1968. Bourguiba, Jr.'s concentration on foreign affairs has left him little time to build a domestic base of support. Both men however, would figure prominently in any regime based on collegial leadership.

Struggle for Power? Ben Salah would almost certainly resist any effort to deny him the major leadership role on other than an interim basis. Tunisia's leaders are not divided by any profound ideological dispute, their competition for power, sharpened by differences in method and personality, could lead to a split when Bourguiba is no longer about to act as mediator. The new succession plan may seek to reduce the possibilities for an open clash by creating some form of collegial rule—possibly by sharing the powers now held by the Presidency with a prime minister.

Significance for the US. Bourguiba's Tunisia has developed its own economic and political structures, borrowing both from Western and Eastern models. Its close ties with the West, particularly France and the US, have proven profitable, and no successor is likely to want to reduce then substantially. At the same time, no successor is likely to be as domestically strong, and as frankly pro-US, as Bourguiba.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 745, Country Files, Africa, Tunisia, Vol. I. Secret; Noforn; Controlled Dissemination.

139. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 3, 1969, 11:30 a.m. 139. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 3, 1969, 11:30 a.m.1

Washington, April 3, 1969, 11:30 a.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

DATE:

April 3, 1969

TIME:

11:30 a.m.

PLACE:

The Secretary's Office

SUBJECT:

US-Tunisian Relations

PARTICIPANTS:

Foreign

Habib Bourguiba, Jr., Tunisian Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs

Rachid Driss, Tunisian Ambassador to the United States

Noureddine Mejdoub, Counselor, Tunisian Embassy

United States

The Secretary

Joseph Palmer 2nd, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs

John F. Root, Country Director for Northern African Affairs

COPIES TO:

S

S/S

CIA

NEA

INR/OD

DOD

J/PM

J

S/P

AF-5

AID

C

WH

EUR

Amembassies: TUNIS ALGIERS RABAT
Complete Distribution Made by CMS 4/15/69

After a preliminary exchange of comments between the two Secretaries on their pleasure at establishing a personal acquaintance, the Tunisian Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs first outlined Tunisia's views on the importance of its close relations with the United States and its sincere appreciation for the benefits, political and economic, it has received from them. He then dwelt on Tunisia's preoccupation with the threats to its security building up in its part of the Mediterranean.

Bourguiba, Jr., recalled that it was President EISENHOWER who wisely tried to stem the Communist advance in the Middle East and Mediterranean by offering the protection of the EISENHOWER Doctrine in 1957. Tunisia was the first country to accept and welcome the Doctrine, but unfortunately President EISENHOWER's objectives had not been achieved, and today the danger in the mid-Mediterranean is greater than ever.

The Tunisian Minister referred to the analysis of the situation in the Mediterranean which his father had given to President Nixon two days before and which he himself had also discussed with Secretary Laird yesterday. Radical countries like Algeria and the UAR, for shortsighted and demagogic reasons, had opened themselves to Soviet ambitions. These countries, he was sure, had not intended at the outset to mortgage their national independence to the Soviet Union, but gradually this was what had happened. It was as if first their fingers, then their hand and now their arm had been caught in the gears of the Soviet machinery. For example, the Rumanian Foreign Minister had told him the Algerians requested deletion from the joint Algerian-Rumanian communiquè of a sentence condemning “foreign intervention” on the grounds that this might be embarrassing to Algeria's “friends.”

Bourguiba, Jr., warned that while the Soviet Union might at one level pursue a policy of coexistence with the United States, on another level it was constantly nibbling away at the peace and security of other countries, seeking to expand its sway, its power and its influence. This was particularly true in the Mediterranean, for Russia's dream of “warm waters” went back to Peter the Great. The Soviet Mediterranean fleet had to be warned away by Tunisia, something the Soviet Union did not at all appreciate.

In answer to a question, the Tunisian Secretary estimated that there are now six to eight thousand Soviet civilian and military technicians in Algeria. When skepticism was expressed that the number was anywhere near so high, he insisted, and claimed that the estimate had come originally from Messmer, the French Minister of the Armed Forces.

Bourguiba, Jr., then expanded on the problems Tunisia faced in its relations with Algeria. As a consequence of the protracted quarreling among Algerian politicians at a much earlier period, Algeria had lost most of its elite, who were swept aside and discredited when the Algerian Revolution finally erupted. Algeria was led today by men of little or no education, many of them (like Boumediene) with an outlook on the world that was five hundred years behind the times. The ingratitude, impetuosity and demagoguery which characterize Algerian leadership were due less to stupidity than to immaturity. The men now in control of Algeria's destiny were simply neither intellectually nor emotionally equipped to provide the kind of rational and forward-looking leadership Algeria so badly needed. They started first by providing the country arms and then grandiose industries for which the country was not yet prepared. Tunisia started by giving its people food and work, and in contrast with the Algerians, the Tunisians were a happy people. Tunisia was attacked for its “moderation” but had too much respect for the real values of revolution to prostitute its meaning in the way others did. Tunisia did its best to have satisfactory relations with Algeria but this was not easy, and the task was made no easier by Tunisia's friendship for the West.

The Secretary asked whether the threat Tunisia feared was from the Soviet penetration in the Mediterranean or from Algeria. Bourguiba, Jr., replied, both. Tunisia today more than ever needed the sense of security that had been offered and accepted under the EISENHOWER Doctrine in 1957. Tunisia has of course in recent years been given to understand in various ways that we would not stand idle if it were ever attacked; but even suppose, for example, the Sixth Fleet came to its rescue in event of overt aggression, the damage—the political damage—would already have become irreparable. What Tunisia needed, rather, was a deterrent. Tunisia had no intention of wasting its resources on a large army and was keeping its military budget within 10 percent of the total, but it should have, first of all, sufficient military strength of its own to make a would-be aggressor think twice. In addition, the Tunisian Government had given considerable thought over the past several years to how to supplement self-defense measures with an assurance of protection from its friends. Tunisia was at one time ready to enter an alliance. However, it is well aware that today the mood of the US Congress is not favorable to new security commitments of a formal nature. There were other ways, nevertheless, in which the interest of the United States in Tunisia's security could be made clear to potential adversaries.

In light of the foregoing, he had two proposals to present for our serious consideration. First of all, there should be a complete review by our two governments of the conclusions of the Clowes Report [a US military team study in late 1965 of Tunisian army needs] to take into account the formidable new dangers that have arisen in the mid-Mediterranean in the intervening years. Secondly, it would be helpful if an American firm could undertake to develop the ship-repair facilities at Menzel-Bourguiba near Bizerte for the use of commercial shipping plying the Mediterranean. Bizerte was very favorably placed to provide such service, and there could be a real economic benefit to Tunisia; but over and beyond the commercial interest the presence of an American firm would also signify to others US political interest in Tunisia's general welfare and security. If an American firm could not be found, it might be possible to encourage a firm from Denmark or Norway, both NATO allies, to undertake the same kind of commercial development. The presence of either one would have much the same political advantage that Tunisia seeks in trying to enlist our interest.

The Secretary said he would discuss the questions raised by Bourguiba, Jr., with Secretary Laird, and we would be in touch with the Tunisians in due course.

In acknowledging the Tunisian Foreign Minister's expression of appreciation for US economic help, the Secretary of State noted the difficulties we are having with Congress on aid appropriations generally, but said that Tunisia was of course among the favored candidates for aid in Africa, and we would continue to do our best within the limitations of Congressional appropriations. Bourguiba,Jr., indicated complete understanding as regards current attitudes in the US affecting foreign aid.

The meeting closed on the cordial note which had prevailed throughout. The Secretary emphasized the extremely favorable and well deserved reputation which Tunisia had earned for itself in this country and said that President Nixon valued very highly our close friendship with Tunisia. The new US administration wished to preserve these good relations and to improve them—if indeed that were possible. He knew that President Nixon already considered them excellent. The two Foreign Secretaries looked forward to their next opportunity to meet, perhaps later this year.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL TUN-US. Confidential. Drafted by Root and approved on April 15 in S. The conversation took place in the Secretary 's Office.

140. Telegram 63195 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Tunisia, April 23, 1969, 2313Z. 140. Telegram 63195 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Tunisia, April 23, 1969, 2313Z.1

April 23, 1969, 2313Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State 63195
063195
23 APR 1969
ACTION: AMEMBASSY TUNIS

REF:

State 052187

JOINT STATE/DEFENSE MESSAGE

1. As you have been informed, principal theme of both Bourguibas during recent visit Washington was heightened danger in Mediterranean and threat this posed for Tunisian security. Bourguibas saw this danger as coming from dual source—Soviet expansion, and worrisome behavior of Soviet-supported states like Algeria. Bourguibas pointedly raised question of current validity EISENHOWER Doctrine but did not press for reply and indeed seemed to recognize that present Congressional temper would not permit new security commitments.

2. Bourguiba Jr. in his talks with Sec Rogers and SecDef Laird did make two specific requests: one for US-Tunisian review of conclusions of Clowes Report in light of situation he felt had changed for worse; and other for US help in finding firm from US or other friendly NATO country to develop ship-repair facilities at Bizerte.

3. With regard to former Bourguiba Jr not very clear about what he had in mind, although he said at one point review should cover political as well as military factors. In call on SecDef Bourguiba Jr. did not cite specifics but gave clear indication he feels Tunisian forces only Qte symbolic Unqte and inadequate to check possible attack. Our impression is that he is less concerned with technical critique of Clowes report recommendations than with engaging new US administration in general dialogue on Mediterranean and North African security problems as they affect Tunisia. Probably Bourguibas themselves have not given great deal of thought to tangible results to emerge from such dialogue but are primarily interested in updated demonstration, visible count public opinion at home and abroad, that Tunisia can count on protection to of powerful US. They may well hope that such demonstration would in part take tangible form of additional military aid, but perhaps of equal or greater importance in their minds are those political and psychological gestures by US which would bespeak continuity and reliability of US interest in Tunisian security and welfare. Bourguiba Jr stressed for example that project undertaken by American, Danish or Norwegian ship-repair firm at Bizerte for purely commercial purposes would nevertheless convey important political overtones.

4. From our point of view it is hard to see how review of Qte new danger Unqte mentioned by Bourguibas likely to lead to significant change in US effort, military or otherwise, for Tunisia. Tunisian army has not yet fully complied with recommendations of Clowes Report. We do not consider that potential Algerian threat to Tunisia has altered significantly over past two years. As Embassy aware USG has not insisted Tunisia adhere strictly to organizational concepts in Clowes report. Report still considered valid estimate of forces Tunisia could be expected to achieve without undue diversion of resources from economic development effort.

5. As for Soviet danger in Mediterranean, this is matter of general concern to US and its Western allies and is not sort of threat that lends itself to specific bilateral action with Tunisia. Indirectly but significantly, as Bourguibas well realize, Tunisia already benefits from presence Sixth Fleet and other Western defensive forces in Mediterranean.

6. At the same time we recognize importance GOT attaches to our continuing interest and willingness to maintain discussion. Problem is to avoid having this lead us into dialogue which Tunisians would seek expenditures or commitments we simply not prepared to undertake.

7. To be responsive to Bourguiba demarche in Washington while at same time discouraging Tunisians from spelling out more clearly intentions only vaguely hinted at in call for security review, we would like you now to speak with Foreign Minister along following lines: a. You have been asked to respond to Foreign Minister's suggestion regarding possible review of Clowes Report.

b. As we understand it, Tunisian view is that worsening of threat in mid-Mediterranean during past two years may have outdated Clowes team's conclusions. Hypothetical threat dealt with in Clowes Report was that from Algerian armed forces. Our preliminary judgment is that potential Algerian military threat to Tunisia has not changed significantly and that Clowes recommendations for Tunisian forces as valid now as when report prepared. Tunisia has not yet applied number of these recommendations and deliveries of equipment from MAP just beginning, If FonMin suggests review Clowes Report, feel this could best be done at technical level with Embassy and USLOT.

c. As for general threat represented by expanded Soviet activity throughout Mediterranean, burden of concern, realistically speaking, rests with principal Western defense forces which in effect carry responsibility for containing Soviet threat. While we agree that Soviet expansion requires constant vigilance and that exchange of views between our two governments can be helpful, US considers Soviet forces in Mediterranean still not match for those of West and that latter fully capable of coping with all foreseeable contingencies.

d. Favorable reception Bourguibas received in Washington is evidence of importance which new US administration attaches to continuing close US-Tunisian friendship and cooperation. We have taken careful note of concerns expressed by President and Foreign Minister and wish to continue to benefit from their counsel. Tunisia need have no doubt of our interest and desire to be helpful whenever we can. We are interested in such cooperation in security matter and that which took place during recent passage Soviet naval force through Gulf of Hammemet, when we closely coordinated intelligence estimates. This we intend to continue. We do not need to emphasize political, physical and financial limitations on our abilities, for we feel Tunisians have thoroughly realistic appraisal of factors entering into Washington policy consideration, but limitations must of course be kept in mind.

8. Naturally we hope to avoid new Tunisian requests and in discussion with Bourguiba Jr you should make clear your remarks in no way imply that Washington will be able to increase present MAP effort or go beyond previous expressions of concern for Tunisian security. Frankly, we would hope exchange of views itself would largely suffice to keep Tunisians content.

ROGERS

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967- 69, POL 7 TUN. Secret. Drafted by Root; cleared by ISA/AF, JS, ISA/PPS, and J/PM; and approved by Palmer. In telegram 52187 to Tunis, April 5, the Department reported that in their meetings with President Nixon and other American officials,“President [Bourguiba]and Bourguiba Jr. expressed concern growing Soviet naval presence Mediterranean and continued fear of Soviet-armed Algeria. Tunisia's pro-Western stand had heightened its isolation and vulnerability.” (Ibid., POL 7 TUN) According to Nixon's Daily Diary, on April 1 from 3:23-3:46 p.m., the President met with President Bourguiba and Bourguiba Jr., who were in Washington for the funeral of President EISENHOWER. No memorandum of the conversation was found. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Central Files, Staff Members and Office Files, President's Daily Diary, April 1, 1969-May 31, 1969)

141. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 15, 1969, 11 a.m. 141. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 15, 1969, 11 a.m.1

Washington, September 15, 1969, 11 a.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE:

September 15, 1969

Department of State

11:00 a.m

SUBJECT:

Tunisian Security

PARTICIPANTS:

H. E. Habib Bourguiba, Jr., Tunisian Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs

Mr. Hamed Ammar, Tunisian Minister

The Secretary

Mr. David D. Newsom, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs

Mr. John F. Root, Country Director for Northern African Affairs

COPIES TO:

S

J

S/S

S/PC

CIA

AF

Amembassy TUNIS

U

C

INR/OD

WH

DOD

EUR

Amembassy MOSCOW

The Foreign Minister and the Secretary spent an hour today discussing Tunisia's security concerns. Starting off with a review of the Libyan coup, Bourguiba, Jr., said Tunisia was of course against coups in principle as they usually presaged a period, not of stability, but of instability. The Libyan coup as Tunisia analyzed it seemed to be the work of amateurs who must have acted with little advance preparation, for it is impossible to keep a secret for long in the Arab world. They were reacting out of frustration to an unsatisfactory internal situation in Libya, which was probably bound to bring a drastic change sooner or later. The problem is that they seem to represent a mixed bag of elements and probably will not know what to do next. There will be plenty of outsiders—Bathists, Nasserists, Soviets—eager to influence them. Tunisia agreed that there were some hopeful signs and Tunisia, like us, would do its best to get close to the new regime and to exert a constructive influence on it. But odds for success were not high. The Libyan elite from which the young military officers have come has generally been educated in Egypt or by Egyptians. They lack political maturity. It is significant that they have used phrases familiar in the Middle East context but have said not a word about the Maghreb. It is significant that the only Arab diplomat to be received at RCC headquarters on the first day of the coup was the Iraqi Charge.

In any event, while trying to make the best of the situation, Tunisia also had to think of the worst. Tunisia was a small morsel sandwiched between two radically inclined and unpredictable countries. Libya was susceptible to foreign influences and had the means for troublemaking. Radical Algeria had a government increasingly unsure of the support of its people. The very existence of Tunisia as a successful moderate country on close terms with the West is, from their point of view, an unwelcome example. “The race to take possession of the Libyan revolution is on,” said Bourguiba. The Algerians, the Egyptians and the Bathists all have their various games to play in Libya, and behind them looms a still larger problem, the Soviet Union. It is instructive to remember, said the Foreign Minister, that “Libya was invented in 1951 to prevent a Soviet trusteeship.” How could the Libyan Government today ever renew the lease for Wheelus Air Base?

The Tunisian Government, he continued, knows that it is responsible for its popularity at home and for internal security. By what it does it must earn and keep the confidence of the Tunisian people. It is in the matter of external security that it needs help, for here it feels insecure and this anxiety is shared by the people. In many respects they still lack sophistication and cling to old ways and old ideas. They must see tangible evidence that government policies are succeeding. The public outburst at the time of the Arab-Israeli war in 1967 was a revelation to Tunisia's leaders, showing there are deep wells of emotion that can be stirred up in a crisis. By the same token the Tunisian Government has come recently to realize that Ben Salah's program for putting the country under cooperatives was moving too rapidly for public tolerance. Hence the recent reform and cutback of the cooperative movement and the Cabinet shakeup.

The Tunisian people and Tunisia's military cadres must likewise see evidence—tangible evidence—that cooperation with the West is producing military security. Tunisia's officers are not like Libya's, but they too are feeling frustrated, and the government is increasingly worried about them. They have received modern military training in France and elsewhere in the West but see that they lack adequate modern military equipment (“There is not even enough training ammunition!”) and that the Tunisian army is still worth nothing militarily. In addition to receiving modern military equipment, they must also feel they have a constructive role in the peacetime life of the nation, and this the Tunisian Government hopes to provide. Finally, Tunisia knows that real security comes primarily through economic and social progress. In acquiring military equipment, therefore, there is the financial aspect to consider. Tunisia cannot afford to add to its budgetary burdens if this means neglecting essential economic programs.

With this background, Bourguiba, Jr., said he wanted to speak now with utter frankness; perhaps we would even detect a certain bitterness, which was real. Over the past ten years Tunisia has developed a growing feeling that the United States is pursuing a kind of disengagement around the world. Perhaps this is because the US feels safe with its advanced military weapons and technology and also with the hot line to Moscow. But this does not mean that the Soviets have stopped expanding their sphere of action or that the dangers for a little country like Tunisia have stopped growing.

On the contrary, Tunisia more than ever feels the need for additional security. Tunisia is not unreasonable in its expectations. It knows about US Congressional attitudes and the difficulties of formal security commitments. But the conclusions of the Clowes report need updating in light of Tunisia's increasingly precarious position in its part of the world, and Tunisia needs more, and more modern, military equipment. Tunisia is by no means addressing itself to the United States alone in this matter. The Tunisian Minister of Defense, M'Zali, has been invited to visit French Defense Minister Debre in mid-October. The Italians are helping with a radar capability in northern Tunisia (the Foreign Minister noted at this point that the US might assist in extending radar coverage to the rest of the country, as radar would have a commercial as well as a military utility). The Tunisians had even detected an increasing Spanish interest in their welfare, and Bourguiba, Jr., thought he might stop in Madrid on his way home from his present trip.

What he had to ask of us now was to reconsider the Clowes conclusions and our present MAP program in the hope that our assistance could be augmented to serve Tunisia's needs more effectively. If we could not help, we should at least tell the Tunisians so.

The Secretary said he appreciated the frankness with which the Foreign Minister had set forth Tunisia's concerns. We ourselves were very much concerned by what had happened in Libya. There was no advance notice of the coup, it unfolded as an internal matter, there was no sign of effective opposition, and there was thus no basis whatsoever on which we could act. Consequently we did not want to react adversely to the coup, particularly as no one can foretell just what its outcome will be. We have come to realize from this and other experiences that the US is not really in a good position to cope with this kind of situation and that our best recourse is to maintain a low posture until we can see more clearly how to adapt to the new situation (Bourguiba, Jr., nodded his agreement with this reasoning).

The Secretary went on to say that there has been a great deal of misunderstanding about disengagement. Disengagement is a misleading term. All are talking about is that there is a limit to what we can do to sustain foreign governments in power, particularly those which are unpopular with their own people—not, of course, the case with Tunisia.

We are simply reviewing our commitments and responsibilities throughout the world to make sure they are commensurate with our capabilities. By the same token we want to make sure that the assistance we give is effectively utilized. It is understandable that the American taxpayer finds it difficult to understand why we spend great sums of money to help shore up a foreign government in the name of stability, perhaps only to have that government overthrown and its country more unstable than ever. In some parts of the world we have been put under pressures almost akin to blackmail. Now what we are trying to do is introduce more realism and efficacy into our programs of foreign assistance. This is the background for some of our recent Asian policy statements, which have attempted to put the responsibilities and capabilities of our nation and those we are trying to help into more realistic perspective. (The Secretary said he of course did not have Tunisia in mind in referring to the weaknesses of our aid programs which we are trying to correct elsewhere. Bourguiba, Jr., regretted that Tunisia some-times had to pay the price for those failings of other US beneficiaries which so irritate the US Congress.)

The Secretary said, having given this background, he wanted it to be clear that we were not backing away from our global responsibilities or our interest in the welfare of our friends. In Tunisia's particular case there was a strong feeling of friendship on our part—and we wanted to help where we could. A security commitment, as the Foreign Minister already recognized, was hardly a realistic possibility. It was unlikely Congress would ratify such a commitment. But we do want to show our support for Tunisia in other ways: first, by reaffirming our support; second, by moving from words to deeds that will help relieve the anxiety the Foreign Minister described; third, by reviewing our MAP assistance and doing what we can to help in this area. (The Secretary asked at this point whether there was one particular concrete thing more than any other that we could do now to be helpful. Bourguiba,Jr., disclaimed competence in the military field but after reflecting for a second cited the radar possibility.) The Secretary said he understood that Assistant Secretary Newsom and his colleagues would be going into the Tunisian MAP question in further detail.

The Secretary concluded the conversation by saying that he hoped to see the Foreign Minister in New York and that we were also hoping, if the schedules could be worked out, to arrange an appointment for the Foreign Minister with the President.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967- 69, POL TUN-US. Secret. Drafted by Root and approved on September 22 in S. The conversation took place at the Department of State. In telegram 163880 to Tunis, September 26, Rogers followed up with Bourguiba Jr. by expressing Washington's willingness to review Tunisian defense requirements within the context of the current assistance program. (Ibid., POL 7 TUN)

142. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, September 18, 1969, 2:25 p.m. 142. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, September 18, 1969, 2:25 p.m.1

New York, September 18, 1969, 2:25 p.m.

SECRETARY'S DELEGATION TO THE TWENTY-FOURTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
New York, September, 1969
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

DATE:

September 18, 1969

TIME:

2:25 p.m.

PLACE:

Waldorf Astoria I

SUBJBCT:

Review of U.S.-Tunisian Relations -Part II of II

PARTICIPANTS:

U.S.: The President

The Secretary

Mr. Henry A, Kissinger

Mr. John F. Root

FOREIGN:

Habib Bourguiba, Jr Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia

Salaheddine El Goull, Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the UN

Rachid Driss, Ambassador of Tunisia to the US

Noureddine Mejdoub, Counselor, Tunisian Embassy, Washington, D.C.

Distribution:

White House

AF

S/S

Amembassy TUNIS

DOD

CIA

The President referred to the recent change of regime in Libya. The Tunisian Foreign Secretary said the first impressions of the new regime were not particularly encouraging. Some of its pronouncements sounded Bathist. The coup had happened almost too quickly. Libya was perhaps due for a change but now the danger was that the pendulum would swing too far in the other direction. Tunisia had hoped Libya would remain a no-man's land, a buffer zone between Tunisia and the radical governments to the East but now Tunisia had much reason to be concerned. The race for influence in Libya was on - Iraq, Syria, Egypt would all try to influence Libya's new leaders.

The President asked about the attitudes of Tunisian youth - did they continue to feel strongly about the Palestine refugee problem, for example? Bourguiba Jr, confirmed that the Middle East question was capable of arousing emotions in Tunisia. The President recalled that President Bourguiba had spoken to him in 1957 about the problem of Egyptian teachers exported throughout the Arab world. Bourguiba Jr. agreed that they had been an unhelpful factor - Tunisia had never been willing to receive any, and even Algeria found it had to get rid of those it had admitted.

President Nixon said it was unfortunate Tunisia had not been a major beneficiary of the large oil discoveries in North Africa, but he was nevertheless encouraged to learn that Tunisia was going forward with its development. He understood that the Foreign Minister had had discussions with Secretary Rogers about the problem of the Tunisian armed forces. The President said he would like to ask frankly whether Tunisia faced a serious problem of internal security. Was the problem increased by the new situation along the Libyan border?

Bourguiba Jr. answered that of course there was some grumbling, as in every country, but the Tunisian government kept a careful eye on public opinion and was trying to keep domestic unrest within bounds. Recently, for example, it had “changed gears” on its program of cooperatives because public opinion was not yet ready to tolerate too rapid an advance in this respect. Tunisia was not dogmatic in its policies, but pragmatic.

The President said he wished to speak in candor about the problem of arms deliveries. This was an issue which of course raised domestic difficulties for us. Yet here was a country like Tunisia which had always placed the emphasis on civil authority and which had never sought an arms capacity directed against anyone else. We had appreciated President Bourguiba's great courage in speaking out forthrightly on the great issues of the day - even when this was not always the popular thing to do at the moment and sometimes not even a matter of direct importance to Tunisia. He could instead have taken the popular and demagogic position.

The President said he felt it was important therefore that Tunisia have what it really needs and that the United States do what it reasonably could to help meet these needs.

Secretary Rogers confirmed the President's impression that the question of additional arms aid was already under review in Washington as a result of the conversation he had had earlier this week with the Tunisian Foreign Minister and that we were hopeful of some kind of answer for the Foreign Minister before he leaves this country. The Secretary added that he felt that the matter of military assistance was important for the reasons already given but also as a boost to the morale of the Tunisian people.

Bourguiba Jr. readily agreed. Tunisia, he said, was like the piece of ham in a sandwich. The ham needed a bone - a deterrent to anyone who tried to gobble it up.

The President said additional arms aid was likely to cause us a political problem here, but the Administration was prepared to cope with it. The President said he felt it very important that the nations of the world, like Tunisia, which presented no military threat to anyone and which were trying to live decently, not be allowed to fall because of inadequate defensive means. Their peoples must have sufficient confidence that their security requirements are being met so that they can successfully pursue their constructive peace-time goals.

The President then commented on what he called the terribly difficult problem of the Middle East. He said we know that the Middle East question presents a very special difficulty for those countries living in that general part of the world. We are trying our best to be fair and to find some basis for settlement. He could not be very optimistic at the moment about the outlook, but on the other hand we cannot give up trying to find a solution. If the Foreign Minister found a good solution, he should certainly let us know.

Bourguiba Jr. said he would be failing his duty to be frank, as friend to friend, if he did not warn that some of the comments on the Middle East in the President's General Assembly speech today would be badly received by the Arabs. Some of the phrases would seem to them to be leaning to the side of the Israelis. For example, the President had said that the 1967 resolution “maps the way” to a settlement. This would sound to Arab ears like the Israeli thesis that the resolution is only a start. The Secretary said there is quite a difference between a “start” and something that “maps the way”. The latter implies a great deal more about the guidelines for negotiation.

The President noted we had already had a complaint from the Israelis about his statement that there should not be any substantial change of the borders. This was a very significant part of his comments. We believe in the 1967 resolution. There is no doubt that there is a lot more to be spelled out and of course it takes two to make an agreement. But the resolution “maps” the trip to be taken. Now it is necessary for the parties to take it. We are trying hard to be fair to both sides and to stay in the middle. We earnestly seek peace in the area and the Tunisian Foreign Minister could reassure his reasonable Arab colleagues of our intentions. Bourguiba, Jr. remarked that unfortunately there were fewer and fewer falling in this category.

In closing, the Tunisian Foreign Secretary congratulated the President for the courageous stand he had taken in his speech not only on Vietnam but also on the Chinese question.

AF/AFN:JFRoot:vmd:abk

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL TUN-US. Secret. Drafted by Root. The conversation took place at the Waldorf Astoria during the annual meeting of the UN General Assembly.

143. Airgram CA-6414 From the Department of State to the Embassies in the United Kingdom, France, West Germany, Italy, and Turkey, December 2, 1969 143. Airgram CA-6414 From the Department of State to the Embassies in the United Kingdom, France, West Germany, Italy, and Turkey, December 2, 19691

December 2, 1969

AIRGRAM
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
CA-6414
DEC 2, 1969

TO:

Amembassy LONDON,

PARIS,

Bonn,

ROME,

ANKARA

INFO:

Amembassy TUNIS,

RABAT,

ALGIERS,

TRIPOLI,

USNATO

FROM:Department of State DAT& 2 5 22 pH '69

SUBJECT:

Instructions for Consultations on Tunisia

1. This message contains background material for your use as appropriate in conducting a bilateral exchange on Tunisia with the Foreign Ministry or any other officials designated by the Foreign Ministry. The package contains an internal and external political assessment and a brief review of American military and economic assistance programs to Tunisia. All the material contained in the attachments except Section I (Internal Political Assessment) may be transmitted at your discretion verbally or in writing. Section I is an INR document and is for the background of briefing officers only.

2. As each post is aware, the Tunisian Government, following the September 1 Libyan coup, approached the British, French, Italians and ourselves with a request for help and reassurance. The Tunisian Foreign Minister extended his appeal to representatives of other NATO countries at the UNGA. On September 17 Secretary General Brosio convened informally at Italy's request the NATO Permanent Representatives of France, Italy, the United Kingdom and United States to consider Tunisia's demarche. They came to an understanding that Tunisia's concerns should not be a subject of NATO consideration and could be more usefully discussed between Tunisia's friends. Accordingly, Italy suggested a multilateral ambassadorial meeting in Rome and invited the United States, Germany, France, Turkey and the United Kingdom. We demurred, feeling such a meeting could become public knowledge and thereby be misinterpreted, Equally while we did not rule out an eventual multilateral discussion, we felt preparatory bilateral exchanges were required to establish the ground rules and provide some indication on how forthcoming each participant intended to be. France, Germany and eventually Turkey agreed to the bilateral exchange. We believe Italy and the UK will have no serious objection.

3. Through consultations and an exchange of views and information the Department hopes to accomplish the following objectives: (a) We attach great importance both within and without NATO to full consultations between allies on questions relating to the Western Mediterranean. By focusing attention on one country, we hope to set an example and develop a framework for consultations on other countries and regional blocs within the area.

(b) A complete exchange of information on Tunisia to include political estimates and assistance programs is inherently valuable and could perhaps permit development of parallel policy and plans.

(c) Ultimately we hope to open better communications and improve cooperation between our various embassies and assistance missions in Tunisia and elsewhere in North Africa.

(d) We wish to obtain for Tunisia concrete results in the form of political reassurance and assistance.

4. These objectives and specific political and program objectives contained in the body of the document will not be rapidly or easily obtained. We foresee, even in the limited case of Tunisia, an extended period of consultations on a bilateral basis and do not exclude consultations on a multilateral basis perhaps similar to the original proposal of the Italian Government. We would like, as soon as possible, each Embassy's assessment of the interest the respective governments show in continuing consultation and, based on these reactions, we will plan our next steps. In due course the Department would like any comment or reply the Foreign Ministries may make on the information contained in the enclosed document. Specifically, we hope to obtain each country's estimate of the Tunisian internal and external situation as well as details of military and economic assistance programs. In addition to discussing this package in Europe the Department will also go over its contents with the European embassies here.

5. We intend to inform the Tunisian Government that bilateral talks have begun. We will not discuss the contents of this message or European reactions to it with the Tunisian Government. We hope the respective Foreign Ministries will exercise the same discretion.

6. The military and economic assistance papers are brief summaries of large and complex programs. While general exchanges will be the task of our embassies in the interested capitals with the respective Foreign Ministries, you may advise each Foreign Ministry economic and military data supplied here is brief and more specific information, in depth discussion of potential areas of assistance, or detailed exchanges of technical data, would better be carried on in Tunis between our respective missions. If necessary, we would be prepared also to consider sending technical experts to any capital where such an approach could further the exchange.

7. At your convenience we would also like to have your assessment of possible interest of host government in expanded consultations on North Africa.

8. FOR: Embassy PARIS: In view of the special French relationship with Tunisia, you may assure the Quai we look forward to remaining in close contact as the consultations progress. We continue to welcome exchanges similar to those which preceded the Mzali visit to Paris.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967- 69, POL 1 TUN-US. Secret. It was repeated to Tunis, Rabat, Algiers, Tripoli, and USNATO. Drafted on November 21 by Wisner; cleared by INR/NEA, EUR/FBX, EUR/BMI,DOD/ISA, EUR/AIS, NEA/TUR, AID/AFR/NA, EUR/GER, and AF/N; and approved by Newsom. The background material is not printed.

144. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, February 13, 1970 144. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, February 13, 19701

February 13, 1970

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
February 13, 1970

MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT

FROM: Henry A. Kissinger [HK initialed]

SUBJECT:

Secretary Rogers' Report on His Visit to Tunisia

Secretary Rogers had cabled a report to you on his visit to Tunisia. (Tab A) He was warmly received and seems to have had useful meetings with key Tunisian officials. He feels that we have a “sincere friend” in Tunisia that “deserves our help.”

Discussion of bilateral relations was “relatively brief.” Prime Minister Ladgham and Foreign Minister Bourguiba, Jr., did, however, lay “great stress” on Tunisia's close relations with us. The Prime Minister specifically made the point that this was “not dependent on personalities, but was the conviction of the Government.” The Foreign Minister said that Tunisia never confused Arab differences with the U.S. on the Middle East with our basic friendship.

Secretary Rogers found the Tunisians preoccupied about the Middle East situation. In a frank and lively discussion with the Foreign Minister and other members of the Cabinet, the Secretary presented our views on the Middle East. They spoke in public favorably about Secretary Rogers' December 9 speech. In common with Morocco and Algeria, the Tunisians took a position favoring the Palestinians. The Foreign Minister strongly maintained that the Soviets want neither war nor peace in the Middle East and would prevent Nasser from establishing peace.

The Tunisians are also extremely worried about the course of events in Libya. They believe that the Egyptians are fully dominating the Libyan Government. They were not, however, particularly worried about the French sale of jet aircraft to Libya, since the French had assured them that France had “absolute guarantees” that the planes would not be used against Libya's western neighbors, and, in any event, the Tunisians noted that they could not yet be flown anyway.

On Vietnam, Foreign Minister Bourguiba included in his formal toast for public release a plea for peace based almost exactly on our policy.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 745, Country Files, Africa, Tunisia, Vol. I. Secret. Attached but not printed at Tab A is telegram Secto 39/591 from Addis Ababa, February 12. In the full February 10 memorandum of conversation, Rogers had asserted that “The US is not pro-anybody' but rather pro-peace'” in the Middle East conflict, adding that he had made clear the opposition of the United States to the expansion of Israel in his own December 9 speech. The Tunisian Foreign Minister “remarked that indeed the Secretary's speech of December 9 had opened hopes. It was a shame that President Nixon's speech about additional arms to Israel had looked to so many like backtracking.” (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, ORG 7 S)

145. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Eliot) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, August 24, 1970 145. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Eliot) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, August 24, 19701

Washington, August 24, 1970

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington. D.C. 20520
August 24, 1970

Copies To:

AF

AF/N

S/S: RF

MEMORANDUM FOR MR. HENRY A. KISSINGER
THE WHITE HOUSE

Subject:

“Straws in the Wind” - Changes in Tunisian Foreign Policy

Enclosed for your information is a memorandum prepared for the Acting Secretary by the Bureau of African Affairs.

[signed]Theodore Eliot, Jr.
Executive Secretary

Enclosure:

As Stated

clearance AF/N:FGWinsner

S/S-SMHornblow:imc 8/24/70

SUBJECT:

“Straws in the Wind” - Changes in Tunisian Foreign Policy - INFORMATION

MEMORANDUM

Since Masmoudi's assumption of the foreign affairs portfolio in June, Tunisia has moved quite quickly to reassert its non-aligned standing and harmonize its foreign policy with prevailing Arab and “third world” attitudes, from which it has kept its distance over much of the past decade.

We need not regard the change as inevitably unfavorable to us. Normalization of relations with Arab and Third World nations could reduce Tunisia's vulnerability and —-conversely —our need to underwrite many of Tunisia's needs precisely because it has isolated itself from so many of its neighbors and peers.

— With the Radical Arabs. The Tunisians have pushed for a detente with the radical Arabs. Improved relations with the Libyans have been the personal concern of Prime Minister Ladgham and the Foreign Minister. Diplomatic ties with the UAR have been reestablished at Ambassadorial level and plans are underway to send a Charge to Baghdad.

- With the Third World. Masmoudi has declared his readiness to attend the Lusaka conference and his intention to take an active stand on non-aligned, particularly African liberation issues.

- With the Communist World. In a recent conversation with Ambassador Calhoun, the Foreign Minister reported his meeting with a North Korean delegation. While he gave no sign of Tunisian interest in relations with North Korea, he expressed his government's interest in recognizing North Vietnam (in addition to the Saigon government which Tunisia already recognizes) and East Germany because of the progress made by the FRG with the Soviet Union and the East Germans. In addition, we understand the GOT has authorized the Soviet cultural mission in Tunis to make full distribution of Soviet information and propaganda.

It is not entirely clear whether the GOT really plans to move to recognize the GDR and the DRV, or whether Masmoudi is probing for a US reaction. A clear statement of West German and American interests could suffice to cool Masmoudi's ardor. We have asked Ambassador Calhoun to discourage Tunisian relations with North Vietnam and East Germany.

1 Source: National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 1 TUN. Confidential. Cleared by Wisner. In Airgram A-155 from Tunis, August 18, the Embassy noted that the “special relationship” that Washington had enjoyed with Tunis was likely to end with the demise or retirement of Bourguiba. (Ibid., POL 15-1 TUN)

146. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, October 7, 1970 146. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, October 7, 19701

Washington, October 7, 1970

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
INFORMATION 21957
October 7, 1970

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM: Henry A. Kissinger [HK initialed]

SUBJECT:

Tunisian Concern over Relations with the U.S.

Secretary Rogers—in the attached memorandum—would like you to be aware of some strains that are developing in our relationship with Tunisia, a country that has your special interest.

The Tunisians are concerned over the appearance of our declining ability to meet their development and security requirements. Last September, after the Libyan coup, you indicated to Bourguiba's son, then Foreign Minister, that we would be as forthcoming as possible with economic and military assistance in view of our continued interest in Tunisia's progress and security. The Tunisians considered this a morale boost at that time. However, it is becoming increasingly evident that we may not be able to provide the $9.2 million in concessional food sales nor provide significant additional military assistance that Tunisia requires. In fact, needs in Southeast Asia will require us to reduce our $3.0 million in military assistance for Tunisia.

Tunisia has been a loyal companion since the beginning of our assistance relationship after their independence in 1956. The Tunisian leadership is now looking upon anticipating reductions as a precursor of a changed U.S. attitude. The Secretary feels that—despite some necessary cuts that may have to be made—it is not in our interest to convey the impression that we are backing away from our traditionally close assistance relationship with Tunisia. He has instructed Ambassador Calhoun to press home in Tunis reassurances of our interest and Secretary Rogers plans to do the same when he sees the Foreign Minister at the United Nations sessions. The Secretary also feels that it might be desirable at some future point for you to inform President Bourguiba that our reductions—necessitated by our world-wide obligations—will be kept to a minimum to account for our strong interest in Tunisia's development. He is not recommending that this action be taken at this juncture but wanted you to be aware that such a situation might arise.

Comment: Tunisia is an example of how the small countries often get squeezed when the high-priority ones are taken care of in our military and economic assistance programs. Also, Tunisia is a country which is broadening its natural economic relationship with Western Europe and still needs U.S. aid. The result is that the U.S. spends its money where it is more exclusively depended upon.

I share the Secretary's concern about this friendly country's receiving wrong impressions of our policy. In addition to the Secretary's recommendations I am having my staff work with State to see what else might be done.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 745, Country Files, Africa, Tunisia, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for information. A note on the first page reads, “The President has seen.” The attached September 11 memorandum from Rogers to the President is not published.

147. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), October 29, 1970 147. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), October 29, 19701

October 29, 1970

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
INFORMATION 23169
October 29, 1970

MEMORANDUM FOR DR. KISSINGER

FROM: Harold H. Saunders [signed Hal]

SUBJECT:

Your Meeting with Tunisian Foreign Minister Masmoudi-4:00 p.m. October 29

Arrangements

Foreign Minister Masmoudi will bring with him his #2 in the Foreign Ministry, Abdel-Aziz Lasram, and Ambassador El Goulli. Masmoudi has flown back from New York today just to see you.

The interpreter, Alec Toumayan, can translate simultaneously if you can arrange for him to sit next to you. [This saves time.]

Yesterday, Masmoudi opened his meeting with Secretary Rogers with a 55-minute statement of his views. I suggest you take command of the conversation at the outset by saying:

—You are familiar with what he said to Secretary Rogers yesterday. [see below]

—You would like to ask his views on some specific points and then you would be glad to discuss any points he might want to make.

What Is on Masmoudi's Mind

Masmoudi made the following major points to Secretary Rogers:

—He feels that there is a real possibility for peace in the Middle East but everything depends on the U.S. and Israel. The U.S. will have to press the Israelis to be more forthcoming if there is to be chance for peace settlement.

—Any peace settlement must take fully into account the desires of the Palestinians. The Arabs, Israelis and the U.S. must recognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinians and make provision for a “Palestinian homeland” if any peace settlement is to stick over the long term.

—He feels very strongly that our presence in the Mediterranean should remain and not be decreased. His main concern is the growing soviet role and presence.

More specifically—though he will probably not mention this to you—Tunisia is concerned with the declining level of U.S. economic assistance [they want more PL480 than we have been able to promise] and U.S. inability to provide anything like the kind of military assistance they would like. [They have a shopping list worth $50-60 million, and our whole MAP appropriation for all Africa is only $20 million with $3 million programmed for Tunisia.]

Talking Points

1. We understand the point that President Bourguiba and the Foreign Minister have made—that legitimate Palestinian concerns must be met if there is to be a lasting peace settlement. What we still have difficulty understanding is exactly how the Tunisians envision a process that could take Palestinian concerns into account. For instance:

—What do the Palestinians want that is achievable? [They say they want a binational Palestine, but that seems unlikely to happen. What can they honorably settle for?]

—How do Palestinian aspirations and the future of Jordan relate?

—Who can speak for all the Palestinians? Do the fedayeen leaders fairly represent them?

2. The U.S. tried to demonstrate in September that it remains actively and intimately concerned with the preservation of freedom in the Mediterranean.

—How does the Minister see European participation in this process evolving?

3. The U.S. wants to continue working with Tunisia in the military and economic assistance fields to the extent our resources permit. The Minister understands the difficulties the Administration has in getting adequate appropriations from the Congress. Tunisia should understand that the level of assistance that is possible is not a measure of the Administration's attitude toward Tunisia. [You may recall that the President in his talk with their Foreign Minister Bourguiba, Jr., a year ago at the UN indicated sympathy with Tunisia's military assistance needs.]

A State Department memo with a biographic paragraph on Masmoudi is attached. He is a possible successor to president Bourguiba. He speaks only French.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 745, Country Files, Africa, Tunisia, Vol. I. Confidential. Sent for information. The attached Department of State memorandum is not printed.

148. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 29, 1970 148. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 29, 19701

Washington, October 29, 1970

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Tunisian Foreign Minister Mohammed Masmoudi

Ambassador Slaheddine El-Goulli

Ambassador Abdelaziz Lasrarm, Director of International Cooperation in the Tunisian

Foreign Ministry

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President

Mr. Harold H. Saunders,NSC Staff

Mr. Alec G. Toumayan, Interpreter, State Department

DATE AND PLACE:

October 29, 1970, in Dr. Kissinger's Office

After exchanging greetings with his visitor, Dr. Kissinger indicated that he was aware of his conversation with the Secretary of State and with his views in general. The Foreign Minister then proceeded to cover the following points:

He explained the role Tunisia had been called upon to play and how important it was for the US to support it in its present role. First called “traitors” by Nasser because they had advocated calm and reason, the Tunisians had recently seen their position vindicated by Nasser himself, who, a few days before he died, had stated categorically that he did not want war and that the Tunisians had been right in the stand they had taken.

The growing Soviet presence in the Mediterranean was a cause of deep preoccupation. The Soviets now openly declare themselves “a Mediterranean power” by virtue of the Mediterranean Sea being an extension of the Black Sea. He recalled that a few years ago the French would dismiss any remark about Soviet penetration into the Mediterranean and would refer to that presence as short-term and temporary.

He emphasized the need for the United States to focus on the central idea of a settlement and not become obsessed with details. He cautioned us against engaging in a step-by-step escalation supplying weapons to the Israelis because the Egyptians had moved missiles. This escalation could only lead to ultimate folly.

He was proud that Tunisia had been able to introduce a new approach; a new method of work, and that other Arabs listened to Tunisia and responded to this calm approach.

Dr. Kissinger said that he had followed every point the Minister had made so far except one. Why was it incomprehensible that we would like to maintain an agreement that we had proposed in the first place and that we had every reason to believe had been accepted by the UAR? When he had first heard of the violations of the standstill agreement he had not believed them because he could not believe that any country would engage so soon in violations of those agreements. He had studied the evidence. The Secretary of State had spent five hours reviewing the evidence and there was absolutely no doubt that there had been massive violations. Thus, why was it difficult to understand that we wanted to maintain this agreement that we had initiated?

The Foreign Minister responded by restating his argument on the perils of escalation and on the importance for the United States to view the overall idea of a settlement rather than focusing on details such as getting the Israelis to accept indirect negotiations, to use or not to use the term “withdrawal”; all these were details.

Turning to the Palestinian aspects, he stressed that no settlement can be arrived at without a settlement of the Palestinian question. This included secure and guaranteed borders for a Palestinian entity.

Dr. Kissinger asked what would happen to Jordan in this process of redefining borders. The Foreign Minister replied that Jordan would become what it had been in the past— “Trans-Jordan.” He urged the US to be more understanding toward the Palestinians and stressed that in his view El Fatah was the responsible party with whom to open an eventual dialogue.

Dr. Kissinger expressed regret at having to go to another meeting but stressed how valuable it was for him to have had the benefit of the Minister's advice and counsel. The Minister should be assured that we share the basic principles he had outlined. We also want peace in the Middle East to be established for several generations. We want to encourage moderates like Tunisia in their development without the pressures and the tensions under which they labor at present. We want to work usefully for peace and our ideas and objectives are very very close to the Minister's own.

The Minister expressed the hope that on his future visits to Washington he would have the opportunity to meet with Dr. Kissinger and compare thoughts and ideas with him. He considered this as extremely important and valuable. Dr. Kissinger responded that, indeed, his feelings would be hurt if the Minister did not call on him when he came to Washington again.

[H.H. initialed]

Harold H. Saunders

1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Box CL 268, Memoranda of Conversation, Chronological File, October 1970. Confidential. Drafted by Saunders. The meeting took place in Kissinger's office. In telegram 182778 to Tunis, November 6, the Department provided a memorandum of a conversation between Rogers and Masmoudi, October 28, in which the latter expounded on the need for Washington to put pressure on Israel to achieve Middle East peace, and to take account of the Palestinian movement as a political force. (National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 7 TUN)

149. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, November 12, 1970, 3 p.m. 149. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, November 12, 1970, 3 p.m.1

Washington, November 12, 1970, 3 p.m.

[3 pages not declassified in time for publication]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files, Box 24, FRC 73-A-1975, Tunisia 1970, 000.1, Jan---. Secret

150. Telegram 1 From the Embassy in Tunisia to the Department of State, January 1, 1971, 1800Z. 150. Telegram 1 From the Embassy in Tunisia to the Department of State, January 1, 1971, 1800Z. 1

January 1, 1971, 1800Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY TUNIS 0001
0 011800Z JAN 71 ZFF4

FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4465

SUBJECT:

ILLNESS OF PRESIDENT BOURGUIBA

REF:

STATE 210077 AND PREVIOUS

1. DOCTORS BARNES AND MAGAL HAVE EXAMINED PRESIDENT BOURGUIBA ON THREE OCCASIONS DURING PAST TWO DAYS AND HAVE HELD LENGTHY CONSULTATIONS WITH TEAM OF TUNISIAN DOCTORS, AS WELL AS WITH MRS. BOURGUIBA WHO IS IN ALMOST CONSTANT ATTENDANCE WITH THE PRESIDENT. DOCTORS WILL SEE PRESIDENT AGAIN SATURDAY, JAN. 2, AT 5:00 P.M. AT WHICH TIME SWISS DOCTOR AND FRENCH PSYCHIATRIST WHO TREATED BURGUIBA IN PARIS WILL ALSO BE PRESENT.

2. BARNES' AND MAGAL'S PRELIMINARY DIAGNOSIS IS THAT THE PRESIDENT WAS SUFFERING FROM “INVOLUTIONAL MELANCHOLIA” AND THAT POSSIBLY SUPERIMPOSED ON THIS CONDITION NOW IS ORGANIC BRAIN DISEASE, PROBABLY ARTERIOSCLEROSIS. THE DOCTORS REPORT THAT IN THE PAST THE INVOLUTIONAL MELANCHOLIA HAS BEEN TREATED IN PARIS WITH SHOCK THERAPY (TWO SERIES). THE DOCTORS FEEL, HOWEVER, THAT BOURGUIBA HAS NOT HAD ADEQUATE DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES, E.G. HE HAS NOT HAD SKULL X-RAYS, BRAIN SCAN, PNEUMOENCEPHALOGRAM, GLUCOSE TOLERANCE TEST, SPECIAL LECTROENCEPHALOGRAMS, OR SPINAL TAP, AND THAT THEIR LIKELY RECOMMENDATION, WHICH WILL BE GIVEN AFTER THE SATURDAY EXAMINATION, WILL BE THAT PRESIDENT BURGUIBA GO TO SOME UNSPECIFIED MEDICAL CENTER (SUCH AS ZURICH, LONDON) WHERE SUCH STUDIES CAN BE MADE. CERTAIN TESTS CANNOT BE DONE IN TUNISIA. WHILE THEY INDICATE THAT BOURGUIBA MAY WELL BE MOVING DOWNHILL RAPIDLY TOWARD PROGRESSIVE ENFEEBLEMENT, THEY CANNOT RULE OUT THE CHANCE THAT HE HAS A TREATABLE CONDITION, WHICH CAN ONLY BE DETERMINED WITH FURTHER TESTS.

3. THE DOCTORS REPORT THAT PRESIDENT BOURGUIBA SPENDS ALL HIS TIME IN BED, UNDER HEAVY SEDATION. DESPITE THIS MEDICINE, HE HAS CONSTANT INSOMNIA. BOURGUIBA HAS SERIOUS SPEECH IMPEDIMENT WHICH MAY BE PARTLY DUE TO HEAVY SEDATION OR ORGANIC BRAIN DISEASE. HE STARTS SENTENCES AND THEN STOPS IN THE MIDDLE SEARCHING FOR WORD OR PHRASE AND USUALLY TURNS TO HIS WIFE FOR HELP. BOURGUIBA CAN FOLLOW THROUGH WITH IDEAS, BUT THESE SHOW SIGNS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERIORATION. BOURGUIBA IS OBSESSED WITH IDEA THAT HE IS NEARING THE END AND THAT HIS PASSING WILL ALSO BRING THE END OF TUNISIA. HE CONSTANTLY REFERS TO HIS EARLIER ROLE IN UNIFYING TUNISIA AND IDENTIFIES HIMSELF COMPLETELY WITH TUNISIA. HE DEPICTS HIMSELF, WITH ARMS OUTSTRETCHED, AS A MODERN ATLAS HOLDING UP TUNISIA. HE IS IN A VERY EMOTIONAL STATE, TEARS FLOW FREQUENTLY, AND HE FREQUENTLY USES WORDS SUCH AS “TRISTE” (SAD), “FATIGUE” (TIRED) AND “FAIBLE” (WEAK) AND REFERS TO TUNISIANS AS HIS CHILDREN. HE REFERRED TO BEING SURROUNDED BY FRIENDS AND “TRAITORS,” HARPING AT LENGTH ON THE PERFIDIOUS BEN SALAH, AND “DIVISIONS” AHEAD. THE PRESIDENT CONSTANTLY RETURNS TO THE PAST AND EXCULPATES HIMSELF OF ALL WRONGS, AND CREDITS HIMSELF WITH ALL THE POSITIVE DEVELOPMENTS IN RECENT TUNISIAN HISTORY.

4. THE DOCTORS REPORT FURTHER THAT THE PRESIDENT HIMSELF, MRS. BOURGUIBA AND THE TUNISIAN DOCTORS INDICATE THAT BOURGUIBA SEEMS TO BECOME MOST AGITATED DURING THE AFTERNOON. IN SUCH “CRISIS” MOMENTS, ACCORDING TO MRS. BOURGUIBA, THE PRESIDENT ASKS FOR A REVOLVER IN ORDER TO END HIS LIFE. HE COMPLAINS THAT HE IS COMPLETELY USELESS. MRS. BOURGUIBA REPORTS THAT THE PRESIDENT HAS TRIED TO CHOKE HER, CLAIMING THAT HE WANTS HER TO DIE WITH HIM. AS THE PRESIDENT IS STILL PHYSICALLY STRONG, MRS. BOURGUIBA SAYS SHE IS AFRAID OF THE PRESIDENT AND CAN'T GO ON MUCH LONGER. AS THERE IS A DANGER THE PRESIDENT MAY TRY TO COMMIT SUICIDE, HE MUST BE WATCHED CONTINUALLY BY ATTENDANTS.

5. DOCTORS BARNES AND MAGAL REPORT THAT THEY ALSO TALKED WITH PRIME MINISTER NOUIRA AT THE PALACE TODAY. THE PRIME MINISTER FEELS UNDER URGENT PRESSURE TO ISSUE A COMMUNIQUE ON THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH. THE PRIME MINISTER ALSO WANTS A WRITTEN REPORT FROM THE DOCTORS. THE DOCTORS HAVE INDICATED THAT THEY WILL NATURALLY DELAY MAKING ANY RECOMMENDATIONS UNTIL AFTER THE CONSULTATION WITH THE SWISS AND FRENCH DOCTORS TOMORROW. HOWEVER, THEY ADVISED ME THAT THEY ARE PRESENTLY PLANNING TO MAKE A REPORT TO THE TUNISIAN DOCTORS (PROBABLY TO DR. M'BAREK, WHO IS THE TUNISIAN PSYCHIATRIST ON THE MEDICAL TEAM) WHICH, IN CAUTIOUS LANGUAGE, WILL MERELY STATE THAT THE PRESIDENT SHOULD GO SOMEPLACE WHERE HE CAN HAVE THE PROPER DIAGNOSTIC TESTS. THE DOCTORS REPORT THERE SEEMS TO BE SOME RELUCTANCE ON THE TUNISIAN SIDE, MAINLY FROM THE TUNISIAN MEDICAL TEAM, TO LETTING THE PRESIDENT GO ABROAD, AND THE TUNISIAN DOCTORS SEEM TO BE THE ONES PUSHING FOR AN AMERICAN MEDICAL TEAM TO COME IN AND HELP TAKE CARE OF THE PRESIDENT. BARNES AND MAGAL SAID THAT THE PRESIDENT INDICATED TO THEM THAT HE WOULD BE WILLING TO GO ABROAD IF THAT WERE THE RECOMMENDATION.

6. COMMENT A. THE PRIME MINISTER IS OBVIOUSLY FEELING THE PRESSURE TO REPORT TO HIS CABINET AND THEN TO ISSUE A COMMUNIQUE ON THE PRESIDENT'S CONDITION AND PLANS. IN SUCH A COMMUNIQUE, REFERENCE MAY WELL BE MADE TO THE CONSULTATIVE SERVICES OF THE AMERICAN DOCTORS, AS WELL AS TO THE SWISS AND FRENCH DOCTORS, IF THIS OCCURS, WE BELIEVE IT WOULD NOT ONLY BE NECESSARY BUT ADVISABLE FOR THE TUNISIAN GOVERNMENT TO ISSUE SUCH A PUBLIC STATEMENT MENTIONING AMERICAN PARTICIPATION.

B. DOCTORS BARNES AND MAGAL BELIEVE THAT THEY MUST GIVE THE TUNISIAN DOCTORS A CAUTIOUSLY WORDED WRITTEN REPORT. THOUGH IT WILL NOT BE SUBMITTED UNTIL AFTER THE SATURDAY CONSULTATIONS WITH THE SWISS AND FRENCH DOCTORS, THEY DO NOT ANTICIPATE ANY CHANGE IN THEIR RECOMMENDATION. (THEIR REPORT WOULD BE ADDRESSED TO THF TUNISIAN DOCTORS IN THEIR CAPACITY AS CONSULTANTS.) THE DOCTORS WILL REFRAIN FROM RECONMENDING ANY SPECIFIC PLACE OUTSIDE OF TUNISIA FOR THESE FURTHER DIAGNOSTIC TESTS. HOWEVER, BARNES AND MAGAL ANTICIPATE THAT THE TUNISIANS MAY SUGGEST THAT BOURGUIBA GO TO THE UNITED STATES FOR THIS PURPOSE.

C. THE PRIME MINISTER WILL UNDOUBTEDLY REQUEST FURTHER ASSISTANCE FROM THE UNITED STATES, EVEN THOUGH HE FULLY UNDERSTANDS THAT THE SERVICES OF THE AMERICAN DOCTORS HAVE BEEN GIVEN WITHOUT FURTHER COMMITMENT.

D. WE WILL COMMENT FURTHER AFTER TOMORROW NIGHT'S MEETING. THE DOCTORS ARE TENTATIVELY PLANNING TO LEAVE TUNIS ON SUNDAY BUT WILL REMAIN LONGER IF NECESSARY. IN THE MEANTIME WASHINGTON COMMENT WOULD BE APPRECIATED.
GP-1.

RELPH

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 TUN. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. In telegram 6097 from Rabat, December 26, the Embassy had conveyed the urgent request of Prime Minister Nouira for a U.S. psychiatric team to be dispatched to Tunisia to treat Bourguiba. (Ibid.) In telegram 209981 to Rabat, December 29, the Department advised the Embassy that an American internist and psychiatrist would arrive in Tunis on December 31. (Ibid.)

151. Telegram 9 From the Embassy in Tunisia to the Department of State, January 3, 1971, 0200Z. 151. Telegram 9 From the Embassy in Tunisia to the Department of State, January 3, 1971, 0200Z.1

January 3, 1971, 0200Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY TUNIS 0009
0 030300Z JAN 71 ZFF4

FM

AMEMBASSY TUNIS

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4470

TUNIS 0009

SUBJECT:

ILLNESS OF PRESIDENT BOURGUIBA

REF:

STATE 2871

1. PRIME MINISTER NOUIRA CAME TO MY HOUSE LATE TONIGHT (JANUARY 2) DIRECTLY FROM THE PRESIDENT'S PALACE. HE SAID THAT AFTER HEARING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE AMERICAN DOCTORS, ALL OF THE DOCTORS HAD FULLY ACCEPTED THE RECOMMENDATIONS AND AGREED THAT THE PRESIDENT SHOULD GO ABROAD FOR FURTHER TESTING AND TREATMENT, PREFERABLY IN THE UNITED STATES. AS A RESULT, NOUIRA SAID THE PRESIDENT AND HIS WIFE AS WELL AS HIMSELF AND HIS GOVERNMENT HAVE DECIDED THAT PRESIDENT BOURGUIBA SHOULD GO TO THE UNITED STATES FOR MEDICAL TREATMENT. THE PRIME MINISTER ADDED THAT HE HAD CALLED A CABINET MEETING FOR THE MORNING OF JANUARY 3 TO BRIEF HIS MINISTERS. AFTER EXPRESSING DEEP APPRECIATION FOR ALL THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT HAD DONE IN THIS EMERGENCY, HE THEN SPECIFICALLY ASKED THE UNITED STATES TO ASSIST IN DETERMINING THE APPROPRIATE MEDICAL CENTER AND IN PROVIDING THE TRANSPORTATION. UNDER SUBSEQUENT QUESTIONING, HE INDICATED THAT THE TUNISIAN GOVERNMENT WOULD PAY ALL THE EXPENSES. “ALL, ALL”, HE EMPHASIZED.

2. I EXPLAINED TO THE PRIME MINISTER THAT IT WOULD SEEM MORE APPROPRIATE AND IN KEEPING WITH PAST PRACTICE IF THE PRESIDENT WENT TO EUROPE. HE COULD BE ASSURED OF THE SAME TESTING AND TREATMENT FACILITIES IN ANY NUMBER OF EUROPEAN CITIES, AND IT WOULD BE A LOGICAL DEVELOPMENT IN EXPLAINING HIS DEPARTURE TO THE TUNISIAN PUBLIC. THE PRIME MINISTER EMPHASIZED THAT EVERYONE WAS IN AGREEMENT THAT IT SHOULD BE THE UNITED STATES; AND THAT IN EUROPE, CLOSE TO TUNISIA, HE WOULD CONTINUE TO BE INVOLVED IN WHAT IS GOING ON IN TUNISIA. DESPITE MY FURTHER EFFORTS, NOUIRA WOULD NOT BE DISSUADED FROM INSISTING ON THE UNITED STATE AS THE VENUE FOR PRESIDENT BOURGUIBA'S TESTS AND TREATMENT.

3. ACCORDINGLY, I SAID I WOULD TRANSMIT HIS REQUEST TO WASHINGTON. HE PRESSED STRONGLY FOR ASSISTANCE WHICH WOULD PERMIT PRESIDENT BOURGUIBA TO DEPART ON MONDAY OR TUESDAY. I EXPLAINED THAT OVER THE LONG NEW YEAR'S WEEKEND THIS WOULD BE VERY DIFFICULT, BUT THAT, OF COURSE, I KNEW THE USG WOULD GIVE URGENT ATTENTION TO HIS REQUEST.

4. FOLLOWING NOUIRA'S VISIT, I TALKED WITH DOCTORS BARNES AND MAGAL. THEY CONFIRMED THAT ALL THE DOCTORS, TUNISIAN, FRENCH, SWISS, AND U.S., AFTER MEETING WITH PRESIDENT BOURGUIBA, HAD PREPARED A BRIEF, SIGNED STATEMENT IN WHICH THEY AGREED UNANIMOUSLY THAT THE PRESIDENT NEEDED FURTHER DIAGNOSTIC EXAMINATION AND TREATMENT OUTSIDE OF TUNISIA. IN THIS BULLETIN THE DOCTORS EXPRESSED PREFERENCE FOR SUCH TESTING IN THE UNITED STATES. (DRS. BARNES AND MAGAL EMPHASIZED THAT, DESPITE THEIR TACTFUL EFFORTS, THE TUNISIANS WOULD NOT BE DISSUADED FROM THEIR DECISION THAT PRESIDENT BOURGUIBA SHOULD GO TO THE UNITED STATES FOR TREATMENT.) THE DOCTORS FELT HE NEEDED A COMPLETE CHANGE OF ENVIRONMENT. HOWEVER, THE DECISION ABOUT WHERE THE PRESIDENT SHOULD GO FOR THIS TREATMENT WAS SPECIFICALLY LEFT TO THE FAMILY. THE PRIME MINISTER HAD NOT WANTED BOURGUIBA TO LEAVE THE COUNTRY—HE FELT IT WOULD BE BAD FOR POLITICAL REASONS—NOR DID MRS. BOURGUIBA AT FIRST, BUT THEY ALL AGREED IN THE END, AFTER CONSULTING THE PRESIDENT A SECOND TIME, THAT THE UNITED STATES WOULD BE THE BEST PLACE WHERE HE COULD OBTAIN THE FINEST EXPERTISE. IN THE END, THEY WERE GUIDED BY WHAT THEY FELT WAS BEST FOR THE PRESIDENT. THE PRESIDENT HAD TOLD THEM, “HE WOULD DO ANYTHING TO GET BETTER.”

5. COMMENT: NOUIRA WAS ASKING URGENTLY FOR ANY ASSISTANCE WE COULD OFFER. HE WOULD UNDOUBTEDLY LIKE THE U.S. TO INVITE PRESIDENT BOURGUIBA TO STAY AT A VIP MEDICAL FACILITY LIKE WALTER REED, BUT HE DID NOT ASK FOR THIS DIRECTLY. HE ONLY ASKED FOR ASSISTANCE IN DETERMINING THE APPROPRIATE MEDICAL CENTER WHERE HE MIGHT GO, PRIVATE OR USG, AND FOR HELP IN PROVIDING TRANSPORTATION. HE INDICATED THAT HE HOPED AN AMERICAN AIRCRAFT COULD BE MADE AVAILABLE FOR THIS PURPOSE. I WAS, OF COURSE, NON-COMMITTAL WITH THE PRIME MINISTER AS TO WHAT COURSE OF ACTION THE USG WILL TAKE, BUT AGAIN ASSURED HIM THAT HIS REQUEST WOULD RECEIVE URGENT AND SYMPATHETIC ATTENTION. DR. BARNES AND DR. MAGAL STATED TO ME THAT THE PRESIDENT SHOULD GO TO A MEDICAL CENTER WHERE HE CAN HAVE BOTH PSYCHIATRIC AND NEUROLOGICAL CARE.

6. THE MANNER IN WHICH WE RESPOND TO THIS REQUEST IS VERY IMPORTANT. IN MY OPINION, IT SHOULD BE QUICK, POSITIVE AND GENEROUS. I DO NOT WANT TO DWELL ON THE OBVIOUS. BOURGUIBA HAS BEEN A LONG AND FAITHFUL FRIEND OF THE UNITED STATES AND HE HAS HAD A CLOSE RELATIONSHIP WITH PRESIDENTS NIXON, EISENHOWER, KENNEDY AND JOHNSON. HE IS SERIOUSLY ILL. HE WANTS TO GO TO THE UNITED STATES WHERE HE FEELS HE WILL GET THE FINEST MEDICAL ATTENTION. WHILE RECOGNIZING THAT THERE MAY BE ULTIMATELY SOME CRITICISM OF THE U.S. IF HE FOLLOWS THE SAME COURSE AS MONGI SLIM, THERE WILL BE MUCH MORE POLITICAL FALLOUT, IF THE U.S. FAILS TO RESPOND TO THIS URGENT PLEA FOR ASSISTANCE IN A MANNER IN KEEPING WITH THE TRADITION OF OUR RELATIONSHIP.

7. REQUEST DEPARTMENT PASS PARIS.
GP-1

RELPH
(NOT PASSED TO PARIS BY OC/T JANUARY 3, 1971)

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 TUN. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. In telegram 261 to Tunis, January 3, the Department, “in view great esteem USG has for Bourguiba and in recognition President's long friendship for US,” offered military evacuation aircraft to carry Bourguiba to Walter Reed Army Hospital. (Ibid.) The physicians at Walter Reed confirmed the President's involutional depression and “mild but definite arterial brain damage.” (Ibid.)

152. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 4, 1971 152. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 4, 19711

Washington, March 4, 1971

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
INFORMATION
24884 25302

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM: Henry A. Kissinger

SUBJECT:

Eventual Transfer of Power in Tunisia

As you know, President Bourguiba was recently at Walter Reed Hospital for diagnosis of his deteriorating brain condition and is now undergoing treatment in Switzerland. He is not mortally ill, but there is little prospect that he will be able to resume his duties except, at most, on a part time and largely ceremonial basis. Below just for background are a few comments on the elements in the situation in Tunisia and the eventual possible implications for our bilateral relations.

Succession Problem

Until now in Tunisia political power has been highly centralized and personalized in Bourguiba. The people and institutions under him have been of only secondary importance. Fortunately, Bourguiba's decline has been gradual and this has given him and the other leaders some chance to focus on the succession problem.

At Bourguiba's initiative the constitution was amended last year to provide for the automatic succession of the Prime Minister should the President die, resign or become incapacitated. Then in early February, Prime Minister Nouira proposed, presumably with Bourguiba's approval, a new procedure for selecting a successor. Under the new measures a Presidential vacancy would be filled by the President of the National Assembly for “a few weeks,” during which time he would be required to arrange for National Presidential elections in which he could not himself be a candidate.

Other pending amendments to the constitution would circumscribe the authority of the President by increasing the powers of the Prime Minister and National Assembly. They would, for instance, give the now relatively powerless National Assembly the right under certain as yet unspecified circumstances to force the Prime Minister and his Cabinet to resign.

The National Assembly has now appointed a special commission to study the proposals, which are the result of extensive deliberation by the Tunisian leadership over the past eight months. It is expected that the measures will be passed with few if any changes, although the process can not be completed before mid-May at the earliest.

Bilateral Relations

Even if the transfer of power and democratization measures go smoothly, we must expect some modification of the relationship between the United States and Tunisia. Much of the parallelism between Tunisia and U.S. foreign policy and friendship for the U.S. has stemmed from Bourguiba personally. He has viewed the U.S. as a powerful friend in the strategic North Africa-Mediterranean area and one that has stood by Tunisia in its numerous quarrels with the French and has contributed to Tunisia's economic development.

Bourguiba's political heir or heirs are less likely to feel the same personal sense of attachment for the U.S. Moreover, none of them—Nouira, former Prime Minister Ladgham, Foreign Minister Masmoudi, or Minister of Interior Ahmed Mestri—has either the personality or prestige that would make it possible for him fully to withstand domestic and Arab pressures for a more “Arab” policy on the Middle East and more non-alignment on other issues of importance to us. On the other hand, the new leadership is not likely to respond to Soviet blandishments, although any further reductions in our economic and military aid will make it more difficult for Tunisia to resist Soviet offers.

In short, a shift in political forces is already underway and with it a change in the tone of our relationship. In this process, the Tunisians may begin to gradually adopt more positions at variance with ours, both on regional and wider international issues. However, barring a major revolution in Tunisia, which nobody for sees, the chances are that the Tunisians will continue to want a relationship with the U.S. Even if they do not, Tunisia can not damage U.S. interests in the Mediterranean. We have no economic interests there and no military interests. What is likely to happen when Bourguiba goes is that we will drift into a new relationship rather than finding ourselves precipitated into one.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 745, Country Files, Africa, Tunisia, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for information. This document is an unsigned copy. Attached but not printed is the January 22 memorandum from Rogers to the President on the “Transfer of Power in Tunisia.”

153. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, April 13, 1971 153. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, April 13, 19711

Washington, April 13, 1971

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION 27274
April 13, 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR DR. KISSINGER

FROM: Harold H. Saunders [signed Hal]

SUBJECT:

Tunisian Military Assistance

You may recall that when the President saw former Tunisian Foreign Minister Bourguiba, Jr. in New York at the UN in September 1969, he assured him that the U.S. would do what it reasonably could to help meet Tunisia's defense needs.

Doing this has been a continuing struggle because of the low overall ceiling imposed in the Foreign Assistance Act on military assistance to Africa and the need to recognize that Tunisia's economy will not support a large defense establishment. Therefore, our programmers have had to work at levels well below what the military planners might design even as a minimal defense force for Tunisia.

At present, the military assistance programmers are working within the concept of a $45 million package over 5 years—this representing not the amount of money we can provide but the value of the equipment that Tunisia might try to procure from all sources.

In the attached memorandum and telegram, State and Defense seek clearance on a telegram informing the Tunisians that we have been able to add $1 million to the present $3 million program for FY 1971. Within that ceiling, the Tunisians would make their own choices between items earlier programmed and new items available, including some M-48 tanks, medium helicopters, mortars and anti-aircraft artillery.

The particular reason for seeking White House clearance on the attached package is that Secretary Rogers, in order to make the most of this modest increase, has decided to send a personal message to Foreign Minister Masmoudi. In that message he would recall the President's earlier expression of “full sympathy with Tunisia's sustained efforts to achieve its economic and social development goals in an atmosphere of peace and security.” The most significant statement in this message is in the next to last paragraph of the message [bottom of page 3 in the first telegram attached to the Eliot to Kissinger memorandum]. This assures the Foreign Minister “on behalf of the President that he remains personally interested in Tunisia's security and that the United States will do what it can, within the limits imposed by available resources, to assist in its sound development.” The statement of personal “interest in Tunisia's security” has over the years represented the extent to which we have been willing to go in response to Tunisia's request for a special security relationship with the United States. This says neither more nor less than has been said before.

Recommendation: That you clear the attached telegram with its references to the President's concern for Tunisian security and development.

Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 745, Country Files, Africa, Tunisia, Vol. I. Secret. Sent for action. Kissinger approved the recommendation. The attachments are not printed.

154. Airgram A-41 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Tunisia, June 22, 1971 154. Airgram A-41 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Tunisia, June 22, 19711

June 22, 1971

AIRGRAM
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
A-41
JUN 22, 1971

TO:

Amembassy TUNIS

FROM:Department of State DATE:

SUBJECT :

Policy Planning Paper

REF :

CA-5632, November 3, 1970

Attached are three copies of the Policy Planning Paper for Tunisia, as approved by the members of the NSC Interdepartmental Group for Africa.

The paper constitutes an official statement of US policy towards Tunisia and should be used as a guideline by all elements of the Embassy in the preparation of policy statements, action plans and future budgetary projections.

ROGERS

Enclosure As Stated

TUNISIA: Policy Planning Paper
Approved by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for Africa
June 1971

TUNISIA: Policy Planning Paper

A. U.S. Interests in Tunisia

1. Continuation of Tunisia's friendly and constructive voice in North African and Middle Eastern affairs which may in the future be increasingly helpful to larger US interests in the area.

2. Because of overall U.S. political and military interests in the Mediterranean, Tunisia's strategic position, flanking the Sicilian straits, is important to the United States and NATO, especially in the event of non-nuclear or nuclear war on a limited scale. Access to Tunisian ports for recreation purposes by the Sixth Fleet has also supported U.S. political-military and intelligence objectives.

3. Tunisia's emphasis on economic development offers a market for U.S. goods, services, and possibly, a field for private investment. The internal market would be limited, however, owing to Tunisia's restricted resource base and relatively small purchasing power.

4. Thus, U.S. interests in Tunisia are mainly political and strategic; U.S. economic interest is represented largely by the important USG investment in Tunisian development, which reflects our political interests and the capabilities and intentions of Tunisian leaders with respect to economic and social development and political stability. Our strategic interests are essentially negative. It would be contrary to our interests for Tunisia to be utilized by a hostile power capable of military action against NATO.

B. U.S. Objectives Over the Next Five Years

1. Maintenance of close and mutually useful U.S.-Tunisian relationship, including frank governmental exchanges on bilateral as well as area matters and objectives. In this process seek Tunisian understanding of the limitations on U.S. economic and military assistance.

2. Encouragement of Tunisia's constructive role and increasingly influential position on issues within the Arab and non-aligned world.

3. Maintenance of internal stability during a difficult and crucial transitional period in domestic political and economic affairs.

4. Improvement in Tunisia's economic performance especially productivity, through better use of existing investment and resources and with emphasis on agriculture and population control.

5. Increased western European interest in Tunisia's sound economic development and security against external aggression.

6. To assist in maintenance and gradual modernization of Tunisia's modest self-defense capability.

7. Continued U.S. access to the Tunisian market on a non-discriminatory basis for U.S. goods, services, and private capital.

C. Tunisia's Objectives Vis-a-vis the United States

1. Sustain a high level of U.S. economic and technical assistance to (a) make up domestic food deficit on concessional terms until agricultural production increases, (b) provide Local currency and dollar investment in the development program, and (c) provide Tunisia with its own improved human resource and institutional base for carrying on its continued development.

2. Seek maximum public evidence of U.S. interest in Tunisian security and obtain enough U.S. grant military assistance to provide a credible defensive capability at home and abroad, consistent with achievement of economic and social development goals.

3. Maintain sufficient “great power” interest to give Tunisia flexibility in dealing with its European and Arab neighbors without reducing Tunisia's ability to seek accommodations with them.

4. Persuade the United States to move closer to certain Tunisian positions on world issues, especially in the Mediterranean, Middle East and Africa, while maintaining present friendly ties with the United States.

D. Recommended Courses of Action

1. Political

a. Continue to cultivate close ties and frank consultations between leaders of both countries, including periodic visits by Tunisian chiefs of State and Government to the U.S. and high level visits to Tunisia.

b. Welcome, in pursuit of larger U.S. objectives, a greater flexibility and influence on the part of the GOT in world affairs, even if this means more frequent differences of view with the U.S. on some specific issues.

c. Encourage Tunisia to diversify its political and economic ties with non-communist countries, especially with Western Europe.

d. Continue the development of pro-Western internal security forces on a scale related to Tunisia's needs, especially through training.

2. Economic

a. Within the framework of the Tunisian Consultative Group, participate with other donors in providing economic and technical assistance, especially through PL 480 loans and grants, commodity (program) loans, project loans and technical assistance. U.S. assistance efforts should be reduced as Tunisian production and other donor inputs more nearly meet Tunisia's requirements.

b. Encourage additional assistance by other donors, both bilateral and through multinational agencies, and seek better coordination of all foreign assistance.

c. Support where useful the role of private U.S. organizations in Tunisia, including the Ford Foundation, the International Executive Service Corps, AALC, and the Voluntary Agencies.

d. Coordinate more closely the assistance efforts of all U.S. Government agencies, including HEW, Agriculture, the Smithsonian Institution, and the Peace Corps with the main objectives of the U.S. economic and technical assistance effort, especially in the case of foreign currency programs.

e. Attempt to reduce the area of Tunisian commercial discrimination against U.S. exports and to prepare the way for Tunisian participation in the U.S. generalized preferences trading proposal.

f. Encourage the GOT wherever possible to move towards a private enterprise system, remove restrictions on exports, free its currency, and limit its borrowings for capital projects without clearly defined, economically sound objectives.

3. Military

a. Continue to assist Tunisia within the limits of available resources in support of the new Tunisian defense plan, but at the same time encourage western nations to increase modestly their military assistance to Tunisia. The GOT and donors of military assistance should continue to be encouraged to relate planned military programs to Tunisia's economic development requirements.

b. in connection with (a) above, obtain increased cooperation from the GOT in allowing greater contact between U.S. and Tunisian military and in developing intelligence on Soviet military activities, especially Soviet naval and air activities in the Mediterranean.

c. Maintain U.S. Navy (6th Fleet) ship visits to Tunisian ports at appropriate levels.

4. Cultural

a. Maintain current level and quality of USIS programs in Tunisia, with emphasis on periodic high quality cultural presentations.

b. Expand the programs for visits to the U.S. by potential leaders and youth and by grants to qualified Tunisian graduate students for M.A. or PhD programs.

c. Encourage the teaching of English in Tunisia, primarily through a qualitative Peace Corps program, but also through USIS and USAID support if necessary.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 1 TUN-US. Secret; Noforn; Limdis. Drafted on June 21 by Nancy Rawls (AF/NSC-IG) and approved by Carter.

155. Telegram Secto 7/3076 From Secretary of State Rogers to the Department of State, October 2, 1971, 2231Z. 155. Telegram Secto 7/3076 From Secretary of State Rogers to the Department of State, October 2, 1971, 2231Z.1

October 2, 1971, 2231Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
USMISSION USUN NY 3076
PR 022231Z OCT 71

83

ACTION SS-25

INFO OCT-01 SSO-00 CCO-00 FILE-01/027 W 040130

P R 022231Z OCT 71

FM USMISSION USUN NY

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7542

INFO

AMEREMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY

AMEMBASSY CAIRO

AMEREMBASSY TEL AVIV

USUN 3076

SECTO 07
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION:
FM MASHOUDI (TUINISIA) SECRETARY'S OCTOBER 1 MEETING WITH FONMIN: PART I MIDDLE EAST. 9:30 A.M.,35A WALDORF.

1. PARTICIPANTS: TUNISIA - MASMOUDI, MINISTER MOUSSA; U.S. - THE SECRETARY, MR. DE PALMA, AMBASSADOR MCKESSON (REPORTING OFFICER), MR. TOUMAYAN (INTERPRETER).

2. SUMMARY: MASMOUDI SAID ARABS LONG FOR CLOSER TIES WITH US AND HOPE US CAN EXERT ITS INFLUENCE TO BRING ABOUT JUST PEACE IN AREA. SECRETARY EXPLAINED US POSITION STRESSING IMPORTANCE OF INTERIM AGREEMENT LEADING TO FINAL SETTLEMENT, BUT POINTED OUT FINAL TERMS OF LATTER COULD NOT BE DECIDED IN ADVANCE. MASMOUDI FORESAW CONTINUED STALEMATE WITH ALTERNATING TALKS AND SKIRMISHES. END SUMMARY.

3. MASMOUDI SAID THAT ON HIS RECENT TRIP TO MID EAST HE NOTED GEAT LONGING AMONG ARABS FOR BETTER AND CLOSER RELATIONS WITH U.S. ARABS ADMIRE NUMEIRI'S STAND IN SUDAN AND WANT TO SEE THE SOVIETS LEAVE EGYPT. THIS IS NOT AN IDEOLOGICAL POSITION BUT REFLECTS A FEELING THAT WITH CLOSER US TIES AREA WOULD BE CLOSER TO PEACER AND FREEDOM.

4. MASMOUDI SAID ARABS WONDER WHY U.S. DOES NOT UNDERSTAND AND HELP THEM MORE. THEY DO NOT WANT WAR BUT FEAR WAR IS ONLY OUTLET IF THINGS REMAIN AS THEY ARE. EGYPT WAS DISAPPOINTED WITH RECENT MEETING BETWEEN RIAD AND SECRETARY, ACCORDING TO MASMOUDI, AND CAIRO NOW FEELS CONDEMNED TO DO SOMETHING. ARABS ARE TALKING ABOUT REDUCING THE FLOW OF OIL AND ARE PREPARING FOR WAR KNOWING THEY CAN SUFFER MANY DEFEATS BUT THAT ISRAEL CANNOT SURVIVE ONE.

5. SECRETARY ROGERS SAID U.S. CAN DO NOTHING IF ARABS DECIDE ON WAR, BUT THAT A POLICY OF COURTING DEFEAT IS NO POLICY. THE U.S. CAN RE HELPFUL IN BRINGING ABOUT A SOLUTION IN WHICH ARABS WILL GET ALMOST EVERYTHING THEY WANT. OUR POLICY IS QUITE FAVORABLE TO THE ARABS AND THAT IS WHY IT IS CRITICIZED BY ISRAEL. THE PRESENT ADMINISTRATION HAS CHANGED THE U.S. POLICY OF THREE YEARS AGO AND THE ARABS SHOULD UNDERSTAND THIS AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF IT. WE OFFER POSSIBILITY OF PEACE, WITH ARABS OBTAINING ALMOST ALL THEY ASK FOR. SOVIETS TELL ARABS TO HOLD OUT FOR EVERYTHING THEY DEMAND AND OFFER NO ALTERNATIVE EXCEPT STALEMATE AND WAR. PROLONGATION OF PRESENT STATUS PLAYS INTO ISRAELI HANDS AND INTERIM SETTLEMENT WHICH WE FEEL CAN BE ACHIEVED IS MORE IN INTEREST OF ARABS THAN ISRAELIS. INTERIM AGREEMENT SHOULD BE STEP TOWARD FINAL SETTLEMENT BUT IT CANNOT SPELL OUT EXACTLY WHAT FINAL AGREEMENT WILL BE, OR THERE WOULD BE NO NEED FOR INTERIM STEP. THE U.S. POSITION IS THAT ISRAEL SHOULD RETURN SUBSTANTIALLY ALL OCCUPIED TERRITORIES EXCEPT FOR SOME MINOR SECURITY ADJUSTMENTS SUCH AS THE PROBLEM OF THE GOLAN HEIGHTS AND SHARM EL SHEIKH. SECRETARY SAID HE FAVORABLY IMPRESSED WITH SADAT AND BELIEVES INTERIM AGREEMENT CAN BE ACHIEVED WHICH WOULD BENEFIT EGYPT WITHOUT PREJUDICING FINAL SETTLEMENT BUT THAT NOTHING CAN BE DONE IF ARABS ASK FOR EVERYTHING THEY WANT PRIOR TO AN INTERIM ACCORD. AS IN CASE OF BERLIN AGREEMENT, SECRETARY POINT OUT THAT SOME THINGS CAN BE SETTLED WHILE OTHERS ARE NEGOTIATED LATER.

6. MASMQUDI SAID THAT AN INTERIM AGREEMENT WITHOUT AN UNDERSTANDING OF THE ULTIMATE GOAL WOULD BE DIFFICULT TO PROMOTE ON ARAB SIDE. HE FORESAW LITTLE LIKELIHOOD OF ANY PROGRESS UNDER PRESENT CONDITIONS AND EXPECTED THAT THE STALEMATE WOULD CONTINUE WITH INTERMITTENT TALKS AND SKIRMISHES. HE THEN RAISED BRIEFLY THE PROBLEM OF JERUSALEM.

7. THE SECRETARY RECALLED THAT WE SUPPORTED THE ARAB POSITION ON JERUSALEM AND SAID THAT WE CAN ONLY TRY TO HELP IF THE PARTIES WISHED TO MAKE PROGRESS. IT SEEMED TO US THAT EGYPT WOULD BE BETTER OFF WITH THE CANAL OPEN AND SUCH A MOVE COULD LEAD TO OTHERS.
GP-4

ROGERS

1 Source: National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 7 TUN. Confidential; Exdis. It was repeated Priority to Tunis and to Cairo and Tel Aviv. In telegram 4608, September 11, Calhoun reported Masmoudi's plea for U.S. support in achieving a political solution, which he passed along from Egyptian President Sadat. (Ibid., POL TUN)

156. Intelligence Memorandum 2101/71, Washington, December 8, 1971 156. Intelligence Memorandum 2101/71, Washington, December 8, 19711

Washington, December 8, 1971

DIRECTORATE OF INTELLIGENCE
Intelligence Memorandum
Tunisia: The Hour of Separation Approaches
8 December 1971
No. 2101/71

Note: This memorandum was prepared by the Office of Current Intelligence and coordinated within CIA.

I feel that the hour of separation is soon going to sound. I would like to be reassured on the future of this country, convinced of having left as successors men worthy of…continuing the work of Bourguiba. This must not perish after him.” Bourguiba, 15 Oct 70

Introduction

Habib Bourguiba, the dynamic 68-year-old leader who has dominated Tunisian politics for nearly 40 years, is moving reluctantly toward the end of his rule. Meanwhile, the government and the ruling Destourian Socialist Party are wrestling with the inter-related problems of decentralization of power and orderly presidential succession.

Two years ago, while recovering from a severe bout of viral hepatitis, Bourguiba faced a serious, and for him traumatic, crisis in which he had to reverse his agricultural policy. [text not declassified] His activities are circumscribed and closely monitored by his doctors. At best, his health is precarious, and he must pace his activities and avoid deep personal involvement in the daily affairs of government and party.

Bourguiba's rule has been pragmatic, paternalistic, highly personal, and autocratic. He wants to ensure a niche in history as the creator of a stable and respected nation-state. For the past decade he has time and again vacillated over the succession problem, but he has been reluctant to relax the reins of authority.

Many Tunisians leaders are well-schooled in the Bourguiba philosophy and should by able to govern effectively; competition among candidates for succession is seen as they maneuver for political backing. All are basically pro-West, but none so openly aligns himself with the US as Bourguiba.

BOURGUIBA

1. Assessing Tunisia's body politic requires insight into the personality of its chief architect, who calls himself the “supreme combatant.” Habib Bourguiba was born in 1903 at Monastir in the heart of the Sahel, a rich agricultural plain of eastern Tunisia which produced most of the country's pre-independence political leaders, bureaucrats, and intellectuals. He entered politics in the late 1920s after completing his education in French schools in Tunis and France. With other young intellectuals, almost all educated in France, he sought to revitalize the nationalist, but cautious, Destour (constitution) party that represented the interests of the small Tunisian bourgeoisie and landed gentry.

2. These efforts failed, and in 1934 Bourguiba and his peers broke away from the Destour to form the Neo-Destour party, now called the Destourian Socialist Party. The new party sought a mass, rather than a select, membership. During his first 20 years, the party was more often than not suppressed and, operating clandestinely, evolved into a highly disciplined organization. In 1938 Bourguiba became the second president of the party, but spent most of the years until 1956 in prison or in exile.

3. France's policy of repressing Tunisian nationalism was modified in 1954. From his prison cell, Bourguiba welcomed Premier Mendes-France's promise of self-government. Bourguiba's counsel to the Tunisian team during the arduous negotiations resulted in Tunisia's acceptance of limited autonomy, an admitted half loaf but better than none to Bourguiba. He was permitted to return home in mid-1955 to a hero's welcome. Nine months later, after Morocco had gained independence, Bourguiba persuaded France to give Tunisia its independence also. He became the first post-independence prime minister, and in July 1957, when the constituent assembly proclaimed Tunisia a republic, he was selected as the country's provisional president. Since the constitution was adopted in 1959, Bourguiba has been re-elected for three five-year terms. His present and constitutionally last term expires in November 1974; he is publicly committed to retire at that time.

4. When Bourguiba took charge of the-government in April 1956, he faced the familiar problems of any small country with few natural resources. Most of Tunisia's wealth was held by foreigners. The vast majority of its 3.5 million people was illiterate and existed at subsistence level. A rebellion against foreign rule in Algeria that raged along Tunisia's western border brought serious problems; armed Algerian guerrillas who took refuge in Tunisia and hundreds of thousands of Algerian refugees. Bourguiba's open resistance to the extension of Nasir's influence into North Africa, his avowedly anti-Communist position, and his outspoken support of the West were politically hazardous in the milieu of a newly independent Arab country. Faced with profound ignorance, poverty, xenophobia, and the opposition of Pan-Arabists and religious traditionalists, Bourguiba sought to improve living conditions—particularly housing—expand and modernize education, train cadres for both business and government, create more efficient public and private enterprises, modernize and diversify agriculture, and improve the quality of family life and the status of women.

Bourguibism

Bourguibism accepts the battle when forced to do so and is always victorious.

—Bourguiba

5. Bourguiba's philosophy of government has been strongly influenced by his French education and early association with European socialists and liberals. Basically a humanist, he rejected Marxism and embraced a socialism designed to promote the self-development of individuals. His avowed goal is the creation of a fundamentally egalitarian and modern society, a “showcase of democracy.”

6. In pursuit of this goal he has confronted the entrenched interests of foreign businesses and landowners, and the rich and powerful Tunisian families of the royal court. His programs to modernize Tunisian society have frequently run counter to Islamic practices and have often been greeted with suspicion, superstition, or apathy by the impoverished and ignorant. He restrained supporters who wanted to expel all foreigners. In maintaining a balance between divergent pressures, Bourguiba employed the techniques he had used in winning independence—to press forward; to be conciliatory, persuasive and patient; and if necessary, to back off until he could go forward again.

7. Although he publicly advocates democracy, Bourguiba in fact has maintained tight control over the government and party, making all major and many minor decisions and appointments. Tunisian democracy, he explains, must be guided carefully because the people still are politically immature. [text not declassified] As a result, governmental efficiency has suffered, and the party has lost much of its earlier vitality. Both government and party have had difficulty in attracting intellectuals and youth.

Forces of Change Within the Power Structure

The Neo-Destour is not a private club. A person does not renounce his faculty of judgment by joining…I am sure that once the Neo-Destourian principles are assimilated by all, civic consciousness diffused everywhere, the problems understood by everyone, and the national welfare become the common goal, no Tunisian will remain outside the Party.” —Bourguiba, 28 April 1963

8. Since independence, party and state have for all practical purposes been synonymous; key party leaders have held the key offices in both the party's executive body—the political bureau—and the government. Many party leaders particularly at the local and regional level had initially been elected to office. As time went on Bourguiba began to select them himself. Dissent was discouraged. Anyone who persisted in opposing or failed to execute a specific policy could expect dismissal from the government and the party. Although no formal censorship has been instituted, the press and the other news media have become uniformly uncritical of Bourguiba and those surrounding him. When the press speaks harshly of an official, it is likely that he is either facing early oblivion or has already been dismissed.

9. The cliques that are common within the monolithic political structure generally follow regional, ideological, and generation lines. The two dominant regional divisions are the Sahelians—inhabitants of the coastal area of eastern Tunisia where the party was formed and which supplied the early cadre—and the Tunisois—people born and living in or near the capital. The ideological split is between the conservatives (absolutists) who favor the retention of a strong, centralized authority and a controlled economy, and the liberals (reformists) who call for a more democratic party and government, relaxation of controls, and a freer economy. A generation gap exists between members of the party who were active in the thirties and forties and were imprisoned for their political activities and members born after about 1935. The older ones tend to be Sahelians and conservatives; the younger, Tunisois and liberal.

10. Since independence nearly 16 years ago, a whole new generation of Tunisians, better educated than their fathers, have entered the ranks of the party and bureaucracy. Most of them chafe under the regime's authoritarian and paternalistic practices. Many who supported the theory behind the formation of business, service and agricultural cooperatives begun during the 1960s were troubled by the fact many cooperatives were imposed without the consent of the participants.

11. AHMED MESTIRI, a member of this new generation, is the most prominent of Tunisia's liberals. He made his initial bid to rally support against forced cooperativization in January 1968. He was able to elicit only limited backing and publicly resigned as secretary of state for defense to dramatize his opposition. He was expelled from the party. Two years later, after the imposition of agricultural cooperatives was stepped up and aroused such widespread opposition that the policy had to be dropped, Mestiri was reintegrated into the party. He then helped formulate the program of expanding the authority of government and assembly announced by Bourguiba in June 1970. As executive secretary of the party's Superior Commission which was charged with drafting constitutional amendments and preparing for the quinquennial congress this fall, he was in an excellent position to press for changes in the system.

12. When the 1,000-member party congress was finally held in October, a groundswell of support for more democracy in the party and government became evident. After unexpectedly free discussion the delegates elected liberals to fill a majority of seats in the party's 58-member central committee. It was clear that most of the delegates were seeking new institutions and the free election of his successor when the ailing President steps down.

13. Bourguiba, however, backed by the Sahelian conservative minority, blocked this trend. Although a majority of the delegates had endorsed a proposal to change the existing procedure by which the prime minister would succeed to the presidency in the event of a vacancy, Bourguiba announced that Prime Minister Nouira was his choice as successor. In spite of the clear consensus that the congress should elect the political bureau, the President announced he intended to appoint its members. Mestiri aired his frustrations to the foreign press, and Bourguiba suspended him from party activities. Ultimately Bourguiba submitted a handpicked slate of 20 candidates to the central committee from which it elected the 14-man political bureau. The result was a largely conservative body. Even some liberals have criticized Mestiri for committing the unpardonable sin of discussing internal affairs with foreign press representatives. He will have to appear before a party disciplinary committee.

14. Despite the victory over the liberals, the ruling politicians—including Bourguiba—cannot be completely insensitive to the pressures for change. The liberals still have two forums—the party's central committee and the National Assembly—and they can be expected to make full use of both. Most prominent liberals will continue to work for evolutionary change, expecting that over the next year or so many of the propositions they support will be adopted.

15. By doggedly clinging to the status quo, the conservatives may see their fortunes decline still further. A leading conservative, 38-year-old MOHAMED SAYAH, [text not declassified] a member of the Nouira government and reputed to be a current favorite of Bourguiba, Sayah failed to be elected to the central committee and therefore was not eligible for selection to the political bureau. Should Bourguiba die or his term expire coincident with an expansion of liberal influence, the conservatives might try to seize power. Sayah is the only Tunisian now prominent who seems ruthless enough to attempt a power grab.

Outside the Power Structure

16. Dissident groups outside the power structure are too small, disparate, and disorganized to exert much influence on political developments or to pose more than a remote threat to the country's stability. Followers of Salah ben Youssef, expelled from the party in 1955 and murdered in 1961—presumably on Bourguiba's orders—have long been actively plotting from exile to upset the Bourguiba regime. There are also a few adherents of Marxism, Trotskyism, Maoism, and various Pan-Arab movements. The small Tunisian Communist party, banned since 1963, has an estimated 100 members. Most political exiles eke out a living from small and diminishing foreign subsidies, occasional handouts from sympathizers, or what wages they can earn in an uncertain labor market.

17. Islam exerts a subtle moral influence in Tunisia. While emphasizing Muslim moral values, Bourguiba has consistently sought to eliminate religious customs that impede economic modernization. His efforts have been but partially successful. His campaign to downgrade the strict observance of Ramadan, the economically unproductive Moslem month of daytime fasting and nighttime feasting (he labeled it a luxury a developing nation could ill afford) has antagonized the country's religious leaders and been openly resisted by most Tunisians. Religious support is not likely to be a vital factor in any power struggle, however.

18. The backing of the generally apolitical military and security forces is crucial to any Tunisian government. Bourguiba and other authorities have been careful to isolate the military from politics. Despite his efforts to insulate the military from politics the cleavage between liberal and conservative factions has to some extent been reflected among the military officers, with senior officers generally favoring the conservatives and junior officers being sympathetic toward the liberals.

19. Students, traditionally the most fractious element of Tunisian society, are a most likely source of disaffection and discord. Most students have resisted party control over the student union. During the annual student union congress in August, a majority of the delegates—including some Destourians, leftists, Communists, and Arab nationalists—formed a “Democratic Front” which unsuccessfully tried to take control of the organization. The new leaders, imposed by the minority, can be expected to adhere to party direction, but there is a real question how much of a following the organization will command among the university students this year. In an effort to forestall potential troubles within the university, Nouira entered into a dialogue with student and youth leaders immediately after the party congress.

Current Issues

I intend that my work shall not be ephemeral and that my intervention in the history of this country shall not be an isolated phenomenon after which things return to normal, i.e., to instability, anarchy, and the divisions that have hurt us so much. The nation's cohesion must be deep enough so that it can, without damage, pursue its destiny after the artisan of its unity disappears (as the King of France disappeared after creating French unity). —Bourguiba, 12 Mar 64

20. The overriding political issue of the day is presidential succession. For more than a decade, Bourguiba has frequently referred to his mortality, but has vacillated about what procedure should be followed in selecting a successor. In 1969 Bourguiba created the post of prime minister and named his longtime associate, BAHI LADGHAM, to fill it. The National Assembly subsequently amended the constitution to provide that the prime minister succeed in the event of a presidential vacancy.

21. By June 1970 Bourguiba had laid down the broad outlines for constitutional revision, but he changed his mind again. He proposed that the Superior Commission of the party study the possibility of creating a post of vice president or of providing for the temporary succession of the president of the National Assembly to the presidency. That fall, he told an audience that he did not want to know who was going to succeed him and that his successor should be elected. A few days later he had dismissed Prime Minister Ladgham and named another long-time associate, Hedi Nouira, as prime minister. Since then, Bourguiba has frequently expressed full confidence in Nouira. He told the recent congress that Nouira should be his successor, adding that Foreign Minister Masmoudi and former interior minister Mestiri could wait their turn. Bourguiba also told the party congress that he would not seek re-election when his term expires. But he recently informed an American news correspondent that if his health permitted he would run again in 1974.

22. Bourguiba's interventions on the succession problem have complicated and delayed a solution. The liberals are likely to be more determined than ever that the constitution be amended to provide for an elected successor, while the conservatives will no doubt continue to support Bourguiba. Meanwhile, Nouira, although attempting to hew a neutral course, has lost his status as an arbiter.

23. Another controversial issue involves the authority of the National Assembly. The liberals and conservatives agree that Tunisia should retain a strong presidential system in which the president establishes the broad outlines of policy. They also agree that the government, appointed and responsible to the President, should also be accountable to the National Assembly. They disagree over a proposal giving the National Assembly the right to censure the government. Only the liberal faction wants this.

24. A third issue is the relationship between the party and the various national organizations: labor, students, youth, women, artisans and agriculturalists. Most, if not all, of these groups have during the past decade been brought under tight party supervision and control. The labor and student groups, in particular, have resisted party domination and, reflecting the strong popular desire for more democracy within the government and party, may resume pressure for greater autonomy. There will also be demands for a complete restructuring of the party as outlined by Nouira last year. At that time he indicated that local units, or cells, would be represented at all levels of the party hierarchy and that party decisions would be made democratically, not dictated from the top.

25. The possibility of a multiparty political system was raised by the Superior Commission last year, but apparently has been shelved. Tunisia has had only one party since the small Communist Party was banned in 1963. Bourguiba and most party leaders continue to justify the one-party system on the ground that Tunisia, a poor nation, cannot afford competition between rival organizations. The watchword is still national unity within a single-party system.

A Hard Act to Follow

To govern people is a difficult art. To do it one must have the qualities of clairvoyance, intelligence, level-headedness, and often audacity. — Bourguiba, 25 July 67

26. Bourguiba is a part-time president, his government a lame duck regime. Presidential hopefuls are already jockeying for position. Conservatives will almost certainly strive to forestall any change in the present constitutional provisions for presidential succession, at least until Bourguiba's present term expires in November 1974. The liberal faction will work for institutions that will preclude another authoritarian leader.

27. Bourguiba's successor under present constitutional arrangements is HEDI nouira. The President's designated heir has long been one of Bourguiba's most capable and efficient subordinates. The praise Bourguiba has consistently bestowed on Nouira in recent months has added to his already impressive credentials. He became secretary general of the ruling party in October, and as such he is de facto head of the party.

[photo] We must no longer watch the spectacle of an individual who commands and a community which executes. — Nouira 9 April 1971

28. The 60-year-old Nouira received his university education in Paris. As a student, he joined the nationalist movement and has been active in the Neo-Destour/Destourian Socialist Party both before and after independence. Nouira is considered to be the source of many of the moderate, pro-Western ideas adopted by Bourguiba and the party. A proponent of individual initiative, he is reputed to have been prominent among those who urged Bourguiba to reverse the controversial agricultural cooperative policy in 1969. He is said to be scrupulously honest and refuses favors to even his closest friends. He has little political base of his own.

29. The closest runner-up to Nouira in the succession stakes is BAHI LADGHAM, [photo] a leader of the liberal faction and, until last year, the President's closest associate and heir apparent. Ladgham had been the top administrator in the government from the beginning of the republic and served as secretary general of the party from 1955 until he was replaced by Nouira. He was the first chairman of the party's Superior Commission, but lost it to Nouira six months later. Bitterness over his demotion from prime minister and party chairmanship may have been somewhat sweetened by demonstrations of support he received at the party congress when he obtained the greatest number of votes of any candidate for the party's central committee. The President did not propose his name for the political bureau, reportedly at Ladgham's own request.

30. Ladgham was born 58 years ago in a Tunis suburb and received his secondary education in Tunis. Ladgham was largely responsible for creating an effective party and a smoothly operating administration. His leadership of the Jordanian-Fedayeen Conciliation Mission last year won him the respect of many Arab governments. He is also widely respected by the Tunisian military services.

31. Foreign Minister MOHAMED MASMOUDI [photo] is another contender for the presidency. As foreign minister, he had mended Tunisia's fences with the Arab states to the east. The 47year-old Masmoudi is reputed to be one of the principal leaders of the Sahelian faction of the party and to have a considerable following among students. Masmoudi, a protege of Bourguiba, was educated in Tunis and the University of Paris. Since Tunisia's independence, he has twice so antagonized the president that Masmoudi was dismissed from his government posts and suspended from the party. The most recent incident occurred in 1961 when Masmoudi openly criticized the developing “cult of personality.” The fact that Masmoudi has made a bid for the post of UN Secretary General may indicate that he considers his political chances at home slight.

32. Former interior minister AHMED MESTIRI, [photo] who was the executive secretary of the party's Superior Commission,is another presidential hopeful. The 46year-old Mestiri considers it essential that the government and the party be so “institutionalized” that a government upheaval is impossible. A strong advocate of ministerial responsibility, he has twice resigned government posts—in 1960 because members of the presidential entourage meddled in the affairs of his ministry and again in 1968 when he openly opposed the government's economic program. In 1968 he was expelled from the party but was readmitted two years later. He was dismissed as minister of the interior in early September because he objected to Bourguiba's appointment of new governors and a new chief of national security prior to the party congress. At the party congress, he received the second highest number of votes of any candidate elected to the party's central committee, but Bourguiba suspended him from party activity a few days later for making “seditous” statements to the foreign press. Although widely criticized for his maverick tendencies, Mestiri probably could count on widespread support in an open election.

MOHAMED SAYAH, [photo] minister for public works and housing, gained Bourguiba's ear and confidence during the President's most recent convalescence in Switzerland. At that time the 38-year-old Tunisian was his country's representative to the UN agencies in Geneva. He was appointed to the party's Superior Commission in August, but because he failed to be elected to the party's central committee in October, he holds no national party office. He is dynamic, able,] extremely ambitious, [text not declassified] As a leading conservative, he is bitterly opposed to Mestiri. He was a student leader and radical leftist before joining the establishment and may still have a considerable following among leftist intellectuals. [text not declassified]

34. Although the President's only son, Habib Bourguiba JR., has no personal political support, he cannot be discounted entirely as a presidential contender. In the right political atmosphere, he might be chosen to succeed his father. Bourguiba Jr. has served as a member of the Superior Commission and was elected to the party's central committee. The 44-year-old former foreign minister was born and educated in France and has had wide diplomatic experience. As the President-Director General of the National Investment Company, he is acquiring economic and financial experience. Bourguiba Jr. has had several sharp differences with his father. In 1961-62 he strongly protested his father's unpopular divorce and subsequent marriage to his longtime mistress. Recently he unsuccessfully sought to moderate the President's vindictive attitude toward former economic czar Ahmed Ben Salah. Although Bourguiba Jr. was a hard-working and effective foreign minister, he is reputed to be something of a playboy.

[photo] “We have done our best, but I don't know whether he will let us relieve him of responsibility.” — Habib Bourguiba, Jr., Sept 70

35. A possible dark horse is the 45-year-old Tunisian ambassador to France, BEJI CAID ESSEBSI, [photo] a member of the party's liberal faction. Because of his effectiveness as minister of interior and minister of defense he has gained a solid reputation as a capable administrator. While he headed these ministries, he may have acquired some following within the security and military establishments. As a former student leader of the post-World War II era in France and as a participant in pre-independence negotiations for autonomy, he probably developed other effective ties. He is reported to have resigned his present post as ambassador to France to protest Bourguiba's rejection of the consensus at the party's recent congress. He has nevertheless long been close to the President.

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 16, DI/OCI Files, Job 79-T00831A, Box 8. Secret; Noforn. Prepared in the Office of Current Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency. In requesting preparation of a study of current political dynamics in Tunisia, a March 18 CIA memorandum noted that, “We believe there is need for a critical and unorthodox analysis of the political situation that will re-examine current assumptions to the effect that existing institutions in Tunisia are sufficient to insure an orderly transition to a stable and moderate post-Bourguiba Government.” (Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 79-01229A, Box 1, AA-1, AF DIV, 1971)

157. Intelligence Note RAFN-62 Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Washington, December 23, 1971 157. Intelligence Note RAFN-62 Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Washington, December 23, 19711

Washington, December 23, 1971

December 23, 1971

TUNISIAN SECURITY FEARS

In recently requesting security equipment from the US, Tunisian authorities claimed they faced growing internal and external threats in which Algeria and Libya figure prominently. These allegations appear exaggerated.

Internal Threat Probably Minimal. Tunisia has long been considered a model of stability in the Third World. Since 1955 serious internal threats have arisen only twice: during the pre-independence period (1955–1956) when nationalist leader Salah Ben Youssef declared armed insurrection against his former ally, Habib Bourguiba; and later, in 1962, when a group of disgruntled military officers and civilians plotted to assassinate President Bourguiba. In both cases the government squelched the threats with a minimum of disruption.

Today a serious threat from within is probably remote, despite the activities of a few plotters in exile. Ibrahim Tobal, former secretary to Salah Ben Youssef, is the most notable of these, Tobal has found asylum in Algiers, where he has collected an Algerian government subsidy in exchange for performing varied tasks for Sonatrach, the Algerian national oil and gas company. He may be considered the leader of what remains of the Youssefist opposition, although his several years outside the country have probably weakened his links with the interior.

Another dissident group consists of Baathists. Amor Sehimi, former Paris-based chief of the Tunisian Baathists, was assassinated in Beirut on October 7, 1971, apparently on his way to Baghdad. A disagreement with his Iraqi sponsors, reportedly over finances, had led to an open break. Sehimi is also known to have had some contacts with South Yemeni officials and Libyans. Sehimi’s major contact within Tunisia was said to be Mohamed Messaoud Chabi, a former leftist student who visited the US in 1964. The leadership of the external Baathist organization apparently has fallen on Abdessatar Aleya el Keffi, a former Tunisian student in Iraq and Iran now residing in Paris. What little is known of the internal Youssefist and Baathist organizations indicates they possess limited, if any, means for effective subversion.

The Tunisian military establishment has been almost completely apolitical in the past. While there may be a trend away from this, we have seen no indications of subversive plotting. We know very little about the current political attitudes of Tunisian military officers, particularly the younger ones. Given the present transition to a post-Bourguiba era and the propensity of African and Arab armies to assume leadership in times of stress, however, future involvement by the Tunisian military should not be completely discounted.

Tunisian students have been relatively troublesome, but they remain divided over a wide spectrum of ideologies, ranging from Arab nationalism to Maoism, and have been largely neutralized by a subtle combination of government repression and response. Tunisian students in France, while susceptible to the radical ideologies of the French left, have not demonstrated the means to become a threat to the regime.

The strong showing of the liberal faction of the ruling Destourian Socialist Party during the recent Eighth Party Congress brought into the open a challenge to the conservative and personalized rule of President Bourguiba. This challenge, coming at a crucial phase of transition to the post-Bourguiba era, may well herald the end of consensus politics, which since independence has shown great resiliency in accommodating dissent within the Party. The present calm following the Congress shows, however, that the system still has flexibility.

Algerian-Tunisian Relations Warming, Mutual distrust between Algeria and Tunisia, exacerbated by a border dispute in the oil-rich El Borma area, has progressively evaporated since early 1969. The two governments signed a treaty of friendship in January 1970, and agreed to a border settlement that put bilateral relations on a new and positive footing. The removal of major points of contention and Algeria’s preoccupation with internal economic development have tended to aid this trend. President Bourguiba, who has an outstanding invitation to visit Algeria, recently praised closening Algerian-Tunisian relations. The Tunisian Foreign Minister is about to visit Algiers.

While Tunisian dissident Tobal still resides in Algiers, the Algerian government has recently accused him of working for Egypt and deprived him of his subsidy. The Tunisians hardly have grounds for protest about Tobal, since they have allowed Tahar Zibiri, the archenemy of Algerian President Houari Boumediene, to live in Tunis since shortly after Zibiri’s abortive coup attempt in December 1967.

Détente Continues in Libyan-Tunisian Relations. Relations between Libya and Tunisia have qradually improved, albeit unevenly, since the low point following the successful coup of September 1969 in Libya. A lingering undercurrent of mutual suspicion remains, nevertheless, although Prime Minister Muammar Qadhafi made a good impression on his Tunisian hosts when he visited in February 1971. Economic relations also have improved considerably, and the two countries have given each other some diplomatic support. On the other hand, Libya’s quick offer of help to the Moroccan officers who tried to revolt in July 1971 indicated to the Tunisians that they too might become the target of a Libyan interventionist policy. Active Libyan support for insurgents in Eritrea and in Chad, and for the Palestine fedaveen and the Libyan moves in support of Sudanese President Jaafar Nimairi during his counter-coup in July, have lent some credence to this fear.

Libya gave Tunisian exile Tobal some financial aid before he supposedly fell from favor with Qadhafi, and some unidentified Tunisian dissidents are said to be living in Tripoli. In addition, the Libyans probably fear the possible use of Tunisian territory by certain Libyan exiles actively plotting against them.

Despite mutual suspicion and a certain potential for future trouble over problems like an undefined sea frontier in the area of a recent oil discovery, both Tunisian and Libyan leadership seem to desire to keep relations on an even keel.

INR/Africa

Director: LMRives

Analyst: HHoffman

Ext.: 22297

Released by:

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23 TUN. Secret; Noforn; Controlled Dissemination. Drafted by Hoffman and cleared by Rives.

158. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, February 17, 1972 158. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, February 17, 19721

Washington, February 17, 1972

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT:

Tunisian-US Relations

PARTICIPANTS:

Ambassador El Goulli

Tunisian Ambassador

Mohamed Azouz Ennifar

First Secretary Tunisian Embassy

David D. Newsom
Assistant Secretary for African Affairs

Michael V. Connors
Country Officer for Tunisia

COPIES TO:

Amembassy TUNIS

NEA

PM

AF/N (2)

AID/AFR

Ambassador El Goulli said that he was calling to express his deep personal thanks to Mr. Newsom for all that he and Secretary Rogers did in arranging for him to deliver personally to president Nixon the letter from President Bourguiba. El Goulli said that President Nixon received him with special warmth, emphasizing that President Bourguiba was his good friend.

Ambassador El Goulli said that President Nixon's willingness to receive him, even though he was busy preparing for his trip to Peking, constituted a symbolic gesture which would be very important to President Bouguiba. El Gouli said that it was clear in his brief conversation with president Nixon, that the President understands President Bourguiba's concern for security in the Mediterranean and in North Africa, especially the problem of Soviet infiltration. (El Goulli remarked parenthetically that President Nixon has been kept fully advised by the White House staff of Bourguiba's concerns.)

Internal Security. El Goulli said that his welcome at the White House demonstrates that there is good will toward Tunisia here in Washington. In this connection the Ambassador expressed hope that the US would be able to provide help in response to Tunisia's request for internal security assistance. Mr. Newsom stressed that there is indded good will in the USG toward its friends. He noted, however, that there is a growing problem in how the US can manifest this goodwill when its means to help are more limited. For example, the Congress has removed from the assistance bill all proposed authorizations for public safety. In these circumstances, requests for internal security assistance raise some very difficult problems. As for Tunisia's request, we expect to know in the next few days how we might best resolve our mutual problems.

Military Assistance. The Ambassador raised the question of military assistance, expressing hope that beyond what was provided by the US last year, Tunisia would receive more in the furture. El Goulli said that it was generally understood when the US assistance package was delivered in the Spring of 1971 that Tunisia would continue to receive help. Mr. Newsom said that the US would certainly do what it could to help. He noted, however, that at the present time there is a differences of about $50 million in the amounts of overall, world-wide military assistance that the Senate and the House are prepared to provide. Given existing US commitments in Indo-China, should the lesser amount be approved, there would be difficult problems. El Goulli said that he fully understood this problem but expressed hope that since Tunisia's needs are som small -- perhaps only a few million dollars -- the US would be able to find a way few million dollars -- the US would be able to find a way to help. He suggested that since there are already several assistance programs in Tunisia, perhaps some mutually advantageous arrangement could be worked out. Mr. Newsom agreed that we should try to match our mutual possibilities. He added that the Ambassador should be assured that Tunisia will remain one of the five countries in Africa which will continue to receive military assistance - the precise amount to be workded out here in Washington, considering overall availabilities, etc.

Mr. Newsom concluded by informing El Goulli that the serious problems affecting the overall US assistance effort would require the US to inform its friends that it could no longer do as much as it has done in the past. This could, if misunderstood, perhaps lead our friends to question whether there might be changes in our basic attitude toward them. Mr. Newsom stressed that our friends should understand that the issue is not one of basic relationships but of resources.

AF/N:MVConnors:ag 2/22/72

AF - Mr. Newsom

AF/N - Mr. Newsom

AF/N - Mr. Odell

1 Source: National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 17 TUN-US. Confidential. Drafted on February 22 by Michael V. Connors (AF/N); cleared by Harry I. Odell (AF/N); and approved by Newsom. According to the President's Daily Diary, Goulli met with the President from 3:05-3:06 on February 14. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Central Files, Staff Members and Office Files, President's Daily Diary, February 1, 1972-March 31, 1972) The Ambassador delivered a letter from President Bourguiba, not printed, in which Bourguiba expressed appreciation for Nixon's update on his Peking trip and his assurances of continuing U.S. interest in Tunisian development and North African security. Bourguiba concluded by hoping for high-level discussions to review bilateral relations and the international situation. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 15-1 TUN)

159. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, February 29, 1972 159. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, February 29, 19721

Washington, February 29, 1972

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT:

U.S. Response to GOT Request for Internal Security Assistance

PARTICIPANTS:

Ambassador El Goulli

Tunisian Ambassador

Mohamed Azouz Ennifar

First Secretary Tunisian Embassy

David D. Newsom

Assistant Secretary for African Affairs

Michael V. Connors Country Officer for Tunisia

COPIES TO:

Amembassy TUNIS

NEA

PM

AF/N (2)

AID/AFR

Mr. Newsom said that he wished to convey certain decisions that the USG has reached concerning several recent requests by Tunisia for assistance, particularly the request for internal security assistance. Mr. Newsom explained that only after a very thorough and time-consuming examination of all the possible alternatives involved, was it possible to arrive at these decisions.

Mr. Newsom frankly informed Ambassador El Goulli that the means of the USG to provide assistance in the internal security field have become very limited. Mr. Newsom said that in the months that have passed since officers of our Embassy in Tunis met with Tunisian officials to reduce the internal security request to its most essential elements; an important element of Congress has been revealed that it is against public safety assistance. He referred to the Senate's recent amendment to the appropriation bill proposing that public safety programs be limited to financing from security assistance funds.

Mr. Newsom said that while every effort was made to respond in a positive way to the Tunisian request, given the mood of Congress, the USG has concluded that it cannot provide assistance to Tunisia in the area of internal security. Mr. Newsom assured Ambassador El Goulli that the U.S. remains very interested in Tunisia and will continue to make a substantial effort to assist in Tunisia's development. In this connection, Mr. Newsom informed El Goulli that the US is prepared to demonstrate its special friendship for Tunisia by considering the addition of $1 million to the Agricultural Sector Loan now being developed in AID.

Mr. Newsom referred to the recent US decision to open negotiations in Tunis on the addition of 60,000 tons of wheat and 10,000 tons of soybean oil to the FY 1972 PL 480 Title I Agreement. The value of these additions is about $4 million. He pointed out that the U.S. remains Tunisia's major assistance donor with proposed FY 1972 loans and grants totaling nearly $40 million, or about 11 percent of the total US economic assistance to Africa.

Mr. Newsom expressed hope that the very substantial development assistance which the USG is providing under very tight budgetary circumstances will help Tunisia meet its varied requirements and perhaps free Tunisian foreign exchange for any purchases of internal security equipment Tunisia might wish to make. He added, that should Tunisia wish to consider buying internal security equipment, the US would be prepared to offer TDY services, on a grant basis, of a public safety expert to advise on purchases.

Ambassador El Goulli expressed appreciation for the US decision to open negotiations on adding wheat and oil to the current PL 480 Agreement and for the offer to add $1 million to the AG Sector Loan. He said, however, that his government will be disappointed that the US will not be able to assist in meeting Tunisia's internal security needs. El Goulli asked whether the question of internal security assistance might be reviewed in the future. Newsom replied that this should be considered the final decision on the Tunisian request.

Mr. Newsom said that the long study which preceded our decision carefully assessed all of the problems involved. He noted that there are never problems with the Congress concerning the economic program in Tunisia. However, when one discusses internal security assistance problems do arise.

Ambassador El Goulli asked whether the program loan might be used to procure some of the non-military type items included in the internal security request, for example, communications equipment. (Note: The Ambassador was probably referring to electrical generators. There was no mention of communications equipment in the request as delivered.) Mr. Newsom said that public safety purchases under the program loan would not be appropriate, noting that the expenditures to be made under that loan were generally determined last year when it was prepared.

Mr. Newsom said that it is now AID policy to concentrate assistance in specific economic sectors. For this reason, the usual program loan in Tunisia is being replaced this year by an agricultural sector loan. In offering to seek the addition of $1 million to that loan we are hopeful that the GOT would be able to free foreign exchange for any internal security purchases that it might wish to make.

Military Assistance. The Ambassador asked whether there was any word yet about the FY 1972 military assistance program for Tunisia. Mr. Newsom replied that legislation has not yet cleared Congress and until it does we will not be in a position to discuss the Tunisian program. He expressed regret that the complicated internal processes of the USG may seem sometimes to make life difficult for our friends.

In concluding, Mr. Newsom emphasized that the US response to Tunisia's request for help represents a very considerable effort, under difficult circumstances, to assist a friend. He noted, for example, that there are certain risks in seeking to enlarge the AG sector loan, when the objective is to free Tunisian foreign exchange for public safety purchases. Ambassador El Goulli expressed his understanding of the problems posed by the Tunisian request and said that he would seek to place the US response in proper perspective for his government.

1 Source: National Archives,RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 23 TUN. Secret. Drafted on March 3 by Michael Connors and cleared by Newsom.

160. Letter From President Nixon to President Bourguiba, Washington, March 14, 1972 160. Letter From President Nixon to President Bourguiba, Washington, March 14, 19721

Washington, March 14, 1972

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
March 14, 1972

Dear Mr. President:

With deepest appreciation, I wish to thank you for the warm sentiments conveyed to me in your recent letter which was delivered personally by Ambassador El Goulli. I think often of the close and friendly ties that have long existed between our two nations and of the very special affection which the United States and the American people have for you.

It was in the spirit of our rapport that I asked Ambassador Calhoun to share with you some of my early thoughts concerning my visits to Peking and Moscow. I feel very strongly that close consultations with our good friends, such as Tunisia, are essential in pursuing our mutual objectives of world peace and security. As a further step in these consultations, I have asked Ambassador Calhoun to convey to you some of my observations following my return from the People's Republic of China.

It is always appropriate and useful that Tunisia and the United States maintain close contact, not only because our nations share common international goals, but because the United States remains deeply interested in Tunisia, both in its security and in its development.

You may be assured, Mr. President, that with the resources that are available, the United States will continue to do what it can to assist in Tunisia's further development.

I also wish to express to you my personal admiration for the unflagging efforts you have made to promote world peace and to further human understanding. I look forward to close and continuing cooperation between our two nations.

With warm personal regards,
Sincerely,

[signed Richard M. Nixon]
His Excellency Habib Bourguiba
President of the Republic of Tunisia
Tunis

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL TUN-US. Unclassified. In a February 24 memorandum to Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Kissinger, Eliot had recommended that the President respond to Bourguiba's hand-delivered letter, in recognition of Bourguiba's status as a long-standing ally and to soften the blow of the U.S. refusal to provide a requested $7.3 million in internal security assistance. (Ibid., POL 15-1 TUN)

161. Telegram 1963 From the Embassy in Tunisia to the Department of State, April 24, 1972, 1015Z. 161. Telegram 1963 From the Embassy in Tunisia to the Department of State, April 24, 1972, 1015Z.1

April 24, 1972, 1015Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
AMEMBASSY TUNIS 1963
R 241015Z APR 72

14 10

ACTION AF-13

INFO OCT-01 SS14 PM-06 L-03 IO-12 E-11 M-03 SIG-02 CU-04 EUR-20 INR-06 RSR-01 RSC-01/097 W 101338

R 241015Z APR 72

FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 8371

TUNIS 1963

SUBJ:

AMBASSADOR'S OVERVIEW ON PADM AND PARA REVIEW FOR TUNISIA 1972

REFS:

1) DEPT'S A-1616;

2) TUNIS A-80

1. FOLLOWING IS MY OVERVIEW STATEMENT ON THE PADM AND PARA REVIEW FOR TUNISIA 1972. SINCE THE EMBASSY DID NOT HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO COMMENT FORMALLY BEFORE THE PARA REVIEW AND THE ISSUANCE OF THE PADM, I REQUEST THAT THE ENCLOSED OVERVIEW STATEMENT AND THE COUNTRY TEAM EVALUATION BE MADE AVAILABLE FOR CONSIDERATION BY THE IG/AF.

2. BEGIN TEXT. TUNISIA HAS SINCE ITS INDEPENDENCE IN 1956 PLAYED A ROLE IN REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS OUT OF PROPORTION TO ITS SIZE AND POPULATION, ITS WEALTH AND POWER. THIS ROLE—AND THE INFLUENCE TUNISIA HAS BEEN ABLE TO EXERT—WHILE THEY SHOULD NOT BE EXAGGERATED, HAVE SERVED US INTERESTS WELL. TUNISIAN POLICY HAS OFTEN BEEN ALIGNED WITH US POLICY. TUNISIA'S CONSTANT FRIENDSHIP FOR THE US, SURVIVING UPS AND DOWNS IN US RELATIONS WITH ITS WEALTHIER AND MORE POWERFUL NEIGHBORS, HAS GIVEN US A RELATIVELY SECURE FOOTHOLD ON A KEY POINT OF THE SOUTHERNMEDITERRANEAN COAST AND HAS HELPED TO PREVENT THIS AREA FROM FALLING UNDER UNFRIENDLY DOMINATION. WE HAVE ALSO BENEFITTED FROM A FRIENDLY, RESPECTED AND REALISTIC VOICE IN ARAB, MEDITERRANEAN AND THIRD WORLD COUNCILS. SUCH ASSETS ARE PERHAPS EASY TO TAKE FOR GRANTED OR TO UNDERRATE, BUT THEY WOULD UNDOUBTEDLY LOOM MORE IMPORTANT IF WE LOST THEM OR HAD TO ACQUIRE THEM NOW: THIS IS ESPECIALLY TRUE AS WE BECOME MORE DEEPLY INVOLVED IN THE MIDDLE EAST, MORE LOCKED INTO ISRAELI POLICY AND INTO THE SUPPORT OF THE INCREASINGLY ISOLATED JORDANIAN REGIME.

3. THESE ASSETS DERIVE PARTLY, TO BE SURE, FROM THE LEADERSHIP OF PRESIDENT BOURGUIBA, WHO SEES THE WORLD WITH AN OPTIC SIMILAR TO OUR OWN. THEY ALSO REPRESENT THE FRUITS OF A CONSTANT US POLICY TOWARD TUNISIA AND THEY SHOULD NOT BE ALLOWED TO DISSIPATE UNNECESSARILY. WE HAVE INVESTED HEAVILY IN TUNISIA, AND THE RESULTS MAY SOMETIMES SEEM DISAPPOINTING, BUT DESPITE ITS LACK OF NATURAL RESOURCES, SOME ILL-ADVISED SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC POLICIES (NOW REVERSED) AND A MAJOR NATURAL DISASTER, THE TUNISIAN ECONOMY IS NOW GROWING AND SHOWS GREATER PROMISE. ITS HUMAN RESOURCES REMAIN ITS CHIEF ASSET AND SHOULD NOT BE UNDERESTIMATED AS AN IMPORTANT DYNAMIC IN THE LONGER RUN. FROM THE POLITICAL STANDPOINT TUNISIA IS RELATIVELY STABLE, AND ALTHOUGH A DIFFICULT AND CRUCIAL TRANSITIONAL PERIOD LIES AHEAD I BELIEVE IT WILL SURVIVE AS A STABLE AREA. THE PROBABILITIES ARE THAT AFTER BOURGUIBA TUNISIA WILL RETAIN A REALISTIC AND MODERATE ORIENTATION IN INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, AND THAT US-TUNISIAN FRIENDSHIP AND COOPERATION WILL SURVIVE TUNISIA'S POLITICAL TRANSITION AND ITS ECONOMIC DEPENDENCE ON THE US, AND WILL HAVE CONTINUING VALUE FOR US. THESE INTANGIBLES, THOUGH HARDER TO MEASURE THAN ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE OR GROWTH, SUPPORT THE PROPOSITION THAT US INTERESTS HAVE BEEN WELL SUPPORTED BY US POLICIES.

4. US POLITICAL AND STRATEGIC INTERESTS IN TUNISIA ARE SIGNIFICANT BUT DIFFICULT TO SEPARATE. CONFRONTED WITH CHANGING POWER ALIGNMENTS, GREATER PRIORITIES IN OTHER AREAS, AND WITH LIMITATIONS ON OUR OWN RESOURCES, IT IS NATURAL THAT WE SEEK POLICIES AND PROGRAMS IN LINE WITH OUR CAPABILITIES. NEVERTHELESS, WE SHOULD PRESERVE THE ESSENTIALS OF A RELATIONSHIP THAT HAS LONG SERVED BOTH U.S. AND TUNISIAN INTERESTS AND IS THE RESULT OF SIGNIFICANT POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC INVESTMENT. THE RELATIVE PREDOMINANCE OF THE UNITED STATES IN TUNISIAN DEVELOPMENT AND SECURITY ASSISTANCE HAS DECLINED, AND OTHER DONORS IN EUROPE AND THE WORLD BANK HAVE RISEN IN IMPORTANCE, WHICH IS AS IT SHOULD BE. U.S. POLITICAL INFLUENCE IN TUNISIA IS ALREADY UNDERGOING A SUBTLE DECLINE, PRIMARILY BECAUSE THE U.S. IS INCREASINGLY SEEN AS THE ONLY REAL SUPPORTER FOR ISRAEL IN THE MIDDLE EAST CONFLICT, AN ISSUE WHICH SHARPLY AFFECTS TUNISIAN OPINION AND INCREASINGLY INFLUENCES TUNISIAN POLICY.

14 10

ACTION AF-13

INFO OCT-01 SS14 PM-06 L-03 IO-12 E-11 M-03 SIG-02 CU-04 EUR-20 INR-06 RSR-01 RSC-01/097 W 101338

R 241015Z APR 72

FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS

TO

SECSTATE WASHDC 8371

SECTION 2 OF 2 TUNIS 1963

5. ALTHOUGH TUNISIAN ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE HAS BEEN DISAPPOINTING, CERTAIN EXTENUATING OR EXPLANATORY CIRCUMSTANCES HAVE BEEN NOTED AND THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK IN THE SHORT TO MEDIUM-TERM SEEMS MORE PROMISING THAN SUGGESTED IN THE PADM. THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT HAS BROKEN WITH THE ERRORS OF THE PAST, AND ITS SUCCESSORS WILL PROBABLY CARRY ON. IN THIS EVOLVING SITUATION THE GOT'S COMMITMENT TO DEVELOPMENT AND ECONOMIC GROWTH SHOULD NOT BE PREMATURELY UNDERMINED BY AN ABRUPT REDUCTION IN AID OR UNREALISTIC STANDARDS FOR TYING AID TO SPECIFICS OF TUNISIAN PERFORMANCE. OTHER DONORS, INCLUDING THE WORLD BANK, ARE NOT LIKELY TO PRESS THE TUNISIANS ON MAJOR ECONOMIC POLICY ISSUES OR EVEN AGREE ON THE REFORMS REQUIRED. I AGREE THAT WE SHOULD SEEK TO REDUCE OUR DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE ROLE GRADUALLY RELATIVE TO THOSE OF OTHER DONORS, BUT IN DOING SO WE SHOULD RECOGNIZE THAT OUR LEVERAGE WILL BE LESS. DESPITE OUR BEST EFFORTS TO ENCOURAGE OTHER DONORS TO INCREASE THEIR AID AND TO BETTER COORDINATE AID, OUR EXPECTATIONS ON THESE SCORES SHOULD BE MODEST AND SHOULD SHAPE OUR ASSISTANCE IN THE NEXT FEW YEARS. NO OTHER LIKELY SOURCES WILL PROVIDE THE LEVEL AND TYPE OF ASSISTANCE NOW PROVIDED BY THE U.S. DECISIONS ON OUR ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS SHOULD REFLECT THESE REALITIES AND THE BROADER POLICY ELEMENTS OUTLINED ABOVE AND SHOULD ALSO RECOGNIZE THE U.S. DOMESTIC INTERESTS SERVED BY OUR PL-480 AND PROGRAM OR SECTOR LOANS.

6. A REVIEW OF OUR DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE PLAN FOR TUNISIA IS ALREADY UNDERWAY AT USAID AIMING AT A GRADUAL PHASING-DOWN OF AID LEVELS. BUT IT IS PREMATURE NOW TO DEFINE THE BASIS AND PROSPECTS FOR EVENTUAL PHASING-OUT OF AID AND TO EXPECT THE 1972 CONSULTATIVE GROUP MEETING TO BRING FORTH EITHER A FULLY SATISFACTORY TUNISIAN DEVELOPMENT PLAN OR A COORDINATED DONOR VIEW ON THE LONGER FUTURE. THESE COMMENTS DO NOT RUN COUNTER TO THE BROAD INTENT OF THE PADM BUT POINT UP PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS AFFECTING TIMING AND IMPLEMENTATION OF OUR POLICY. WE SHOULD CONTINUE TO PRESS THE WORLD BANK TO LEAD, AND INTENSIFY OUR BILATERAL EFFORTS TO ENCOURAGE GREATER ASSISTANCE FROM OHER DONORS, BUT NOT EXPECT THE DEGREE OF PROGRESS SUGGESTED IN THE PADM AND PARA REVIEW. WE SHOULD CONTINUE TO KEEP U.S. DEVELOPMENT AID POLICY, INCLUDING THE IMPORTANT PEACE CORPS PROGRAM HERE, FOCUSED ON THE KEY AREAS OF AGRICULTURE (WHICH SERVES BOTH TUNISIAN AND U.S. INTERESTS CONCRETELY), FAMILY PLANNING, NUTRITION, AND EDUCATION.

7. RECOGNIZING THAT TUNISIA HAS DEPENDED PRIMARILY ON U.S. SECURITY ASSISTANCE, WE SHOULD KEEP OUR MTLITARY ASSISTANCE AT A REASONABLE LEVEL IN THE NEXT FEW YEARS WHILE TAKING INTO ACCOUNT OUR DOMESTIC PROBLEMS IN THIS AREA. WITH OUR RECENT TURN-DOWN OF TUNISIA'S SPECIAL REQUEST FOR INTERNAL SECURITY ASSISTANCE AND OUR REJECTION OF THEIR REQUEST FOR A SMALL CONTINUING PUBLIC SAFETY PROGRAM, WE SHOULD AVOID ABRUPT REDUCTIONS IN MILITARY ASSISTANCE. IN WORKING TOWARD ELIMINATION OF MATERIAL GRANT AID AFTER FY 75, WE SHOULD ACTIVELY ENCOURAGE TUNISIA TO CONSIDER FMS CREDIT PURCHASES BUT AIM AT AN ANNUAL MAP OF $3 MILLTON IN THE MEANTIME.

8. AS WE GRADUALLY REDUCE ASSISTANCE, WE SHOULD RECOGNIZE THE GREATER IMPORTANCE OF OUR EFFECTIVE CULTURAL AND INFORMATION PROGRAMS IN TUNISIA IN ORDER TO BUILD ON WHAT HAS BEEN ACHIEVED SINCE TUNISIAN INDEPENDENCE, INCLUDING CONTINUING SUPPORT FOR AN EFFECTIVE ENGLISH-LANGUAGE TEACHING PROGRAM THROUGH PEACE CORPS OR OTHER MEANS.

9. IN THE LIGHT OF THE FOREGOING, PRESIDENT BOURGUIBA'S SUGGESTION IN A FEBRUARY 1972 LETTER TO PRESIDENT Nixon THAT THERE BE A HIGH-LEVEL REVIEW OF US-GOT RELATIONS TAKES ON ADDED IMPORTANCE. IN THE PAST THERE HAVE BEEN RELATIVELY FREQUENT EXCHANGES OF VISITS AT THE CHIEF OF STATE LEVEL BUT THERE HAVE BEEN NO SUCH VISITS IN THE PAST FOUR YEARS FOR A VARIETY OF UNDERSTANDABLE REASONS. I RECOMMEND HIGH-LEVEL TALKS AT THE CHIEF OF STATE OR PRIME MINISTER LEVEL (DEPENDING ON INTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS HERE) BE PLANNED FOR THE FIRST HALF OF 1973. I FURTHERMORE RECOMMEND THAT THE LINES OF US POLICY TOWARDS TUNISIA LAID OUT IN PRESIDENT Nixon'S MARCH 14 LETTER TO BOURGUIBA, AND THE INTERPRETATION PLACED ON THEM BY BOURGUIBA AS REPORTED IN TUNIS EXDIS 1852, BE FULLY TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT IN THE NEXT STAGE OF POLICY REVIEW ON TUNISIA. END TEXT.

CALHOUN

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 1 TUN. Secret.

162. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, October 13, 1972, 5 p.m. 162. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, October 13, 1972, 5 p.m.1

New York, October 13, 1972, 5 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

Date:

October 13, 1972 5:00 p.m.

Place:

UNGA Delegates Lounge

Subject:

Tunisian/US Relations

Participants:

Tunisia Foreign Minister Mohammed Masmoudi Tunisian Staff Member

United States Ambassador William Witman III US Delegation

Copies:

POLSEC AmEmbassy Tunis

IO/UNP

Amb. Bush

AF

Amb. Schaufele

AF/N

POLSEC - Mr. Grigg

REF NEA

INR - 10

This meeting was arranged at FM Masmoudi's request when Ambassador Witman telephoned to express Assistant Secretary Newsom's regret at not having been able to see the FM before returning to Washington with the Secretary.

FM Masmoudi said he would be leaving for Tunis at 10:00 p.m. and was very sorry to have missed having a further opportunity to meet with Mr. Newsom.

Speaking personally and emotionally - and at length - the FM said he did not understand American policy. It almost looked as if the US and the Soviets had agreed on a division of spheres of influence that would turn over the entire Arab east to the Russians and bring the latter to Tunisia's border. Why had the US completely written off the Palestinians and become totally wedded to the Israelis? This made it very difficult for America's friends like Tunisia. Sadat had thrown the Russians out but in the absence of any support from the US, he would have no choice but to enter into a new relationship with them. The Libyans were, like himself, very devout (tres croyants) but they too would he driven by despair to deal with the Russians.

Mr. Witman protested, as possible, that there clearly was no agreement with the Soviets on spheres of influence, in the Mediterranean or elsewhere in the ME. Furthermore, Rogers had made a special point of emphasizing the legitimate aspirations and concerns of the Palestinian people and had, as the FM well knew, made great efforts to find a peaceful settlement in the ME.

POLSEC : Wwitman : ams 10/17/72

FM Masmoudi stated that he disagreed profoundly with the US position on terrorism. How was it possible for an Arab not to feel deeply about the fate of the Palestinians? Why did the US react so strongly to acts of despair by the Palestinians while passing over in silence the daily terrorism of the Israelis, who had founded their state with its use?

Mr. Witman tried unsuccessfully to persuade FM Masmoudi to draw a distinction between acts of war and indiscriminate threats to innocent non-combatants, or to reassure him that our proposed Convention clearly excluded political movements.

The FM nevertheless was obviously very pained at this seemingly insuperable difference that had arisen in the hitherto extremely close US/Tunisian relationship. He said that Tunisia was obliged for the sake of credibility to make approaches to Hanoi, but that should not interfere with the US connection. (He said nothing about going to Saigon.)

Mr. Witman in closing urged that the PM continue the dialogue with Ambassador Seelye, who would shortly be arriving in Tunis.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 7 TUN. Confidential. Drafted on October 17 by Witman. The conversation took place in the UN General Assembly Delegates' Lounge. In telegram 188159 to Tunis, October 16, the Department transmitted a memorandum of conversation between Masmoudi and Rogers in which the two disagreed over U.S. policy toward the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. (Ibid.)

163. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, December 11, 1972 163. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, December 11, 19721

Washington, December 11, 1972

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION 7966
December 11, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR:

THE PRESIDENT

FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HK initialed]

SUBJECT:

Letter to President Bourguiba of Tunisia

When our new ambassador to Tunisia presented his credentials to President Bourguiba he also transmitted an oral message of greetings from you and a warmly inscribed photograph. He reported that Bourguiba was deeply touched by your personal gestures and expressed warmest thanks. Bourguiba has now sent you a photograph of himself and a long and thoughtful letter of thanks (Tab B).

While this is ostensibly a thank-you letter, Bourguiba injects a substantive point which would appear to require your reply. He expresses hope that “you might find the occasion for a consultation at as high a level as possible in order to re-examine together our bilateral relations…and analyze together in order to jointly undertake the actions necessary for the consolidation of peace and security in this world.”

We do not know precisely what Bourguiba has in mind. The consensus is that he may simply be seeking general reassurance that the US remains interested in Tunisia. Should it be more than that, someone can always be sent to talk with him. Also, both you and the Vice President have standing invitations to visit Tunisia, and our Assistant Secretary for African Affairs is often in the area. This last could meet the need for the time being.

For the moment, all that seems required is to reply to Bourguiba with a warm letter of reassurance with general agreement on the desirability of a continued exchange of views.

Recommendation: That you sign the letter to President Bourguiba at Tab A. [Text cleared with Mr. Price's office.]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 762, Presidential Correspondence, President Bourguiba. Confidential. Sent for action. In his October 25 letter, not printed, Bourguiba renewed his request for a bilateral review of U.S.-Tunisian relations and the international scene. In Nixon's December 12 reply, not printed, he agreed that a dialogue on bilateral matters was important, and that, while much could be communicated at the ambassadorial level, he welcomed Bourguiba's views at any time.
