Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–13, Documents on China, 1969–1972 (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 2006)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1969-76ve13).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Documents on China, 1969–1972 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–13)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976

Volume E–13

Documents on China, 1969–1972

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on June 1, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
June 2018

Documents on China, 1969–1972 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–13)Contents

Preface

Sources

Abbreviations

Persons

Documents on China, 1969-1972 (Documents 1-175)

Preface Preface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, under the direction of the General Editor, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg first promulgated official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series on March 26, 1925. Those regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.

Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by President George H. W. Bush on October 28, 1991, established a new statutory charter for the preparation of the series. Section 198 of P.L. 102–138 added a new Title IV to the Department of State's Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 U.S.C. 4351, et seq.).

The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the series must include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government. The statute also confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purpose of concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded.

Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series

This electronic-only volume is part of the Foreign Relations subseries that documents the most important decisions and actions of the foreign policy of the administration of President Richard M. Nixon. This is the sixth Foreign Relations volume to be published in a new format, that of electronic-only publication. Approximately 25 percent of the volumes scheduled for publication for the 1969–1976 subseries, covering the Nixon-Ford administrations, will be in this format. The decision to institute this change was taken in full consultation with the Department's Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, which was established under the Foreign Relations statute. The advantages of this new method of presenting documentation are evident in this volume: the format provides convenient access to important supplemental documentation on key aspects of U.S. foreign policy shift, all or any portion of which can be easily downloaded. Annotation—the value added element of documentary editing—is still present in limited form, but not on the scale of a Foreign Relations print volume. This electronic-only publication results in substantial savings in cost and time of production, thus allowing the series to present a fuller range of documentation, on a wider range of topics, sooner than would have been possible under a print-only format. These advantages compensate for the fact that this Foreign Relations volume is not an actual book bound in traditional ruby buckram. The Department of State, the Historian, the General Editor, and the Historical Advisory Committee are all dedicated to publishing the great majority of the volumes in the Foreign Relations series in print form; these are also posted in electronic format on the Department of State's website. While the future of research in documentary publications is increasingly tied to the ease of use and availability of the Internet, the Department of State will continue to use both print and electronic-only versions to make the Foreign Relations series available to the widest audience possible. In that sense, this innovation is in keeping with the general principles of the series begun by President Abraham Lincoln and Secretary of State William H. Seward and continued by subsequent presidents and secretaries of state for more than 140 years.

Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume E–13

This volume supplements the recently released print volume XVII, China, 1969–1972, by publishing 175 documents, most of which are cited in the footnotes of print volume XVII, that relate to the high-level contacts between the People's Republic of China and the United States. Typically, the print volume presents the shorter (and sometimes more subjective) summary memorandum of a conversation or important message that National Security Advisor Henry A. Kissinger and the National Security Council staff prepared for the President, while the supplement contains the verbatim memorandum of conversation or the full text of messages exchanged. In addition, Vol. E–13 contains documentation on the Nixon administration's historic opening to China, including accounts of meetings at the foreign minister level during President Nixon's visit to Beijing in 1972, backchannel messages, and memoranda from other agencies, such as the Department of Defense. This extra coverage of the Nixon administration's opening to China is the result of a decision to give this historic and important U.S. foreign policy shift maximum coverage in the Foreign Relations series.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time. Memoranda of conversation are placed according to the date and time of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations electronic-only volumes follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the Chief of the Declassification and Publishing Division. The original text is reproduced exactly, including marginalia or other notations, which are both visible on the facsimile copy of the document and described in the source note. There is also a text version of the document. The editors have supplied a heading, a summary, and a source note with additional relevant information, as required, for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the original text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected in the text file. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the text, and a list of abbreviations, persons, and sources accompanies the volume.

Bracketed insertions in roman type are used on the facsimile copy and in the text file to indicate text omitted by the editors because it deals with an unrelated subject. Text that remains classified after declassification review is blacked-out on the facsimile copy and a bracketed insertion (in italic type) appears in the text file. Entire documents selected for publication but withheld because they must remain classified are accounted for by a heading, a source note, and a bracketed note indicating the number of pages not declassified. These denied documents are listed in their chronological place in the volume.

Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation

The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Historical Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the preparation and declassification of the series. The Historical Advisory Committee does not necessarily review the contents of individual volumes in the series, but it makes recommendations on issues that come to its attention and reviews volumes, as it deems necessary, to fulfill its advisory and statutory obligations.

Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act Review

Under the terms of the Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act PRMPA) of 1974 (44 U.S.C. 2111 note), the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) has custody of the Nixon Presidential historical materials. The requirements of the PRMPA and implementing regulations govern access to the Nixon Presidential historical materials. The PRMPA and implementing public access regulations require NARA to review these materials for additional restrictions in order to ensure the protection of the privacy rights of former Nixon White House officials, since these officials were not given the opportunity to separate their personal materials from public papers. Thus, the PRMPA and related implementing public access regulations require NARA to notify formally the Nixon estate and former Nixon White House staff members that the agency is scheduling for public release Nixon White House historical materials. The Nixon Estate and former White House staff members have 30 days to contest the release of Nixon historical materials in which they were a participant or are mentioned. Further, the PRMPA and implementing regulations require NARA to segregate and return to the creator of files private and personal materials. All Foreign Relations volumes that include materials from NARA's Nixon Presidential Materials Staff are processed and released in accordance with the PRMPA.

Declassification Review

The Office of Information Programs and Services, Bureau of Administration, Department of State, conducted the declassification review of all the documents published in this volume. The review was undertaken in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12958, as amended, on Classified National Security Information, and applicable laws.

The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security as embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State and other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government. The declassification review of this volume, which began in 1999 and was completed in 2002, resulted in the decision to deny no documents in full and to make minor excisions in 6 documents. The editors are confident, on the basis of the research conducted in preparing this volume and as a result of the declassification review process described above, that this volume is an accurate supplemental record of the foreign policy of the Nixon administration towards China from 1969 to 1972.

Acknowledgments

The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the Nixon Presidential Materials Project of the National Archives and Records Administration (Archives II), at College Park, Maryland, Sandra Meagher of the Department of Defense, who facilitated access to Defense records, and historians at the Center for the Study of Intelligence, who assisted in access to relevant records of the Central Intelligence Agency. The editors also wish to express gratitude to the Richard Nixon Estate for allowing access to the Nixon Presidential recordings and the Richard Nixon Library & Birthplace for facilitating that access.

Steven Philips did the research, selection, and annotation of the volume which was reviewed by Edward C. Keefer, then Chief of the Asia and Americas Division and now the General Editor of the Foreign Relations series. Susan C. Weetman, Chief of the Declassification and Publishing Division, and Chris Tudda coordinated the declassification review. Kristin L. Ahlberg and Carl Ashley performed the copy and technical editing with assistance from Keri Lewis, Aaron W. Marrs, Andrea Peterson, and Edmond Pechaty. Richard Moss scanned the documents and prepared them for on-line publication.

Marc J. Susser
The Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
September 2006

Sources Sources

Sources for the Foreign Relations Series

The Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation on major U.S. foreign policy decisions and significant U.S. diplomatic activity. It further requires that government agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government engaged in foreign policy formulation, execution, or support cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. Most of the sources consulted in the preparation of this volume have been declassified and are available for review at the National Archives and Records Administration.

The editors of the Foreign Relations series have complete access to all the retired records and papers of the Department of State: the central files of the Department; the special decentralized files (”lot files”) of the Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the Department's Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of international conferences and high-level official visits, correspondence with foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and memoranda of conversations between the President and Secretary of State and foreign officials; and the files of overseas diplomatic posts. All the Department's indexed central files through July 1973 have been permanently transferred to the National Archives and Records Administration at College Park, Maryland (Archives II). Many of the Department's decentralized office (or lot) files covering the 1969–1976 period, which the National Archives deems worthy of permanent retention, have been transferred or are in the process of being transferred from the Department's custody to Archives II.

The editors of the Foreign Relations series also have full access to the papers of President Nixon and other White House foreign policy records. Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Presidential libraries and the Nixon Presidential Materials Project at Archives II include some of the most significant foreign affairs-related documentation from the Department of State and other Federal agencies including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Dr. Henry Kissinger has approved access to his papers at the Library of Congress. These papers are a key source for the Nixon–Ford subseries of Foreign Relations.

Research for this volume was completed through special access to restricted documents at the Nixon Presidential Materials Project, the Library of Congress, and other agencies. While all the material printed in this volume has been declassified, some of it is extracted from stillclassified documents. The Nixon Presidential Materials staff is processing and declassifying many of the documents used in this volume, but they may not be available in their entirety at the time of publication.

Sources for Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XVII

The Nixon Presidential Materials, presently housed at the National Archives and Records Administration at College Park, Maryland, are the single most important source of documentation for those interested in Sino-American relations during the first Nixon administration. The Nixon Presidential Materials are scheduled to be transferred to the Nixon Presidential Library in Yorba Linda, California over the next few years.

Foreign policy research in the Nixon Materials centers around the National Security Council (NSC) Files, which include Country Files,the President's Daily Briefing materials, backchannel messages, VIP Visit Files, topical files related to Vietnam and China, Name Files, Files of NSC staffers, and Kissinger's Office Files. The NSC files contain about 1,300 archive boxes of materials. In particular, the Country Files for the Republic of China on Taiwan and the People's Republic of China (Boxes 518–529); President's File—China Trip (Boxes 846–851); and Files for the President—China Materials (1031–1038) hold the most complete documentation of high-level policy making.

There are several collections in the NSC Files that contain scattered,but often unique, documentation on the evolution of America's China policy, including the chronological files for various NSC staff members such as Alexander M. Haig, Robert Houdek, Anthony Lake, Jon Howe, Harold Saunders, and Richard Solomon. Finally, Kissinger's Office Files overlap considerably with the Kissinger Papers at the Library of Congress (discussed below). This collection includes materials from the Presidential transition (November 1968–January 1969),overseas trips, and Country Files (Boxes 86–100 cover China).

Besides the NSC Files, the Nixon Materials include the White House Central Files, which have Staff Member and Office Files, subject files and name files. There also exists the White House Special Files,which include Staff Member and Office Files, Subject Files, and Name Files. The White House Central Files generally contain less sensitive materials, but add some insight into the connection between the domestic and foreign policies of the Nixon White House. The Special Files' Staff Member Office Files collection includes the files of H.R. Haldeman, John Ehrlichman, and most other important White House staff members. It also holds the President's Office Files (POF), which have the President's Handwriting File (copies of documents with President Richard M. Nixon's handwritten comments) and Memoranda for the President. The Memoranda for the President is a chronological collection of memoranda of conversation or other documentation of meetings attended by Nixon. It includes meetings related to domestic politics and foreign policy, and often contains records of talks with foreign leaders. While only a small portion of the NSC Files have been declassified,much of the Central and Special Files are available to the public. Binders with complete box lists for these materials are available at the Nixon Presidential Materials Project.

One important resource is the White House Central Files, President's Daily Diary, which lists all those who met with the President at the White House or while he was traveling. The Diary also indicates telephone calls to and from the President and has a daily record of ”Presidential Movements.”

The White House tapes, which began in February 1971, provide an invaluable record of Nixon foreign policy and life in the White House. Conversations were recorded from the Oval Office, Cabinet Room, Camp David, Nixon's private office in the Executive Office Building (EOB), as well as the White House and Camp David telephones. A tape log outlining the topics of each conversation and providing specific conversation numbers, time, date, and names of those on the tape has been prepared by the staff at the Nixon Presidential Materials Project. An abbreviation, acronym, and name list has also been provided by Nixon Project to help narrow the search of the tapes. The tapes themselves vary greatly in quality; those from the EOB office are difficult to hear, while those in the Cabinet Room or over the telephone are often quite clear.

The NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H–Files) contain documents distributed prior to each NSC meeting (71 meetings held from 1969 to 1972), Special Review Group (49 meetings), Senior Review Group (91 meetings), Washington Special Actions Group (153 meetings),Defense Program Review Committee (23 meetings), Verification Panel (45 meetings), Vietnam Special Studies Group (7 meetings), and the NSC Intelligence Committee (1 meeting), along with detailed minutes of most of these meetings. There is a guide to the H–Files available at the National Archives.

After the Nixon Presidential Materials Project, the Henry A. Kissinger Papers located in the Manuscript Division of the Library of Congress are second in importance. While the Kissinger papers contain copies of many of the most important items found in the Nixon Presidential Materials Project, the chief advantage of these files is that they are well-organized and contain fewer materials on administrative matters of little value to most researchers. The most useful parts of the Kissinger Papers are the Chronological Files, Memoranda of Conversations,Memoranda for the President, and a collection of documents organized by country under the Geopolitical Files heading. The Kissinger papers also contain records of Kissinger's telephone conversations (telcons). The telcons, prepared by members of the NSC staff, include Kissinger's talks with President Nixon, Secretaries Rogers and Laird, other top U.S. officials, foreign diplomats (including ”unofficial” go-betweens involved in Japanese textile negations), scholars, and newspaper, magazine, and television reporters (who comprise about one-third of the total number of conversations). Copies of the Kissinger telephone conversations are also available at the National Archives and are open to the public. Another unique item in the Kissinger papers is a typed version of Kissinger's daily schedule. This is found under Miscellany, 1968–1976, Record of Schedule, though the schedule before August 31, 1970, has not been located. For an overview of the entire collection, researchers are advised to consult ”Henry Kissinger: A Register of his Papers in the Library of Congress,” prepared by the Manuscript Division of the Library of Congress in 1996.Access to these papers currently requires permission from Kissinger.

Since Nixon and Kissinger dominated the formulation and implementation of China policy, the files of the Department of State, the Department of Defense, and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) are of less importance for the 1969–1972 period than for earlier administrations.The White House deliberately excluded these agencies from involvement in rapprochement between the United States and the People's Republic of China (PRC). These files are, however, important sources of information for researching America's increasingly troubled relationship with the Republic of China on Taiwan (ROC). The Central Files of the Department of State are most valuable for information on day-to-day interaction with the ROC and for some information on events within the PRC. The Lot Files of the Department of State containing some useful information are the records of the Executive Secretariat (S/S), the organization charged with managing the paperwork of the Secretary of State (Lots 71 D 175 and 72 D 318) and the Conference Files, a consolidated grouping of documents related to trips by the Secretary, the President, and the Vice President. This latter collection includes many memoranda of conversation with foreign leaders and correspondence from high-level American officials while they were on travel or at the United Nations in New York.

For relevant records of the Central Intelligence Agency and the Department of Defense, see the following list.

Unpublished Sources

Department of State

Central Files. See National Archives and Records Administration below.

Lot Files. For other lot files already transferred to the National Archives and Records Administration at College Park, Maryland, Record Group 59, see National Archives and Records Administration below.

INR/IL Historical Files

Files of the Office of Intelligence Coordination, containing records from the 1940s through the 1970s, maintained by the Office of Intelligence Liaison, Bureau of Intelligence and Research

National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, Maryland

Record Group 59, Records of the Department of State

Central Files

AID (US) CHINAT, ROC, U.S. economic aid to the ROC

AID (US) 8 CHINAT, U.S. grants and technical assistance to the ROC

AID (US) 15 CHINAT, P.L.–480 assistance to the ROC

CSM 1 CHICOM, Chinese Communist doctrine, objectives

CSM 1–1, Communist schisms, deviation

CUL CHICOM, cultural activities related to the People's Republic of China (PRC)

CUL CHINAT, cultural activities related to the Republic of China (ROC)

DEF 12–1 CHICOM, nuclear testing, PRC

DEF ASIA SE, regional military affairs, Southeast Asia

DEF CHICOM, military affairs, PRC

DEF CHINAT, military affairs, ROC

DEF 1 CHINAT, defense policy, plans, readiness, ROC

DEF 1 CHINAT–US, defense policy, plans, readiness, ROC–U.S.

DEF 1–4 CHINAT, air defense, ROC

DEF 6 CHINAT, armed forces, ROC

DEF 6–5 CHINAT, paramilitary forces, ROC

DEF 15 CHINAT, bases and installations, ROC

DEF 15 CHINAT–US, bases and installations, ROC–U.S.

DEF 15–3 CHINAT–US, status of forces, ROC–U.S.

DEF 15 HK, bases and installations, Hong Kong

DEF 19 US–CHINAT, U.S. military assistance to the ROC

DEF 19–8 US–CHINAT, U.S. provision of military equipment and supplies to the ROC

E CHICOM or CHINAT, general economic affairs, PRC or ROC

E HK, general economic affairs, Hong Kong

E 5 MONG, economic development, Mongolia

FN CHICOM or CHINAT, financial affairs, PRC or ROC

FN HK, financial affairs, Hong Kong

FT CHICOM–US, question of trade with the PRC

FT CHICOM–1 US, general policy on the question of trade with the PRC

INT 6, collection of intelligence

INCO TEXTILES CHINAT, industries and commodities, textiles, ROC

ORG 1 OSD–STATE, State–Defense coordination

ORG 3–2, chiefs of mission and principal officers

ORG 7 FE, travel by officials of the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs

ORG 7 S, travel by the Secretary of State

PET CHINAT, petroleum, ROC

POL ASIA/ASIA SE, political affairs and relations, Asia/Southeast Asia

POL 1 ASIA SE–US, U.S. general policy toward Southeast Asia

POL CAN–CHICOM, political affairs and relations, Canada and the PRC

POL CHICOM, political developments, PRC

POL 1 CHICOM, U.S. general policy toward the PRC

POL 1–3 CHICOM, general policy evaluation, PRC

POL 2 CHICOM, general reports and statistics, PRC

POL 13–2 CHICOM, PRC students and youth groups

POL 15–1 CHICOM, PRC head of state

POL 16 CHICOM, independence and recognition, PRC

POL CHICOM–CHINAT, political affairs and relations, PRC China–ROC

POL 27 CHICOM–CHINAT, military operations, PRC–ROC

POL 1 CHICOM–FR, general policy, PRC and France

POL CHICOM–JAPAN, political affairs and relations, PRC and Japan

POL CHICOM–US, political affairs and relations, PRC and the U.S.

POL 1 CHICOM–US, U.S. general policy toward the PRC

POL 27–7 CHICOM–US, U.S. prisoners of war, hostages, civilian internees in the PRC

POL 31–1 CHICOM–US, air disputes and violations, PRC and the U.S.

POL CHICOM–USSR, political affairs and relations, PRC and the U.S.S.R

POL 32–1 CHICOM–USSR, territory and boundary disputes, violations, incidents, PRC and the U.S.S.R.

POL CHINAT, political developments, ROC

POL 2 CHINAT, general reports and statistics, ROC

POL 7 CHINAT, travel and visits by high–level ROC officials

POL 15–1 CHINAT, ROC head of state

POL 16 CHINAT, independence and recognition, ROC

POL 29 CHINAT, political prisoners, ROC

POL CHINAT–CHICOM, political affairs and relations, ROC and PRC

POL CHINAT–FR, political affairs and relations, ROC and France

POL 1 CHINAT–FR, ROC general policy toward France

POL CHINAT–US, political affairs and relations, ROC and the U.S.

POL 1 CHINAT–US, U.S. general policy toward the ROC

POL 17 CHINAT–US, ROC diplomatic and consular representation in the U.S.

POL 1 CHINAT–VIET S, ROC general policy toward South Vietnam

POL 23–10 COMBLOC, travel controls, Communist Bloc countries

POL HK, political affairs and relations, Hong Kong

POL 23–8 HK, demonstrations, riots, protests, Hong Kong

POL HK–US, political affairs and relations, Hong Kong and the U.S.

POL 7 JAPAN, visits of Japanese leaders

POL 16 MONG, question of recognition of Mongolia

POL MONG–US, political affairs and relations, Mongolia and the U.S.

POL 7 ROM, travel and visits by high–level Romanian officials

POL 17 ROM–POL, Romanian diplomatic and consular representation in Poland

POL TAIWAN, political affairs and relations, Taiwan (ROC)

POL TIBET, political affairs and relations, Tibet

POL 19 TIBET, political issues concerning Tibet

POL 30–2 TIBET, Tibetan exile political activities

POL 19 TIBET/UN, the Tibet issue in the United Nations

POL 19 TIBET/US, U.S. policy with respect to Tibet

POL 1 US, general policy, background, U.S.

POL 2 US, general reports and statistics, U.S.

POL 7 US–KENNEDY, files related to visits and meetings of Ambassador David Kennedy

POL 7 US–KISSINGER, files related to visits and meetings of Henry A. Kissinger

POL 7 US/NIXON, President Nixon's overseas visits, head of state visits to the U.S.

POL 15–1 US/NIXON, President Nixon's meetings and correspondence with heads of state

POL 17 US–CHICOM, U.S. diplomatic and consular representation in the PRC

POL 7 USSR, travel and visits by high–level Soviet officials

POL 27 VIET S, military operations, South Vietnam

SOC CHICOM or CHINAT, social conditions in the PRC or ROC

STR 9–1, strategic trade controls on trade with the PRC

TR 8 CHICOM, trade promotion and assistance, fairs and exhibitions, PRC

UN 3 GA, United Nations General Assembly

UN 6 CHICOM, Chinese representation question in the United Nations

Lot Files

DS/IM Files: Lot 96 D 695

Files of U. Alexis Johnson, 1958–1973. This lot file combines lots 90 D 407, 408 and 410. Memoranda of conversation, correspondence files, personal files, and 12 audiotapes.

EA/ACA Files: Lot 71 D 144

Files of Paul H. Kreisberg, Officer in Charge of Mainland China Affairs, 1965–1970,as maintained by the Office of Asian Communist Affairs

EA/ROC Files: Lot 71 D 187

Political files, 1968–1969, from the Office of Republic of China Affairs

EA/ROC Files: Lot 71 D 516

Matters related to economic and defense issues on Taiwan, 1969–1970, from the Office of Republic of China Affairs

EA/ROC Files: Lot 72 D 140

Top Secret files, including briefing materials and records of visits, 1961–1968, as maintained by the Office of Chinese Affairs, later by the Republic of China desk in the office of East Asian Affairs, and later by the Office of Republic of China Affairs

EA/ROC Files: Lot 72 D 145

Political files, 1970 and previous years, from the Office of Republic of China Affairs

EA/EX Files: Lot 72 D 276

Miscellaneous top secret files from 1953, 1967, 1969 and 1970, from the EA Message Center, filed by the Executive Secretariat

EA/ROC Files: Lot 73 D 38

Political files, 1970–1971, from the Office of Republic of China Affairs

EA/RA Files: Lot 73 D 418

Telegrams, airgrams, reports and correspondence, 1966–1972, from the Office of Regional Affairs

EA/ROC Files: Lot 74 D 25

Political files, 1964–1972, from the Republic of China desk in the Office of East Asian Affairs and later by the Office of Republic of China Affairs

EA/PRC/M Files: Lot 74 D 192

Hong Kong and Macau subject files, 1971–1972, from the Office of People's Republic of China and Mongolia Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs

EA/PRC/M Files: Lot 74 D 213

NSC Under Secretaries Memorandum 91, travel and trade with the PRC, 1969–1973,from the Office of People's Republic of China and Mongolia Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs

EA/PRC/M Files: Lot 74 D 400

PRC subject files, 1971, from the Office of People's Republic of China and Mongolia Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs

EA Files: 74 D 471

Letters and memoranda prepared in the Office of the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, 1972–1973

EA/ROC Files: Lot 75 D 61

Economic and defense files, 1968–1972, from the Office of Republic of China Affairs

EA/ROC Files: Lot 75 D 76

Political files, 1954–1973, and miscellaneous Top Secret files, 1955–1973, from the Office of Chinese Affairs, later by the Republic of China desk in the Office of East Asian Affairs, and later by the Office of Republic of China Affairs

EA/ROC Files: Lot 78 D 138

Files on political, defense, and legislative matters, 1971–1975, from the Office of Republic of China Affairs

EA/ROC Files: Lot 79 D 120

Top Secret files, 1961–1972, from the Republic of China desk in the office of East Asian Affairs, and later by the Office of Republic of China Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs

EA/ROC Files: Lot 79 D 307

Ambassadorial talks: Warsaw, 1969–1973, and top secret documents related to China,1961–1977, from the Office of People's Republic of China and Mongolian Affairs

Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240

Files of William P. Bundy as Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, 1962–1970

EAP Files: Lot 89 D 436

China files of William H. Gleysteen, 1969–1977, from the Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs

EAP/CM Files: Lot 96 D 539

Top secret China documents, 1971–1987, from the Office of Chinese and Mongolian Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs

INR/REA Files: Lot 74 D 499

Files relating to the Republic of China, 1969–1970, from the Office of Regional Affairs

INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 99

National Intelligence Estimates, Special National Intelligence Estimates, Telegrams, and Memos, 1952–1985, from the Office of Research and Analysis for East Asia and the Pacific

INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 110

National Intelligence Estimates, Special National Intelligence Estimates, Telegrams,and Memos, 1952–1985, from the Office of Research and Analysis for East Asia and the Pacific

INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 567

Top secret historical documents, 1976–1984, from the Office Research and Analysis for East Asia and Pacific

Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192

Files of Secretary of State Dean Rusk, 1961–1969, including texts of speeches and public statements, miscellaneous correspondence files, White House correspondence,chronological files, and memoranda of telephone conversations

S/P Files: Lot 71 D 382

Records of the Policy Planning Staff, 1964–1970

S/P Files: Lot 72 D 139

Top Secret files of the Policy Planning Council, 1963–1971; country files, 1965–1969

S/P Files: Lot 77 D 112

Files of Policy Planning Director Winston Lord (1973–1977), covering the period 1969–1977

S/S Files: Lots 71 D 175 and 72 D 318

National Security Council meeting files, 1969–1970

S/S Files: Lot 72 D 319

Correspondence of President Richard M. Nixon

S/S Files: Lot 73 D 288

Cabinet, National Security Council, National Security Council Under Secretaries,and Senior Review Group miscellaneous memoranda, 1969–1972

S/S Files: Lot 73 D 443

Secretary William P. Rogers' official and personal papers, 1969–1973 (contents of Rogers' safe), from the Secretariat Staff

S/S Files: Lot 74 D 164

Under Secretary Irwin's meetings with Kissinger, 1970–1972

S/S Files: Lot 74 D 504

Subject files of the Office of International Security Policy

S/S Files: Lot 76 D 249

Briefing books and personal files for Rush, Pederson and Rogers, including Rogers' appointments and meetings with heads of government, from the Executive Secretariat.Files returned to the Executive Secretariat

S/S Files: Lot 80 D 212

National Security Council Files pertaining to NSSMs and related documents as maintained by the Department of State, 1969–1980

S/S Files: Lot 81 D 309, NSC–U/SM

Under Secretaries Study Memorandum, 1969–1976

S/S Files: Lot 82 D 126

NSC, CIEP, Under Secretary Committee meeting miscellaneous files, 1969–1977

S/S Files: Lot 82 D 307

Files of Walter J. Stoessel, Deputy Secretary of State, including files on the Warsaw Talks, 1968–1982

S/S Files: Lot 83 D 276

NSC Under Secretaries Committee memoranda 1969–1977, NSC–U/DM1 through 142

S/S Files: Lot 83 D 277

NSC Under Secretaries Committee, 1969–1977, NSC–U/N–1 through 188

S/S Files: Lot 83 D 305

National Security Decision Memoranda (NSDMs), 1969–1977

S/S Files: Lot 83 D 411

NSC Contingency Plans for various countries, 1969–1974

Warsaw Talks Files: Lot 73 D 210

Files relating to the U.S.-China ambassadorial talks at Warsaw, 1958–1971, with some material concerning the 1955–1957 talks at Geneva, maintained by the Embassy at Warsaw and later by the Office of People's Republic of China and Mongolia Affairs

Nixon Presidential Materials Project

National Security Council Files

Agency Files

Alexander M. Haig Chronological Files

Backchannel Files

Briefing Books for HAK's SEA and PRC Trips

China Trip/Vietnam Negotiations. Includes chronological files entitled ”China Exchanges.”

Country Files: China/PRC, Hong Kong, Mongolia, India (Tibet), Pakistan, Norway,

Poland, USSR

Files for the President—China Materials

Jonathan Howe Trip Files

Name Files

NSC Secretariat, Unfiled Materials

Presidential Correspondence

Presidential/HAK Memoranda of Conversation

President's Daily Briefings, January 1969–August 1974

President's Trip Files

Staff Files

Subject Files

Visits by Foreign Leaders

Henry A. Kissinger Files

Administrative and Staff Files, 1968–1974

Country Files, Far East

Trip Files

National Security Council Institutional Files H-Files)

National Security Council Minutes

National Security Council Meetings

Senior Review Group Minutes

Senior Review Group Meetings

Policy Papers, National Security Decision Memoranda

Study Memoranda

Under Secretaries Committee Files

White House Special Files

Staff Member and Office Files

President's Office Files

President's Personal Files

Subject Files

Alpha Name Files

White House Central Files

Staff Member and Office Files: President's Daily Diary

Subject Files

Alpha Name Files

White House Tapes

Central Intelligence Agency

DCI's Executive Registry Files: Jobs 80–B01086A, 80–R01284A, 80–R10580R, 80–R01731R, and 84–B00513R, executive files of the Director of Central Intelligence

DCI/National Intelligence Officer, Folders on the Sino-Soviet conflict: Job 93–T01468R

Files of Directors of Central Intelligence John A. McCone (1961–1965), William F. Raborn (1965–1966), and Richard M. Helms (1966–1973): Job 80–B01285A

O/D/NFAC, National Intelligence Officer: Jobs 79–R00904A, 79–T00937A, 79–R00967A, and 79–T00968A

National Intelligence Council Files, National Intelligence Estimates and Special National Intelligence Estimates: Job 79–R01012

Library of Congress

Papers of Henry A. Kissinger

Cables

Chronological File

Department of State

Geopolitical File

Memoranda of Conversations

Memoranda to the President

Miscellany

National Security Council

NATO

Speeches and Writings

Subject File

Telephone Records

Papers of Eliot Richardson

Memoranda of conversations

Telephone conversations

Washington National Records Center, Suitland, Maryland

Record Group 330, Records of the Office of the Secretary of Defense

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330 72 6308 and FRC 330 72 6309

Top secret and secret subject decimal files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1969

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330 72 7500

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1968–1970, Cable and Miscellaneous Correspondence Pertaining to the Paris Peace Talks

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330 73 1345

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Miscellaneous Files from the Office of the Executive Officer, Secret

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330 73 1975

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1970 General Files, Secret

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330 73 2360

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Files of Armistead Selden, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330 74 0036

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Miscellaneous Files

OSD Files: FRC 330 74 0045

Chronological Files for the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense, 1969–1973,Top Secret

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330 74 0083

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1971 General Files, Secret

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330 74 0115

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1971 General Files, Top Secret

OSD Files: FRC 330 74 0142

Immediate Office of the Secretary of Defense Vault, 1969–1972

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330 75 0067

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Miscellaneous Country Files

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330 75 0125

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1972 General Files, Secret

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330 75 0155

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1972 General Files, Top Secret

OSD Files: FRC 330 75 0089

Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and Special Assistant to the Secretary, 1969 Secret.

OSD Files: FRC 330 75 0103

Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and Special Assistant to the Secretary, 1969 Top Secret

OSD Files: FRC 330 75 0104

Office of the Secretary of Defense (1966–1971), Admiral Murphy/General Pursley, Top Secret

OSD Files: FRC 330 75 0095

Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and Special Assistant to the Secretary, 1972 Top Secret

OSD Files: FRC 330 76 0028

Office of the Special Assistant to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary, Office Chrons, 1958–1973.

OSD Files: FRC 330 76 0067

Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and Special Assistant to the Secretary, 1970 Secret

OSD Files: FRC 330 76 0076

Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and Special Assistant to the Secretary, 1970 Top Secret

OSD Files: FRC 330 76 0197

Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and Special Assistant to the Secretary, 1971 Secret

OSD Files: FRC 330 76 0207

Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and Special Assistant to the Secretary, 1971 Top Secret

OSD Files: FRC 330 77 0094

Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and Special Assistant to the Secretary, 1972 Secret

OSD Files: FRC 330 77 0131

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense, Miscellaneous Records, 1962–1972

OSD Files: FRC 330 78 0141

Original Multi-Addressee Memoranda Signed by the Secretary and Deputy Secretary, 1948–1977

OSD Files: FRC 330 80 0059

Office of the Secretary of Defense, Relations with Congress, the White House, and Public, 1956–1975

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330 80 0026

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Taiwan Files, 1966–1977

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330 80 0055

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Security Assistance Files, 1950–1977

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330 81 0712

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, East Asia and Pacific Affairs Files, 1964–1973, Japan

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330 83 0123

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, East Asia and Pacific Affairs Files, 1961–1979, Taiwan/China

Published Sources

Documentary Collections

Allen, John, Jr., John Carver, and Tom Elmore, editors. Tracking the Dragon: National Intelligence Estimates on China During the Era of Mao, 1948–1976. Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the President, Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director, National Intelligence Council, 2004.

Burr, William, editor. Kissinger Transcripts: The Top Secret Talks with Beijing and Moscow: A National Security Archive Documents Reader. New York: The New Press, 1998.

Haldeman, H.R., The Haldeman Diaries: Inside the Nixon White House: The Complete Multimedia Edition, Sony Electronic Publishing, 1994. (CD-ROM)

U.S. Department of State. Bulletin 1969–1972.

U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Richard Nixon, 1969, 1970, 1971, 1972. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1970, 1971, 1972, 1973.

Memoirs

Garthoff, Raymond, Détente and Confrontation: American Soviet Relations from Nixon to Reagan. Revised Edition. Washington: The Brookings Institution, 1994.

Green, Marshall, John H. Holdridge, and William N. Stokes, War and Peace with China: First Hand Experiences in the Foreign Service of the United States. Bethesda: DACOR Press, 1994.

Garver, John W. China's Decision for Rapprochement with the United States, 1968–1971. Boulder: Westview Press, 1982.

Haig, Alexander M., Jr., Inner Circle: How America Changed the World. New York: Warner Books, 1992.

Haldeman, H.R., The Ends of Power. New York: Times Books, 1978.

——— The Haldeman Diaries: Inside the Nixon White House. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1994.

Holdridge, John H., Crossing the Divide: An Insider's Account of the Normalization of U.S.-China Relations. New York: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 1997.

Kissinger, Henry A., White House Years. Boston; Little, Brown, and Company, 1979.

Mann, James, About Face: A History of America's Curious Relationship with China from Nixon to Clinton. New York: Alfred Knopf, 1999.

Nixon, Richard M., RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon. New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1978.

Shen, James C. H., The U.S. and Free China: How the U.S. Sold Out Its Ally. Washington: Acropolis Books Ltd., 1983.

Walters, Vernon A., Silent Missions. Garden City: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1978.

Abbreviations Abbreviations

A/A, anti-aircraft

A/AID, Office of the Administrator, Agency for International Development

AA, Afro-Asian

AB, air base

ABC, American Broadcasting Company

ABF, attacks by fire

ABM, anti-ballistic missile

ACA, Office of Asian Communist Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

ACDA, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency

ACTION, Federal agency that coordinates domestic volunteer efforts

ADB, Asian Development Bank

ADOA, Air Defense Operations Agreement

AEC, Atomic Energy Commission

AF, Air Force; also Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AFB, air force base

AFL–CIO, American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations

AFP, Agence France Press

AID, Agency for International Development

AID/NESA, Bureau for Near East and South Asia, Agency for International Development

AMB, ambassador

AMCITS, American citizens

AMH, Alexander Meigs Haig, Jr.

AMCONGEN, American Consul General

AMCONSUL, American Consul

ANZUS, Australia, New Zealand, United States

AP, Associated Press

APC, armored personnel carrier; also Accelerated Pacification Campaign

AR, Albanian Resolution (UN)

ARA, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State

ARVN, Army of the Republic of Vietnam South Vietnam)

ASA, Association of Southeast Asia

ASAP, as soon as possible

ASEAN, Association of Southeast Asian Nations

ASPAC, Asian and Pacific Council

B–52, United States Air Force strategic bomber

Backchannel, a method of communication outside normal bureaucratic procedure; the White House, for instance, used ”backchannel” messages to bypass the Department of State

BNDD, Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, Department of Justice

BOB, Bureau of the Budget

C–130, United States Air Force transport plane

C, Office of the Counselor of the Department of State

CA, circular airgram

CAF, Chinese Air Force (ROC)

CANDEL, Canadian Delegation

CAP, Combined Action Platoon

CAT, Civil Air Transport

CCA, Chinese Communist Army

CCK, Chiang Ching-kuo (Jiang Jingguo); also Ching Chuan Kang Airbase in Taiwan

CCN, Chinese Communist Navy

CCP, Chinese Communist Party

CEA, Council of Economic Advisers

CENTO, Central Asian Treaty Organization (Baghdad Pact)

Chicom(s), Chinese Communist(s)

CHIDEL, Chinese delegation

CHINAT, Chinese Nationalist(s)

CHIREC, Chinese recognition involves bilateral relations between the PRC or ROC and a third country)

CHIREP, Chinese representation UN)

CHMAAG, Chief, Military Assistance Advisory Group (ROC)

CI, counterinsurgency

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

CIA/ONE, Central Intelligence Agency, Office of National Estimates

CIAP, Inter-American Committee for the Alliance for Progress

CIB, Central Intelligence Bulletin CIA)

CIEP, Council on International Economic Policy

CIF, Chinese Irregular Forces

CINC, Commander in Chief

CINCMEAFSA, Commander in Chief, Middle East, South Asia, and Africa South of the Sahara

CINCPAC, Commander in Chief, Pacific

CINCPACAF, Commander in Chief, Pacific Air Force

CINCPACFLT, Commander in Chief, Pacific Fleet

CINCPAC/POLAD, Commander in Chief, Pacific, Political Advisor

CINCSTRIKE, Commander in Chief, Strike Command

CINCUNK, Commander in Chief of United Nations Forces in Korea

CINCUSARPAC, Commander in Chief, U.S. Army Pacific

CIP, commodities import program

CJCS, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

CL, classified

CM, Chairman's (of JCS) memorandum

CMC, Commandant of the Marine Corps

CNO, Chief of Naval Operations

Cocom, Coordinating Committee on Export Controls

Codel, Congressional delegation

Col, Colonel

COMECON, Council on Mutual Economic Assistance

COMINT, communications intelligence

Comite, committee

COMUSMACV, Commander in Chief, U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

COMUSTDC, Commander, U.S. Taiwan Defense Command

CONG, Congress or congressman

CONGEN, Consul General

CONUS, continental United States

COSVN, Central Office for South Vietnam

CPR, Chinese People's Republic (also PRC)

CPT, Thai Communist Party

CSA, Chief of Staff of the Army

CSAF, Chief of Staff of the Air Force

CST, Central Standard Time

CT, Thai Communist Insurgents; also Country Team

CTZ, corps tactical zone

CU, Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs, Department of State

CY, calendar year

D, Deputy Under Secretary for Economic Affairs, Department of State

D/INR, Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

DA, Department of the Army

DAO, defense attaché office

DATT, defense attaché

DCI, Director of Central Intelligence

DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission

DDC, Office of the Deputy Director for Coordination, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

DDCI, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence

DDO, Deputy Directorate for Operations

DDP, Deputy Directorate for Plans

DefMin, minister of defense

DefSec, Defense Secretary

Del, delegate; delegation

Dept, Department of State

Depcirtel, circular telegram from the Department of State

DepFonMin, deputy foreign minister

Deptel, Department of State telegram

DIA, Defense Intelligence Agency

DirGen or DG, Director General

Dis or Dissem, dissemination

DL, development loan

DMZ, demilitarized zone

DOD, Department of Defense

DOD/ISA, Department of Defense, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

DOS, Department of State

DPM, Deputy Prime Minister

DPRC, Defense Program Review Committee

DPRG, Defense Program Review Group

DRV, Democratic Republic of Vietnam North Vietnam)

DTG, date/time/group

E, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

E/ORF, International Resources and Food Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

E/ORF/ICD, Office of International Commodities, International Resources and Food Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

EA, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

EA/ACA, Office of Asian Communist Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

EA/ANZ, Office of Australia, New Zealand and Pacific Islands Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

EA/LC, Office of Laos/Cambodian Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

EA/RA, Office of Regional Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

EA/ROC, Office of Republic of China Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs,Department of State

EA/ROK, Office of Republic of Korea Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs,Department of State

ECAFE, United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East

ECOSOC, United Nations Economic and Social Council

ELR, Elliot L. Richardson

Emb, Embassy

Emboff, Embassy officer

Embtel, Embassy telegram

EOB, Executive Office Building

EST, Eastern Standard Time; also estimated

EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EUR/CAN, Office of Canada Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EUR/SOV, Office of Soviet Union Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

Exdis, exclusive distribution

Ex-Im, Export-Import Bank of Washington

F–4 (Phantom), twin engine turbo jet, all weather, supersonic tactical fighter bomber with two crew members

F–5 (Freedom Fighter), twin engine, supersonic light tactical fighter with one or two crew

F–100, single engine, supersonic fighter aircraft

F, fighter (designation used for United States fighter aircraft)

FAC, Foreign Assets Control

FAO, United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization

FANK, Forces Armées Royales Khmeres Khmer National Armed Forces)

FAR or FARK, Forces Armées Royales Khmeres (Royal Khmer Armed Forces)

FBI, Federal Bureau of Investigation

FBIS, Foreign Broadcast Information Service

FE, Far East; also Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs

Flash, indicates message of highest priority requiring the attention of the Secretary of State

FM, foreign minister; also from

FMS, foreign military sales

FODAG, United States Mission to the United Nations Agencies for Food and Agriculture

FonMin, foreign minister

FonOff, foreign office

FonSec, foreign secretary

FR, France

FRC, Federal Records Center, Suitland, Maryland

FSO, Foreign Service Officer

FWF, free world forces

FT, foreign trade

FY, fiscal year

FYI, for your information

GA, United Nations General Assembly

GAO, General Accounting Office

GATT, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

GDP, gross domestic product

Gen, General

GIMO, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek Jiang Jieshi)

GIO, Government Information Office ROC)

GMT, Greenwich Mean Time

GNP, gross national product

GOC, Government of Canada; also Government of Cambodia

GOI, Government of India; also Government of Indonesia

GOJ, Government of Japan

GOVT, government

GPO, Government Printing Office

GRC, Government of the Republic of China

GSA, General Services Administration

GUB, Government of the Union of Burma

GVN, Government of Vietnam

GVR, Government of the Republic of Vietnam

H, Bureau of Congressional Relations, Department of State

HAK, Henry A. Kissinger

H.E., His Excellency

HEW, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare

HFAC, House Foreign Affairs Committee

HK, Hong Kong; also initials for Henry Kissinger

HKG, Hong Kong Government

HMG, Her Majesty's Government, United Kingdom

hq, headquarters

HR, House Resolution

HUD, Department of Housing and Urban Development

I, Office of the Director, United States Information Agency

IAEA, International Atomic Energy Agency

IBMND, Intelligence Bureau, Ministry of National Defense (ROC)

IBRD, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, World Bank

ICBM, intercontinental ballistic missile

ICC, International Control and Supervision Commission

ICJ, International Court of Justice

ICRC, International Committee, Red Cross

IFI, International Financial Institution

IMF, International Monetary Fund

INFO, information

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

INR/DDC, Office of the Deputy Director for Coordination, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

INR/DDR/REA, Office of Research and Analysis for East Asia and Pacific, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

INR/EAP, East Asia and the Pacific, Bureau of Intelligence and Research

INR/OD, Office of the Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research

INR/RA, Regional Affairs, Bureau of Intelligence and Research

INTEL, intelligence

IO, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

IO/UNP, Office of United Nations Political Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

IQ, important question

IRBM, intermediate range ballistic missile

IRG, Interdepartmental Regional Group

ISA, Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense

J, Office of the Under Secretary for Political Affairs, Department of State

J/PM, Office of Politico-Military Affairs in the Office of the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

JCRR, Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction, Republic of China (ROC)

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

JCSM, Joint Chiefs of Staff memorandum

JHH, John Herbert Holdridge

JUSMAG, Joint United States Military Group

JUSPAO, Joint United States Public Affairs Office

K, Kissinger

KHR, Khmer Republic

KMT, Kuomintang (Nationalist Party, ROC), also called the Guomindang (GMD)

KT, kilotons

L, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

LA, Latin America

LDC, less developed country

LDX, long distance xerography

Limdis, limited distribution

LOC, lines of communication

LPF, Lao Patriotic Front (Pathet Lao)

LTA, long-term agreement textiles)

LTG, Lieutenant General

M–1, World War II-era U.S. military rifle

M–14, semi automatic U.S. military rifle

M–16, U.S. military field rifle

M–113, armored personnel carrier

M, Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Management

mm, millimeter

MAAG, Military Assistance Advisory Group

MAC, Military Assistance Command

MACV, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

MAP, Military Assistance/Aid Program

MASF, Military Assistance Service Funded

MBA, Military Base Agreement

MBFR, Mutual Balanced Force Reduction talks

MemCon, memorandum of conversation

MFA, multifiber agreement

MIA, missing in action

MIG, A. I. Mikoyan and M. I. Gurevich Soviet fighter aircraft named for their two most important designers)

MIL, military

MILAD, military adviser

MinDef, minister of defense

MisOff, mission officer

MND, Ministry of National Defense ROC)

MOD, minister; also ministry of defense

MOFA, Ministry of Foreign Affairs ROC)

MONG, Mongolia

MP, member of parliament

MPR, Mongolian People's Republic

MR, military region; also memorandum for the record

MRBM, medium-range ballistic missile

MT, metric ton

NARA, National Archives and Records Administration

NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NCO, non-commissioned officer

NE, northeast

NEA, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State

NEA/INC, Country Director for India, Ceylon, Nepal and Maldives Islands, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

NEA/PAF, Country Director for Pakistan and Afghanistan, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

NEA/RA, Office of Regional Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

NESA, Bureau for Near East and South Asia, Agency for International Development

Niact, night action, communications indicator requiring attention by the recipient at any hour of the day or night

NIC, National Intelligence Council

NIE, National Intelligence Estimate

NLF, National Liberation Front

NLFSVN, National Liberation Front of South Vietnam

nm, nautical mile

Nodis, no distribution (other than to persons indicated)

Noforn, no foreign dissemination

Notal, not received by all addressees

NPT, Nonproliferation Treaty

NSA, National Security Agency

NSAM, National Security Action Memorandum

NSC, National Security Council

NSC IG/EA, National Security Council Interdepartmental Group on East Asia

NSDM, National Security Decision Memorandum

NSSM, National Security Study Memorandum

NT, New Taiwan Dollar, ROC's unit of currency

NVA (also NVNA), North Vietnamese Army

NVA/VC, North Vietnam/Viet Cong

NVN, North Vietnam

NZ, New Zealand

OASD, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense

OASD/ISA, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

OBE, overtaken by events

OCI, Office of Current Intelligence

OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

OEP, Office of Emergency Preparedness

O & M, operations and maintenance

OMB, Office of Management and Budget

ONE, Office of National Estimates CIA)

OPIC, Overseas Private Investment Corporation

OSD, Office of the Secretary of Defense

OSD/ISA, Office of the Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

OUSD, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense

P, Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State; also President

PA, purchase authorization

PACAF, Pacific Air Force

PACOM, Pacific Command

PACFLT, Pacific Fleet

PARA, paragraph; also Policy Analysis Resource Allocation

PAO, public affairs officer

PAVN, People's Army of Vietnam

PD, presidential determination

PDB, President's Daily Brief

PermRep, permanent representative

PFIAB, President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board

PL, public law; also Pathet Lao

PL–480, Public Law 480 (Food for Peace)

PLA, People's Liberation Army PRC)

PM, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State; also prime minister

PM/ISP, Office of International Security Policy and Planning, Bureau of Politico-MilitaryAffairs, Department of State

PMG, Politico-military Group

PNG, persona non grata

POF, President's Office Files (Nixon Presidential Materials)

POL, petroleum, oil, and lubricants; Poland; political

POLAD, political adviser

PolOff, political officer

POW, prisoner of war

PR, public relations

PRC, People's Republic of China (see also CPR)

PRES, the President

PriMin, prime minister

R & D, research and development

RCD, Organization of Regional Cooperation for Development

RD, rural development

reftel, reference telegram

rep, representative

res, resolution

RET'D, returned

RG, record group or review group

RMN or RN, Richard Nixon

RNC, Republican National Committee

ROC, Republic of China (see also GRC)

ROK, Republic of Korea (South Korea)

ROVN or RVN, Republic of Vietnam

RPT, repeat

RVN, Republic of Vietnam

RVNAF, Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces

S, Office of the Secretary of State

S/AL, Ambassador at Large

S/PC, Planning and Coordination Staff, Department of State

S/PRS, Office of Press Relations, Department of State

S/S, Executive Secretariat of the Department of State

S/S–S, Secretariat Staff, Executive Secretariat of the Department of State

SA, supporting assistance

SAC, Strategic Air Command

SALT, Strategic Arms Limitation Talks

SAM, surface-to-air missile

SAR, search and rescue missions

SC, United Nations Security Council

SCA, Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs, Department of State

SCI, Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs, Department of State

SE, southeast

SEA, Southeast Asia

SEACOORD, Southeast Asia Coordinating Committee

SEAMEC, Southeast Asia Monetary Exchange Council

SEATO, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization

Secdef, Secretary of Defense

Secstate, Secretary of State

Secto, series indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State while away from Washington

Secy, Secretary of State

Secy Gen, Secretary General

Septel, separate telegram

SFRC, Senate Foreign Relations Committee

SIG, Senior Interdepartmental Group NSC)

SIGINT, signals intelligence

SIOP, Single Integrated Operations Plan (for strategic nuclear weapons)

SITREP, situations report

SLBM, submarine launched ballistic missile

SMOF, Staff Member and Office Files Nixon Presidential Materials)

SNIE, Special National Intelligence Estimate

SOF(A), Status of Forces Agreement)

SOP, standard operating procedure

SR, strategic reserve

SR–171, U.S. high altitude reconnaissance aircraft

SRG, Senior Review Group

Subj., Subject

SVN, South Vietnam

SYG, United Nations Secretary General

TA, technical assistance

TAC, tactical; also tactical air command

TACAIR, tactical air

TACS, Tactical Air Control System

TASS, Telegraphnoye Agentsvo Sovetskogo Soyuza Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union)

TC, technical cooperation

TCC, Troop Contributing (to Vietnam) Countries

TDC, Taiwan Defense Command

TDY, temporary duty

TIAS, United States Treaties and Other International Agreements (publication series from the Department of State)

TIM, Taiwan Independence Movement

Toaid, series indicator for telegrams to the Agency for International Development

Todel, series indicator for telegrams to the delegation at the Paris Peace Talks

TOR, terms of reference

Tosec, series indicator for telegrams sent to the Secretary of State while outside of Washington

Tosit, to the White House Situation Room

TS, top secret

U–S/M, Under Secretaries' memorandum

U–2, single engine, high altitude reconnaissance aircraft with one crew member (U.S.)

U, Office of the Under Secretary of State; also unclassified

UH, utility helicopter (Huey)

UK, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

UN, United Nations

UNCURK, United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea

UNESCO, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

UNGA, United Nations General Assembly

UNSC, United Nations Security Council

UNSTO, United Nations Truce Supervision Organization

UPI, United Press International

US, United States

USA, United States Army

USAF, United States Air Force

USAID, United States Agency for International Development

U.S.C., United States Code

USDA, United States Department of Agriculture

USDAO, United States Defense Attaché Office

USG, United States Government

USIA, United States Information Agency

USIB, United States Intelligence Board

USINFO, United States Information Service

USIS, United States Information Service overseas branches of USIA)

USMC, United States Marine Corps

USN, United States Navy

USOM, United States Operations Mission

USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

UST, United States Treaty

USUN, United States Mission to the United Nations

VC, Vietcong

VC/NVA, Vietcong/North Vietnamese

VCI, Viet Cong Infrastructure

VN, Vietnam

VNAF, Vietnamese Air Force

VOA, Voice of America

VOLAGS, voluntary agencies

VP, Vice President

VSSG, Vietnam Special Studies Group

WESTPAC, Commander, Western Pacific

WH, White House

WHCF, White House Central Files

WHO, World Health Organization; also White House Office (series indicator for White House messages)

WNRC, Washington National Records Center

WPR, William P. Rogers

WSAG, Washington Special Actions Group

Z, Zulu (Greenwich Mean Time)

Persons Persons

Abrams, General Creighton W., Jr., USA, Commander, U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam; thereafter, Army Chief of Staff, USA

Abshire, David M., Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations from April 8, 1970

Agnew, Spiro T., Vice President of the United States from January 20, 1969

Aichi Kiichi, Foreign Minister of Japan until July 1971

Aldrich, George H., Acting Deputy Legal Adviser, Department of State, January–October 1969; thereafter, Deputy Legal Adviser

Aalgaard, Ole, Norwegian Ambassador to the People's Republic of China

Allen, Ward P., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs until June 1971

Annenberg, Walter H., Ambassador to the United Kingdom from April 1969

Armstrong, Oscar Vance, Deputy Chief of Mission in Taipei, October 1969–May 1971;Political Advisor, CINPAC, May 1971–July 1973; Director, People's Republic of China and Mongolian Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State, from July 1973

Armstrong, Willis C., Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs from February 14, 1972

Atherton, Alfred L., Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs from March 1970

Bahr, Egon, State Secretary, West German Federal Chancellery

Bao Dai, last emperor of the Nguyen Dynasty; head of state of non-Communist Vietnam, 1949–1955

Barger, Herman H., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, 1970–1973

Barnett, Robert W., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs until January 1970

Barzel, Rainer, leader of the Christian Democratic Union and candidate for chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany in 1972

Beam, Jacob D., Ambassador to the Soviet Union from March 14, 1969

Behr, Colonel Robert M., USAF senior staff member, National Security Council, 1969–1971

Bergsten, C. Fred, member, National Security Council Operations Staff/International Economic Affairs, January 1969–June 1971

Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali, Chairman of the Pakistan People's Party; Minister of Foreign Affairs and Deputy Prime Minister, December 7–17, 1971; thereafter, President, Minister of Foreign Affairs, and Minister of Defense of Pakistan

Blatchford, Joseph H., Director of the Peace Corps, May 1969–June 1971; also, Director of ACTION from July 1971

Braderman, Eugene M., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Commercial Affairs and Business Activities, Bureau of Economic Affairs, until June 1971

Brandt, Willy, Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany until October 1969;thereafter, Chancellor

Bray, Charles W., III, Director, Office of Press Relations, Department of State after February 1971

Brewster, Robert C., Deputy Executive Secretary, Department of State, July 1969–August 1971

Brezhnev, Leonid, First Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union

Brown, Winthrop G., Acting Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs until April 1972

Bruce, David K.E., Ambassador to the United Kingdom until March 1969; also, head of the U.S. delegation to the Paris Peace Talks, 1970–1971

Bundy, William P., Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs until May 4, 1969

Burns, Dr. Arthur F., Counselor to the President, January 1969–January 1970; thereafter, Chairman, Federal Reserve System Board of Governors

Bush, George H.W., Representative (R-Texas) until January 1970; U.S. Permanent Representative to the United Nations from February 16, 1971

Butterfield, Alexander P., Deputy Assistant to the President, January 1969–January 1973

Butz, Earl L., Secretary of Agriculture from December 1971

Cadieux, Marcel, Canadian Ambassador to the United States from October 23, 1969

Caradon, Lord (Hugh Mackintosh Foot), British Permanent Representative to the United Nations until June 1970

Cargo, William I., Director of the Policy Planning Staff, Department of State from August 4, 1969

Ceausescu, Nicolae, First Secretary of the Romanian Communist Party and President of Romania

Chafee, John H., Secretary of the Navy, January 31, 1969–May 4, 1972

Chang Wen-chin, Director, Western European and America Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, People's Republic of China, October 1971–June 1972; Assistant to the Foreign Minister from June 1972

Chapin, Dwight, Special Assistant to the President, 1969–1971; Deputy Assistant to the President, 1971–1973

Chapin, Frank, member, National Security Council staff and staff secretary to the 303/40 Committee

Chew, Vice Admiral John L., Commander, U.S. Taiwan Defense Command

Chi P'eng-fei, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs, People's Republic of China, until April 1971; Acting Foreign Minister until February 1972; Foreign Minister from February 1972

Chiang Ching, wife of Mao Tse-tung; also, member, Chinese Communist Party Politburo during April 1969

Chiang Ching-kuo, General, son of Chiang Kai-shek; Minister of Defense, Republic of China, until 1969; Vice Premier of the Executive Yuan, 1969–1972; Premier from 1972;member, Kuomintang (Guomindang) Standing Committee and the Republic of China National Security Council

Chiang Kai-shek, President of the Republic of China; Chair, Republic of China National Security Council; Director-General, Kuomintang

Chiang Kai-shek, Madame, wife of Chiang Kai-shek; born Soong Mayling (Song Meiling)

Chiao (Ch'iao) Kuan-hua, Deputy [Vice] Foreign Minister, People's Republic of China

Chien Fu (Fredrick F.), Deputy Director of the North American Affairs Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Republic of China, until 1969; Director, 1969–1972; Director-General of the Government Information Office from 1972

Chou En-lai, Premier of the People's Republic of China

Chow (Chou) Shu-kai, ROC Ambassador to the United States until May 1971; Minister of Foreign Affairs, 1971–1972; Minister without Portfolio from 1972

Cleveland, Paul M., Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State, until February 1970; Special Assistant and Staff Director, National Security Council Interdepartmental Group, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs from February 1970

Cline, Ray S., Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, from October 26, 1969

Collins, Michael, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, December 15, 1969–April 11, 1971

Connally, John B., Jr., member, Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, 1970; Secretary of the Treasury, February 1971–June 1972

Cromer, Earl of (George Rowland Stanley Baring), British Ambassador to the United States from February 8, 1971

Cross, Charles T., Ambassador to Singapore, September 15, 1969–November 18, 1971

Crowe, Sir Colin, British Permanent Representative to the United Nations, 1970–1973

Crowe, Philip K., Ambassador to Norway from May 1, 1969

Cronk, Edwin M., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Trade Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, October 1969–June 1972; Ambassador to Singapore from June 27, 1972

Curran, Robert T., Deputy Executive Secretary, Executive Secretariat, Department of State, August 1970–September 1972; thereafter, Deputy Director of Personnel for Management

Cushman, Lieutenant General Robert E., Jr., USMC, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, May 7, 1969–December 31, 1971; thereafter, Commandant, U.S. Marine Corps from January 1, 1972

Davies, Richard T., Consul General in Calcutta until August 1969; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, August 1970–December 1972; Ambassador to Poland from December 2, 1972

Davies, Rodger P., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

Davis, Jeanne W., Director, National Security Council Staff Secretariat 1970–1971; Staff Secretary, NSC Staff Secretariat, from 1971

De Gaulle, Charles, President of France until April 28, 1969

Deng Xiaoping, former Deputy Premier of the People's Republic of China

Denney, George C., Jr., Deputy Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State until April 1970; Deputy Director, Directorate for Management, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, April 1970–November 1973

Dent, Frederick B., Secretary of Commerce from December 1972

De Palma, Samuel, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs from February 7, 1969

Dobrynin, Anatoliy F., Soviet Ambassador to the United States

Donelan, Joseph F., Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Administration from June 14, 1971

Doolin, Dennis J., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs responsible for East Asia and Pacific Affairs

Douglas-Home, Sir Alexander Frederick, British Foreign Secretary from June 19, 1970

Eagleburger, Lawrence S., member, National Security Council staff, 1969–1970

Eden, Sir Anthony, British Minister of Foreign Affairs, October 26, 1951–April 7, 1955;Prime Minister, April 6, 1955–January 9, 1957

Ehrlichman, John D., Counsel to the President, January–November 1969; Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs from November 1969

Eliot, Theodore L., Jr., Special Assistant to the Secretary and Executive Secretary of the Department of State from August 10, 1969

Ellsworth, Robert, U.S. Permanent Representative on the North Atlantic Council, May 1969–June 1971

Enders, Thomas O., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Monetary Affairs,Bureau of Economic Affairs, until August 1969; Deputy Chief of Mission in Belgrade, August 1969–December 1971; Deputy Chief of Mission in Phnom Penh from January 1972

Farland, Joseph S., Ambassador to Pakistan, September 19, 1969–April 30, 1972; thereafter Ambassador to Iran

Farley, Philip J., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs until August 1969; thereafter Deputy Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency

Fazio, V. James, Assistant Director, White House Situation Room, 1971–1972

Feng Chi-chung, Commander-in-Chief, Republic of China Navy until 1970; Director, Joint Operations Training Department, Ministry of National Defense, 1970–1972;thereafter, Deputy Minister of Defense

Fessenden, Russell, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, July 1971–December 1972

Ford, Gerald R., Representative (R-Michigan)

Freeman, Charles W., Jr., Office of Asian Communist Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State, from June 1971

Freeman, John, British Ambassador to the United States, March 17, 1969–February 1971

Froebe, John A., Jr., member, National Security Council staff, from 1971

Froehlke, Robert F., Assistant Secretary of Defense for Administration, January 1969–June 1971; thereafter Secretary of the Army

Fukuda Takeo, Foreign Minister of Japan, July 5, 1971–July 7, 1972

Fulbright, J. William, Senator D-Arkansas); Chairman, Senate Foreign Relations Committee

Gandhi, Indira, Prime Minister of India

Getz, John I., Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, January 1969–February 1972

Gleysteen, William H., Jr., Director, Office of Research and Analysis for East Asia and the Pacific, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, September 1969–June 1971; thereafter, Deputy Chief of Mission in Taipei

Godley, George McMurtrie, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs until May 1969; Ambassador to Laos after July 24, 1969

Grant, Lindsey, member, National Security Council Operations Staff/East Asia, February 1969–August 1970; member, Planning and Coordination Staff, Department of State, June 1971–November 1972

Green, Marshall, Ambassador to Indonesia until January 1969; Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs from May 1, 1969; also, Chairman, Special Group on Southeast Asia from May 1970

Gromyko, Andrei A., Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union

Habib, Philip C., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs until May 1969; member of U.S. delegation to the Paris Peace Talks until October 1971; Ambassador to Korea from September 30, 1971

Haig, Brigadier General Alexander Meigs, Jr., USA, Senior Military Advisor to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, January 1969–June 1970; Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, June 1970–January 1973;thereafter, Army Vice Chief of Staff

Haldeman, H.R., Assistant to the President

Halperin, David, member, National Security Council staff, 1971

Halperin, Morton, Assistant for Programs, National Security Council staff until September 1969

Handley, William J., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs until May 1969; thereafter, Ambassador to Turkey

Hannah, John A., Administrator, Agency for International Development, March 28, 1969–October 7, 1973

Hardin, Clifford M., Secretary of Agriculture, January 1969–December 1971

Harlow, Bryce N., Assistant to the President for Congressional Relations, January 1969–January 1970; thereafter, Counselor to the President

Heath, Edward, British Prime Minister from June 19, 1970

Helms, Richard M., Director of Central Intelligence

Herz, Martin F., Political Counselor in Saigon until June 1970; thereafter Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs

Hilaly, Agha, Pakistani Ambassador to the United States until late 1971

Hillenbrand, Martin J., Assistant Secretary of State for European and Canadian Affairs, February 7, 1969–April 30, 1972; Ambassador to the Federal Republic of Germany from May 1, 1972

Ho Chi Minh, leader of the Vietnamese Communist Party and President of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam until his death on September 3, 1969

Hodgson, James D., Secretary of Labor from July 1970

Holdridge, John Herbert, Director, Office of Research and Analysis for East Asia and the Pacific, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State until July 1969;thereafter, member, National Security Council Operations Staff/East Asia

Hormats, Robert D., member, National Security Council Operations Staff/International Economic Affairs, 1970–1972

Howe, Lieutenant Commander Jonathan, USN member, National Security Council Staff, 1970–1972

Hsiung Hsiang-hui, People's Republic of China diplomat and assistant to Chou En-lai; also, PRC Ambassador to Mexico from April 1972

Huang Chen, PRC Ambassador to France

Huang Hua, PRC Ambassador to the United Arab Republic until July 1969; PRC Ambassador to Canada, July 1971; PRC Chief Delegate, UN Security Council and PRC Ambassador to the United Nations from November 1971

Hughes, Thomas L. Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, until August 1969

Hummel, Arthur W., Jr., Ambassador to Burma, until July 22, 1971; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs from February 1972

Hyland, William, G., member, National Security Council Operations Staff/Europe, from 1970

Ingersoll, Robert Stephen, Ambassador to Japan from February 29, 1972

Irwin, John N., II, Under Secretary of State, September 1970–July 1972; Deputy Secretary of State from July 13, 1972

Jenkins, Alfred le Sesne, Director, Office of Asian Communist Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State from July 1971

Jenkins, Walter E., Jr., Deputy Chief of Mission in Warsaw until July 1970

Johnson, Lyndon B., President of the United States, November 22, 1963–January 20, 1969

Johnson, U. Alexis, Ambassador to Japan until January 1969, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs from February 7, 1969

Judd, Walter, Representative R-Minnesota), 1943–1963

Jurich, Anthony J., Special Assistant to the Secretary for National Security Affairs, Department of the Treasury

Karamessines, Thomas H., Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

Katz, Julius L., Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Resources and Food Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

Kearns, Henry, President and Chairman, Board of Directors of the United States Export-Import Bank

Keating, Kenneth B., Ambassador to India, May 1, 1969–July 26, 1972

Kennedy, David M., Secretary of the Treasury, January 1969–January 1971; Ambassador at Large for Foreign Economic Development from February 11, 1971; U.S. Permanent Representative, North Atlantic Treaty Organization, from March 17, 1972

Kennedy, Colonel Richard T., USA, member, National Security Council staff, 1970–1972;Director, National Security Council Planning Group, 1971–1972

Khan, Agha Muhammad Yahya, President of Pakistan, March 31, 1969–December 20, 1971

Khan, Mohammad Ayub, President of Pakistan until March 25, 1969

Kiesinger, Kurt Georg, Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany until October 21,1969

Kim Jong Pil, Prime Minister of the Republic of Korea from June 3, 1971

Kishi Nobusuke, former Prime Minister of Japan

Kissinger, Henry A., Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs from January 1969

Klein, Herbert G., White House Director of Communications

Kleindienst, Richard G., Deputy Attorney General, January 1969–June 1972; thereafter, Attorney General

Kosciusko-Morizet, Jacques, French Permanent Representative to the United Nations, February 1970–May 1972; French Ambassador to the United States from May 1972

Kosygin, Aleksei N., Chairman, Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union

Kotschnig, Walter M., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs until 1971

Kreisberg, Paul, H., Director, Asian Communist Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State, March 1969–July 1971; Deputy Chief of Mission in Dar es Salaam, July 1971–August 1972

Kubisch, Jack B., Deputy Chief of Mission in Paris from December 1971

Kuznetsov, Vasily V., Soviet Ambassador to the People's Republic of China, 1953–1955;thereafter, First Deputy Foreign Minister

Ladd, Bruce C., Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Commercial Affairs and Business Activities, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State from 1971

Lai Ming-tong, Commander-in-Chief, Republic of China Air Force, until 1970; thereafter, Chief of the General Staff, Ministry of National Defense

Laird, Melvin R., Secretary of Defense

Lake, W. Anthony, member, National Security Council Planning Group, 1970–1971

Le Duan, General Secretary of the Vietnamese Workers' Party (later the Vietnamese Communist Party)

Le Duc Tho, member, Democratic Republic of Vietnam Politburo; head of DRV delegation to the Paris Peace Talks

Lee Kuan Yew, Prime Minister of Singapore

Lee Teng-hui, Senior Specialist, JCRR, until 1970; Chief of the Rural Economic Division, JCRR, 1970–1972; Minister without Portfolio, 1972

Lei Yang, People's Republic of China Chargé d'Affaires in Warsaw

Li Hsien-nien, Vice Premier of the State Council, People's Republic of China; member, Chinese Communist Party Politiburo, 9th Central Committee, April 1969

Li Kwoh-ting, Minister of Economic Affairs, Republic of China, from until 1969; Minister of Finance from 1969

Lincoln, George, Director, Office of Emergency Preparedness

Lin Piao, Minister of Defense, People's Republic of China, until September 1971; also, Vice Chairman, Chinese Communist Party Politburo until September 1971

Linder, Harold Francis, Ambassador to Canada until July 9, 1969

Linowitz, Sol M., U.S. Representative to the Organization of American States and U.S.Representative to the Inter-American Committee of the Alliance for Progress until May 1, 1969

Liu Shao-chi, member, Standing Committee, Chinese Communist Party, Politburo, 1956;President of the People's Republic of China until purged in 1967 during the Cultural Revolution and died in prison in November 1969

Lon Nol, General, FARK, First Vice President of the Council of Ministers and Minister of Defense of Cambodia; Acting Prime Minister and Minister of National Defense, June 1969; Prime Minister and Minister of National Defense after March 18, 1970

Loomis, Henry, Deputy Director, United States Information Agency

Lord, Winston, member, Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense, until 1969; member, National Security Council Planning Group; staff member for United Nations Affairs, National Security Council Operations Staff from 1971

Lucet, Charles, French Ambassador to the United States until May 1972

Lynn, James T., General Counsel, Department of Commerce

Lynn, Dr. Laurence E. Jr., Director, National Security Council Program Analysis Staff, 1969–1971

Macomber, William B., Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations until October 2, 1969; Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration (title changed to Management after July 12, 1971)

Malik, Yakov Alexandrovich, Soviet Permanent Representative to the United Nations General Assembly, 1948–1952 and 1968–1976

Malik, Adam, Foreign Minister of Indonesia and President, United Nations General Assembly, 1971

Malraux, André, French novelist and politician; also, Minister of State (France) responsible for cultural affairs until 1969

Mansfield, Mike, Senator D-Montana), Senate Majority Leader

Mao Tse-tung, Chairman, Chinese Communist Party and Politburo of the People's Republic of China

McCain, Admiral John S., Jr., USN, Commander-in-Chief, Pacific, until September 1, 1972

McClellan, Robert, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Domestic and International Business

McConaughy, Walter P., Jr., Ambassador to the Republic of China

McCloskey, Robert J., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Press Relations, Bureau of Public Affairs, and Special Assistant to the Secretary from July 1969; also, Ambassador at Large

McConnell, General John P., USAF, Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, until August 1, 1969

McCormack, John W., Representative (D-Massachusetts) until 1970; also, Speaker of the House of Representatives until 1970

McCracken, Paul W., Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers, January 1969–November 1971

McGovern, George S., Senator D-South Dakota) and Democratic nominee for president in 1972

McManis, David, member, National Security Council staff, 1970–1971; Director of the White House Situation Room, 1971–1972

McNamara, Robert S., former Secretary of Defense; President, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, World Bank

Meany, George, President, American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations

Meeker, Leonard C., Legal Adviser, Department of State, until July 13, 1969; Ambassador to Romania from July 22, 1969

Menon, Vengali Krishnan Krishna, former Indian Minister of Defense; former head of the Indian delegation to the United Nations General Assembly

Messmer, Pierre, Prime Minister of France from July 6, 1972

Meyer, Armin H., Ambassador to Iran until May 30, 1969; Ambassador to Japan until March 27, 1972

Meyer, Francis G., Assistant Secretary of State for Administration, September 26, 1969–May 31, 1971

Mitchell, John, Attorney General, January 20, 1969–February 15, 1972

Moore, Jonathan, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, September 1969–June 1970

Moorer, Admiral Thomas H., USN, Chief of Naval Operations until July 1, 1970; thereafter, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Moose, Richard M., member, National Security Council staff, 1969–1970

Morris, Roger, member, National Security Council staff, 1969–1971

Mosbacher, Emil, Jr., Chief of Protocol, Department of State, January 28, 1969–June 30, 1972

Moser, Leo J., Political Officer in Taipei until August 1971; thereafter, Country Director for China Republic of China), Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

Moynihan, Daniel P., Assistant to the President for Urban Affairs, January 1969–December 1969; Counselor to the President, January 1970–January 1971

Nehru, Jawaharlal, leader of India's Congress Party and former Indian Prime Minister

Neubert, Joseph W., member, Policy Planning Council, Department of State, until June 1970; thereafter, Acting Deputy Director for Planning, Planning and Coordination Staff

Neumann, Robert G., Ambassador to Afghanistan

Ngo Dinh Diem, President of the Republic of Vietnam, 1955–1963

Nguyen Van Thieu, President of the Republic of Vietnam

Nixon, Richard M., President of the United States

Noyes, James H., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs from 1971

Nutter, G. Warren, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, March 4, 1969–January 30, 1972

O'Connor, Roderic L., Assistant Administrator for East Asia, Agency for International Development, August 1969–June 1971; Coordinator for Supporting Assistance, July 1971–September 1972

Ohira Masayoshi, Japanese Foreign Minister, July 7, 1972–July 12, 1974

Osborn, David Lawrence, Deputy Chief of Mission in Tokyo until July 1970; thereafter, Consul General in Hong Kong

Osgood, Robert E., Assistant for Programs, National Security Council staff, 1969–1970;Director, National Security Council Planning Staff, 1970–1971

Packard, David M., Deputy Secretary of Defense, January 24, 1969–December 13, 1971

Park Chung-hee, President of the Republic of Korea

Passman, Otto E., Representative (D-Louisiana)

Pauls, Rolf, West German Ambassador to the United States

Pedersen, Richard F., Counselor, Department of State

Peterson, Peter G., Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs, and Executive Director of the Council for International Economic Policy, 1971–1972; Secretary of Commerce from January 27, 1972

Phouma, Souvanna, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Laos

Platt, Nicholas, Chief, Asian Communist Areas Division, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, February 1969–January 1970; Chief, North Asian Division, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, January 1970–March 1971; Deputy Director, Executive Secretariat Staff, March 1971–June 1972; Director, Executive Secretariat from June 1972

Podgorny, Nikolai V., Chairman, Praesidium of the Supreme Soviet

Poher, Alain, Interim President of France, April 28–June 20, 1969

Pollack, Herman, Director, Office of International Scientific and Technological Affairs, Department of State

Pompidou, Georges, President of France from June 20, 1969

Porter, William J., Ambassador to the Republic of Korea until August 18, 1971

Pranger, Robert J., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Near East and South Asia, 1970; Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Policy Plans and NSC Affairs, 1971

Prentice, Colgate S., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations from October 1969

Pursley, Brigadier General Robert E., USAF, Military Assistant to the Secretary of Defense;Commander of U.S. forces in Japan from November 1972

Quainton, Anthony C.E., Political and Economic Officer in New Delhi until July 1969;Office of India, Ceylon, Nepal and Maldive Islands, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State, July 1969–September 1972

Rahman, Mujibur, Prime Minister of Bangladesh from 1972

Read, Benjamin H., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State and Executive Secretary of the Department of State until February 14, 1969

Renner, John C., Director, Office of International Trade, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State, August 1970–July 1972; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Trade Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, from July 1972

Resor, Stanley R., Secretary of the Army until June 30, 1971

Richardson, Elliot L., Under Secretary of State, January 1969–June 1970; Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare from June 1970

Ritchie, Albert Edgar, Canadian Ambassador to the United States until January 1970

Rockefeller, Nelson A., Governor of New York

Rockwell, Stuart W., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs until March 1970

Rodman, Peter W., member, National Security Council staff, 1970–1972

Rogers, William P., Secretary of State

Rumsfeld, Donald, Assistant to the President and Director of the Office of Economic Opportunity, May 1969–January 1971; Counselor to the President, January 1971–January 1973; also, U.S. Ambassador to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization

Rush, Kenneth W., Ambassador to the Federal Republic of Germany, July 8, 1969–February 20, 1972; Deputy Secretary of Defense from February 23, 1972

Rusk, Dean, Secretary of State until January 20, 1969

Ryan, General John D., USAF, Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force from August 1, 1969

Samuels, Nathaniel, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, March 28, 1969–May 31, 1972

Sato Eisaku, Prime Minister of Japan until July 6, 1972

Saunders, Harold H., member, National Security Council staff, 1969–1971

Scali, John, Chief Diplomatic Correspondent for ABC News until 1971; thereafter, Special Consultant to the President

Scheel, Walter, Vice Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany and Foreign Minister from October 22, 1969

Schlesinger, James R., Assistant Director, Bureau of the Budget, January 1969–August 1971; Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, August 1971–February 1973

Schmidt, Adolph W., Ambassador to Canada

Schmidt, Helmut, Defense Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany, October 22, 1969–July 7, 1972; Minister of Economic Affairs and Finance, July 7–December 15, 1972; Minister of Finance, December 15, 1972–May 6, 1974; thereafter, Chancellor

Schneider, David T., Country Director, India, Ceylon, Nepal, Maldive Islands, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State from August 1969

Schroeder, Gerhard, lawyer and politician; member, Bundestag, Federal Republic of Germany, Minister of Foreign Affairs or Minister of Defense during much of the 1960s

Schumann, Maurice, French Foreign Minister from June 24, 1969

Scott, Hugh D., Senator R-Pennsylvania), Senate Minority Leader from 1969

Seaborg, Glenn T., Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission until 1971

Seamans, Robert C., Jr., Secretary of the Air Force from February 15, 1969

Shakespeare, Frank M., Director, United States Information Agency from February 7, 1969

Sharp, Mitchell, Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs

Shen Ch'ang-huan, ROC Ambassador to the Holy See until 1969; Ambassador to Thailand, 1969–1972; Minister of Foreign Affairs from 1972

Shen, James C. H., Vice Foreign Minister, Republic of China, until 1971; Ambassador to the United States from May 18, 1971

Shimoda Takeso, Japanese Ambassador to the United States until September 1970

Shoesmith, Thomas P., Country Director, Republic of China, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State, until August 1971; Deputy Chief of Mission in Tokyo from August 1972

Shultz, George P., Secretary of Labor, January 20, 1969–June 10, 1970; Director, Office of Management and Budget, June 1970–May 1972; thereafter, Secretary of the Treasury and Assistant to the President

Sihanouk, Prince Norodom, Cambodian head of state until 1970; leader of governmentin-exile in Peking from 1970

Sirik Matak (Sisowath Sirik Matak), Prince and cousin of Norodom Sihanouk; ally of Lon Nol; Deputy Prime Minister of Cambodia; member of the High Political Council from 1970

Sisco, Joseph J., Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs until February 9, 1969; thereafter, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs; also, Chairman, National Security Council Interdepartmental Group for the Near East and South Asia

Smith, Gerard C., Director, U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, from February 7, 1969

Smith, K. Wayne, Director, National Security Council Policy Analysis Branch, 1971–1972

Smyser, W. Richard, adviser to the delegation to the Paris Peace Talks on Vietnam, 1969;member, National Security Council Operations Staff/East Asia, 1970–1972

Sneider, Richard L., member, National Security Council Operations Staff/East Asia, May 1969–September 1969; Deputy Chief of Mission in Japan, September 1969–July 1972; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs from August 1972

Sonnenfeldt, Helmut, member, National Security Council Operations Staff/Europe, January 1969

Soong Chang-chih, Deputy Commander-in-Chief, Republic of China Navy, until 1970;Commander-in-Chief from 1970

Spiers, Ronald I., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs, August 1969–September 1969; thereafter, Director, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs

Springsteen, George S., Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European and Canadian Affairs until June 1972; Acting Assistant Secretary of State from June 1972

Stans, Maurice, Secretary of Commerce, January 20, 1969–January 27, 1972

Steadman, Richard C., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, 1969

Stein, Herbert, member, Council of Economic Advisers, January 1969–November 1971;chairman, Council of Economic Advisers, from January 1972

Stevenson, John R., Legal Adviser, Department of State, from July 8, 1969

Stewart, Michael, British Foreign Secretary until June 19, 1970

Stoessel, Walter J., Ambassador to Poland until August 5, 1972; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European and Canadian Affairs from August 25, 1972

Strauss, Franz Josef, leader, Christian Social Union, Federal Republic of Germany; former Minister of Defense; Minister of Finance until October 21, 1969

Suharto, President of Indonesia

Sullivan, William H., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs from April 1969; also, Chairman, Ad Hoc Group on Vietnam

Sun Yun-suan, Minister of Communications, Republic of China, until 1969; thereafter, Minister of Economic Affairs

Swank, Emory C., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European and Canadian Affairs,June 1969–September 1970; Ambassador to Cambodia from September 3, 1970

Symington, W. Stuart, Senator D-Missouri); Chairman, Subcommittee of U.S. Security Arrangements and Commitments Abroad, Senate Foreign Relations Committee

Tanaka Kakeui, Prime Minister of Japan from July 6, 1972

Tarr, Curtis W., Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Manpower and Reserve Affairs, 1969–1970; Director, Selective Service System, 1970–1972; Under Secretary of State for International Security Affairs from May 1, 1972

Taylor, Vice Adm. Rufus L., Deputy Director of Central Intelligence until February 1, 1969

Thant, U, Secretary-General of the United Nations until December 1971

Thayer, Harry E. T., Office of Asian Communist Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State, until August 1970; advisor on political affairs, United States Mission to the United Nations, from June 1971

Tibbets, Margaret J., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European and Canadian Affairs, June 1969–May 1971

Torbert, Horace Gates, Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations until October 1970

Trezise, Philip H., U.S. Representative to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development until July 7, 1969; Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, July 8, 1969–November 27, 1971

Trudeau, Pierre-Elliott, Prime Minister of Canada

Tsai Wei-ping, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs, Republic of China

U Thant, see Thant, U

Unger, Leonard, Ambassador to Thailand

Ushiba Nobuhiko, Japanese Ambassador to the United States from September 21, 1970

Vaky, Viron P. (Pete), Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, January–May 1969; member, National Security Council Operations Staff/Latin America, May 1969–1972; Ambassador to Costa Rica from September 11, 1972

Van Hollen, Christopher, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, May 1969–September 1972; Ambassador to Sri Lanka from September 21, 1972

Vaughn, Jack, H., Director of the Peace Corps

Volcker, Paul A., Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs

Waldheim, Kurt, Secretary-General of the United Nations from 1972

Walters, Lieutenant General Vernon A., Military Attaché to Paris until March 1971; thereafter, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence from May 2, 1972

Warner, John W., Under Secretary of the Navy until April 1972; Secretary of the Navy from May 4, 1972

Warnke, Paul C., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs until February 15, 1969

Watson, Arthur K., Ambassador to France, April 8, 1970–October 30, 1972

Wei Tao-ming, Foreign Minister of the Republic of China until May 1971; Senior Advisor to the President from 1971

Weinberger, Caspar W., Deputy Director, Office of Management and Budget, 1970–1971;Chairman, Federal Trade Commission, 1971–1972; Director from 1972

Westmoreland, General William C., USA, Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, until June 30, 1972

Wheeler, General Earle G., USA, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff until July 2, 1970

Wilson, James Harold, British Prime Minister until June 19, 1970

Wilson, James M., Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs from August 1970; Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, February 1972;U.S. Representative for Micronesian status negotiations from November 1972

Wright, W. Marshall, Country Director, Philippines, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State; member, National Security Council Operations Staff/African and UN Affairs, June 1970–April 1972; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations, April–December 1972; thereafter, Acting Assistant Secretary

Xuan Thuy, former Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam; Chief delegate to the Paris Peace Talks until 1970

Yang Hsi-kun, ROC representative to the United Nations General Assembly until 1971;thereafter, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Yen Chia-kan, Premier of the Executive Yuan, Republic of China, until 1972; Vice President of the Republic of China

Yost, Charles W., U.S. Permanent Representative to the United Nations, January 22, 1969–February 25, 1971

Yeh Chien-ying, Marshall, Vice Chairman, Military Council of the Chinese Communist Party Central Committee,1967; member of the Central Committee and Politburo

Ziegler, Ronald L., Press Secretary to the President

Zumwalt, Admiral Elmo R., Jr., USN, Chief of Naval Operations from July 1, 1970

Documents on China, 1969-1972Documents on China, 1969-1972

1. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, December 19, 1969

Washington, December 19, 1969

Pakistani Ambassador Agha Hilaly and President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Henry Kissinger discussed the role of the Pakistani Government as a backchannel between the United States and the People's Republic of China. Kissinger indicated that the Pakistanis could inform the Chinese that the United States appreciated this type of communication. National Security Council staff member Harold Saunders also attended the meeting.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1031, Files for the President-China Material, Exchanges Leading up to HAK Trip to China, December 1969-July 1971. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Saunders. All brackets in the source text. The conversation was held in Kissinger's office at the White House. There is no indication as of the time of the meeting.

2. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, December 23, 1969

Washington, December 23, 1969

Following Pakistani Ambassador Hilaly and President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's December 19 meeting, Hilaly received a letter from Pakistani President Yayha Khan. Yayha wanted Hilaly to convey to President Nixon that the Pakistanis believed the Chinese were interested in resuming talks at Warsaw “without insisting on preconditions” and were concerned about “Japanese militarism.”

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1031, Files for the President-China Material, Exchanges Leading up to HAK Trip to China, December 1969-July 1971. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Saunders. The conversation was held in Kissinger's office. There is no indication as to the time of the meeting. Tab A is a letter from President Nixon to Pakistani President Yayha reiterating Nixon's desire to stay in communication with Yayha. Tab B is a second letter from Yayha thanking Nixon for helping to meet Pakistan's food needs. Both are attached but not published.

3. Airgram A-25 From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of State, January 24, 1970

January 24, 1970

The Airgram transmitted the context of the January 20, 1970, Sino-U.S. ambassadorial talks between Ambassador Walter Stoessel and Chinese Chargé de Affaires Lei Yang. Stoessel communicated President Nixon's desire to improve relations with China. The United States also would not stand in isolation from China or join in “any condominium with the Soviet Union directed against China.” Lei Yang commented that the PRC had consistently stood for “peaceful settlement of disputes” and welcomed constructive “studies and explorations” on this issue.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL CHICOM-US. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by Paul H. Kreisberg and Donald M. Anderson on January 20; cleared by Thomas W. Simons; and approved by Stoessel. The meeting was held at the PRC Embassy in Warsaw.

4. Airgram A-84 From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of State, February 21, 1970

February 21, 1970

After calling for Washington to cease its support of Taiwan, Chinese Chargé de Affaires Lei Yang said China would be open to a visit from an envoy representing President Nixon in order to discuss “questions of fundamental principle.” Ambassador Stoessel noted that the U.S. position was that “the question of the relationship between Taiwan and the mainland of China is one to be resolved by those directly involved.”

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL CHICOM-US. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by Kreisberg and Anderson on February 20; cleared by Simons and approved by Stoessel. The meeting was held at the U.S. Embassy in Warsaw.

5. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon, Washington, May 5, 1971

Washington, May 5, 1971

Haig reported on his meeting with Pakistani Ambassador Hilaly, who relayed PRC criticism of Secretary of State Rogers' public statement about “two Chinas.” Hilaly indicated that the Pakistani Government had transmitted a message to the PRC that Nixon's “hands would be tied,” if other American officials commented on U.S.-PRC relations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1031, Files for the President-China Material, Exchanges Leading up to HAK Trip to China, December 1969-July 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Nixon saw it. A handwritten notation reads: “Special File in HAK's Office.”

6. Memorandum of Conversation, Palm Springs, California, May 7, 1971, 2:50-5:45 p.m.

Palm Springs, California, May 7, 1971, 2:50-5:45 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and U.S. Ambassador to Pakistan Farland discussed the arrangements necessary for a secret preliminary trip to China that would pave the way for an official, public visit by the President.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1031, Files for the President-China Material, Exchanges Leading up to HAK Trip to China, December 1969-July 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. Drafted by David R. Halperin. The conversation was held in Palm Springs, California, at the home of Mr. Theodore Cummings. For more information about the Blood report, see Foreign Relations, 1969-1972, volume XI, South Asia Crisis, 1971.

7. Backchannel Message TOSIT 26 From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), July 11, 1971, 1330Z

July 11, 1971, 1330Z

Kissinger called his 17 hours of discussions with Chinese Premier Chou En-lai “the most intense, important, and far reaching of my White House experience.” He reported that the Chinese agreed to a visit by President Nixon “before May 1972,” and noted that the joint announcement of the visit was scheduled for July 15, 2230Z. Kissinger instructed Haig to inform President Nixon to keep the visit secret.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1031, Files for the President-China Material, Exchanges Leading up to HAK Trip to China, December 1969-July 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only.

8. Backchannel Message SITTO 88/WH 12696 From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), July 11, 1971, 1920Z

July 11, 1971, 1920Z

Haig communicated President Nixon's commentes regarding Kissinger's earlier message. The President instructed Kissinger to prepare a highly sanitized version of discussions. Nixon noted that “certain allied governments” would be informed of the visit prior to his announcement of it on national television.

Source: Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 432, Backchannel Files, Backchannel Messages, Very Sensitive Trip Cables-Not Held by Sit Room. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only.

9. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, July 14, 1971

Washington, July 14, 1971

Kissinger summarized his 2-day talks with Chinese Premier Chou En-lai.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1032, Files for the President-China Material, Polo I Record, July 1971 HAK Visit to PRC. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Tabs A and B were attached but not published.

10. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, July 20, 1971

Washington, July 20, 1971

Haig informed Walters that President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger would be visiting Paris on July 25 and 26 and would like to meet with the Chinese Ambassador at his residence on July 25.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Attached but not published are the two messages, which were to be handed to the Chinese ambassador for transmission to Chou En-lai.

11. Letter From the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Paris, July 22, 1971

Paris, July 22, 1971

Walters described his late afternoon meeting with Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen on July 21.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. Kirschman is in reference to Kissinger.

12. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, undated

Washington, undated

Description of Kissinger's July 26 meeting with Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen focusing on Kissinger's possible October visit.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Sent under a July 30 covering memorandum from Winston Lord to Kissinger for inclusion in Kissinger's files. Kissinger's memorandum to Nixon was not sent.

13. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, August 5, 1971

Washington, August 5, 1971

Haig instructed Walters about the delivery of a written message to the PRC Ambassador and an oral message to the North Vietnamese representative. Haig indicated that a third message contained information about the President's trip to China.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive. Attached at Tab A and B are two of the notes. Attached but not published at Tab C is the memorandum containing logistical details about the trip.

14. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, August 6, 1971, 1530Z

Paris, August 6, 1971, 1530Z

Military Attaché Walters and Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen discussed details of President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's upcoming August 16 trip to Paris.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy.

15. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, August 8, 1971

Washington, August 8, 1971

Haig instructed Walters to orally deliver two messages to Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen. The first message communicated President Nixon's shared belief with Chinese Premier Chou En-lai and President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger that the reopening of the Warsaw channel “would be unwise at this time.” The second message focused on Kissinger's August 16 Paris visit and his desire to meet with the Ambassador in order to discuss recent events in East Pakistan.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Published from a copy that indicates Haig signed the original.

16. Letter From the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Paris, August 9, 1971

Paris, August 9, 1971

Walters indicated that he had delivered the messages he had received from Haig to Chinese officials on August 8. Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen agreed to meeting with President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger on August 16.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. See Document 15 for the text of the two oral messages.

17. Memorandum of Conversation, Paris, August 16, 1971, 9:05-10:45 a.m.

Paris, August 16, 1971, 9:05-10:45 a.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger informed Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen that the United States and the Soviet Union would soon conclude an agreement that would lessen the dangers of accidental nuclear war between the superpowers, predicted that the Soviets would propose that President Nixon visit the Soviet Union, and assured Huang that Nixon would visit China before visiting the Soviet Union.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Lord on August 19. All brackets in the source text. The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy.

18. Letter From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Chinese Ambassador to Canada (Huang Hua), Paris, August 16, 1971

Paris, August 16, 1971

Kissinger welcomed Huang Hua to his new post in Ottawa and provided his White House telephone number as well as the home telephone number of NSC staff member Lord.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. No classification marking. A handwritten note reads: “8/16/71-handed by HAK to Amb. Huang Chen in Paris for transmittal to Huang Hua.” Published from a copy that indicates Kissinger initialed the original.

19. Memorandum of Conversation, Paris, September 13, 1971, 8:45-10:40 a.m.

Paris, September 13, 1971, 8:45-10:40 a.m.

After confirming his upcoming 4-day interim visit to China in October, President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger predicted that Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko would formally invite President Nixon to visit the Soviet Union during his visit to the United States to address the United Nations on September 19.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File—China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Lord, who sent it to Kissinger under a covering memorandum. All ellipses in the source text. The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy. Attached but not published are Tabs B-C. Tab A is published in its entirety as Document 20.

20. Message From the Government of the People's Republic of China to the Government of the United States, Beijing, September 13, 1971

Beijing, September 13, 1971

The message discussed whether or not the two countries should announce President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's October 20 interim visit before or upon his arrival.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only.

21. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, August 31, 1971

Washington, August 31, 1971

Haig instructed Walters how to deliver three messages to Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Published from a copy that indicates Haig signed the original. At Tab A is an oral note for Huang. At Tab B is a statement Walters was to deliver orally after he read Huang the first message. Attached but not published at Tab C is an announcement concerning proposed dates for Kissinger's and Nixon's upcoming visits to China.

22. Memorandum From the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Paris, September 1, 1971

Paris, September 1, 1971

Walters recounted his delivery of the three messages he had received from Haig on August 31. Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen reiterated China's fear of the revival of Japanese militarism but reaffirmed China's commitment to peaceful coexistence.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly.

23. Memorandum of Conversation, Paris, September 3, 1971, 11 a.m.

Paris, September 3, 1971, 11 a.m.

Military Attaché Walters and Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen discussed the negotiations between the Soviet Union and the United States aimed at preventing incidents at sea.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. A handwritten notation reads: “Secret/Sensitive.” The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy.

24. Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, September 13, 1971

Washington, September 13, 1971

Haig instructed Walters to inform Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen that President Nixon wanted his Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's trip announced during the third week of September in order to avoid the impression that the announcement was a reaction to Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko's visit to the United States.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. A notation on the message reads: “9/13/71.”

25. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, September 23, 1971, 5 p.m.

Paris, September 23, 1971, 5 p.m.

Military Attaché Walters recounted his meeting with Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen concerning the American submission of a “two Chinas” resolution to the United Nations. Chinese officials indicated that the resolution prompted them to delay announcement of President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's visit until October 5.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. No classification marking. The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy.

26. Memorandum From the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, September 24, 1971

Washington, September 24 1971

Walters raised the possibility that the Chinese were truly world revolutionaries who would turn on President Nixon after his visit.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Secret; Eyes Only. Ellipsis in the source text. Walters was in Washington, September 24-September 28.

27. Message From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, September 28, 1971

Washington, September 28, 1971

Kissinger instructed Walters to inform the Chinese on September 29 concerning the technical aspects of President Nixon's trip. He also noted that on October 2, Walters should inform the Chinese of the content of President Nixon's September 29 conversation with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko. Kissinger also suggested that Walters inform the Chinese that Walters had been in Washington for consultation, September 24-28.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A handwritten note reads “HK Handed to Walters 9/28/71.” Not published is the oral message to the Chinese.

28. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, September 28, 1971, 5 p.m.

Paris, September 28, 1971, 5 p.m.

Military Attaché Walters and Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen discussed the China Lobby in the United States, supersonic transport, and the American fight against illegal drugs.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Walters on September 30. The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy.

29. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 2, 1971

Paris, October 2, 1971

Military Attaché Walters orally delivered a message to Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen regarding President Nixon and his Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's meeting with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko and Gromyko's probable invitation for Nixon to visit the Soviet Union. The two also discussed the probability of a trip by Nixon to China and Nixon's personal and political courageousness.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Walters on October 4. The lunchtime meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. The precise time of the conversation is not indicated on the memorandum.

30. Instructions for the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, October 8, 1971

Washington, October 8, 1971

Walters was instructed to announce that President Nixon would visit the Soviet Union in May 1972, inform the Chinese that they are the first to be notified, and discuss logistics about Nixon's visit to China.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the instructions. Although a handwritten notation on the document reads “10/9/71,” Walter's memorandum for the record indicates that he received these instructions while in Washington on October 8. See Document 31. Attached at Tab A is the joint announcement. Tabs B, C, and D are attached but not published.

31. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 9, 1971, 10 p.m.

Paris, October 9, 1971, 10 p.m.

Military Attaché Walters gave Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Cheng the text of President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's press conference, during which Kissinger planned to announce President Nixon's visit to the Soviet Union.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. No classification marking. Drafted by Walters on October 10. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. Attached as Appendix A is the Chinese oral note. Appendix B is attached but not published.

32. Letter From the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Paris, October 13, 1971

Paris, October 13, 1971

Walters recounted his October 13 meeting with Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen. The two officials discussed the relatively mild press reaction to the announcement of President Nixon's trip to the Soviet Union.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. No classification marking.

33. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 14, 1971, 6 p.m.

Paris, October 14, 1971, 6 p.m.

Military Attaché Walters gave interpreter Tsao the names of President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's entourage for his upcoming visit to China. Tsao, in turn, discussed his admiration for the United States, especially its print media.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. No classification marking.

34. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 15, 1971, 11 a.m.

Paris, October 15, 1971, 11 a.m.

After Military Attaché Walters relayed information about President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's communications operations for his upcoming trip to China, interpreters Tsao and Wei asked about the role of the military and the racial question in U.S. politics.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. No classification marking. Ellipses in the source text. Drafted by Walters on October 15.

35. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 16, 1971, 11:30 a.m.

Paris, October 16, 1971, 11:30 a.m.

After Military Attaché Walters relayed more specifics about President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's communications operations, interpreters Tsao and Wei asked Walters about the U.S. income tax and credit card systems.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. No classification marking. Drafted by Walters on October 16.

36. Memoranda of Conversation, Beijing, October 20, 1971, 4:30-4:40 p.m. and 4:40-7:10 p.m.

Beijing, October 20, 1971, 4:30-4:40 p.m. and 4:40-7:10 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai introduced each other's entourages and spoke informally for 10 minutes before convening formally. Kissinger relayed President Nixon's personal commitment to improving relations between China and the U.S. He and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai agreed that the two nations had divergent ideologies but convergent interests, especially in ending the war in Indochina, easing tensions on the Korean Peninsula, and preventing conflict between India and Pakistan. Technical arrangements for Nixon's trip to China were also discussed.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on either memorandum. A handwritten notation reads “informal memcon.” There are also numerous handwritten notes written throughout the memoranda. Ellipses in the source texts. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People.

37. Chinese Premier Chou En-lai's Extemporaneous Toast, Beijing, October 20, 1971

Beijing, October 20, 1971

Chou hailed the restoration of contact between China and the United States, praised Chairman of the Communist Party of China Mao Tse-tung, President Nixon, and his Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger, and referenced the ongoing Sino-American talks.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 visit. No classification marking. Published from a copy that indicates it was the English translation of the Chinese remarks.

38. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon, Washington, October 21, 1971

Washington, October 21, 1971

Haig informed Nixon that President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger had raised the issue of Nixon's individual meetings with Chinese Premier Chou En-lai and Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party Mao Tse-tung, noting that Chou refused to agree to a private meeting between Nixon and Mao.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicates that the President saw it. A handwritten note from Nixon reads: “Al-OK with Henry-OK with Chou & Mao together-but RN to be alone-Henry not to be present-otherwise we differ from RN's style in other trips & raise the Rogers problem.”

39. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 21, 1971, 10:20 a.m.-12:15 p.m.

Beijing, October 21, 1971, 10:20 a.m.-12:15 p.m.

Department of State official Alfred Jenkins and NSC staff member John Holdridge broached the establishment of reciprocal or unilateral liaison offices and other lower level relationships such as scientific, cultural, environmental, and sports between the two nations in a conversation with the Prime Minister's Secretary Hsiung Hsiang-hui.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. All brackets are in the source text. The meeting was held at Hupei Hall, the Great Hall of the People.

40. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 21, 1971, 10:30 a.m.-1:45 p.m.

Beijing, October 21, 1971, 10:30 a.m.-1:45 p.m.

Topics discussed included the technical aspects of President Nixon's visit, the normalization of relations, pro-Taiwan Independence demonstrations in the United States, and Japan.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. All brackets and ellipses are in the source text. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People.

41. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 21, 1971, 4:42-7:17 p.m.

Beijing, October 21, 1971, 4:42-7:17 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger noted that California Governor Ronald Reagan's recent visit to Taiwan did not reflect official U. S. foreign policy. Chinese Premier Chou En-lai then called for the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Indochina and criticized Washington's “refusal” to reply to Hanoi's seven point proposal. Kissinger responded that the North Vietnamese had failed to respond both to the August 1971 U.S. eight point proposal including a withdrawal date, which he had presented to North Vietnamese negotiator Xuan Thuy in Paris in September, and to a subsequent October 11, revision of the proposal. The two also discussed the effect a ceasefire in Vietnam would have on Cambodia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People.

42. Messages From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 22, 1971

Washington, October 22, 1971

Haig informed Kissinger of President's Nixon desire to meet with Chairman of the Communist Party of China Mao Tse-tung and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai without anyone else present from the U.S. delegation.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No time of transmission or receipt appears on the message.

43. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 22, 1971, 4:10-5:37 p.m.

Beijing, October 22, 1971, 4:10-5:37 p.m.

Topics discussed among Prime Minister's Secretary Hsiung Hsiang-hu and U.S. officials Holdridge and Jenkins included the establishment of liason offices, President Nixon's proposed visit, possible scientific, technical, and cultural exchanges, and the issue of American organizations inviting Taiwanese athletes to tour the United States.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. An unknown hand crossed out a portion of the date on the memorandum, changing the year from 1972 to 1971. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People.

44. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 22, 1971, 4:15-8:28 p.m.

Beijing, October 22, 1971, 4:15-8:28 p.m.

Chinese Premier Chou En-lai warned that U.S. reconnaissance flights over North Vietnam and Laos that had recently passed into Chinese airspace would be fired upon in the future. President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger said that such flights had not been authorized. Chou then raised North Korea's concerns about Japanese-South Korean rapprochement. Kissinger repeated the administration's opposition to Japanese rearmament and promised that Japanese troops would not replace the U.S. troops withdrawn from South Korea. The two also discussed the growing refugee problem in India as a result of the crisis in East Pakistan, whether or not the Chinese-U.S. talks had influenced Moscow, and the ongoing European Security Conference.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People. All brackets and ellipses are in the source text. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. Holdridge, Jenkins, and Hsuing joined the meeting after concluding their talks, published as Document 43. Attached at Tab A but not published is the text of North Korea's eight points. Also attached at Tab A is the first U.S. draft of the joint communiqué. See Document 56 for the text of the first draft.

45. Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 22, 1971

Washington, October 22, 1971

Haig indicated that President Nixon wanted Kissinger to delay his return to Washington.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Also designated as immediate. No time of transmission or receipt appears on the message. For Haig's understanding of Rogers' position on Kissinger's return, see Document 49. For additional information concerning the Chinese representation issue at the United Nations, see Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII, China, 1969-1972, Document 167 and Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume V, United Nations.

46. Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 22, 1971

Washington, October 22, 1971

Haig relayed Assistant to the President Haldeman's message that President Nixon wanted his visit to China to last 5 rather than 7 days.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A typed notation on the message indicates that it was sent to Kissinger in Beijing via wire. No time of transmission or receipt appears on the message.

47. Message From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Beijing, October 23, 1971

Beijing, October 23, 1971

Kissinger agreed to delay his return to Washington until after the United Nations vote, even though he argued that his visit had not affected the “Chirep” vote. He also recommended that American officials should minimize the use of language supportive of Taiwan, as it could jeopardize relations with the People's Republic of China.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The message indicates that it was to be delivered at the opening of business. Received at the White House at 5:21 a.m. A notation on the memorandum reads: “HAIG ONLY.” Haig underlined the sentence: “Chou has however insisted at every session that PRC will never hold still for the elaboration of new legal status for Taiwan.”

48. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 23, 1971, 9:05-10:05 p.m.

Beijing, October 23, 1971, 9:05-10:05 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai broached the issue of the reconnaissance flights, and also discussed the joint communiqué and the security, flight, and communication arrangements for President Nixon's visit.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Brackets in the source text. The meeting was held in Kissinger's Sitting Room at the Government Guest House.

49. Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 23, 1971

Washington, October 23, 1971

Haig informed Kissinger that he had raised Kissinger's points, concerning his return to the United States, with President Nixon, Secretary of State Rogers, and Ambassador to the United Nations George H.W. Bush. Rogers concluded, and Nixon agreed, that a stopover in Alaska would be desirable. Haig also commented that Rogers was “attempting to again assert himself as a dominant force.”

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A typed notation on the message indicates that it was sent to Kissinger in Beijing via wire.

50. Message From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Beijing, October 24, 1971

Beijing, October 24, 1971

After calling the situation with Secretary of State Rogers “intolerable,” Kissinger agreed to a stop over in Anchorage, Alaska, using the pretense of airplane repairs. He noted that the Chinese had agreed to the proposed dates for President Nixon's trip and that Chinese Premier Chou En-lai suggested the possibility of “coordinated action” between China and the U.S. in Pakistan.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. Secret; Sensitive. A stamped notation indicates that it was received in the White House at 12:33 a.m. on October 24.

51. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 24, 1971, 10:28 a.m.-1:55 p.m.

Beijing, October 24, 1971, 10:28 a.m.-1:55 p.m.

After a brief mention of troop withdrawals from Vietnam, President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai discussed the joint communiqué, various historical world revolutions, the status of Taiwan, and the Indo-Pakistan conflict.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. All brackets are in the source text. The meeting was held in the Government Guest House. Attached at Tab A but not published is the draft communiqué.

52. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 24, 1971, 9:23-11:20 p.m.

Beijing, October 24, 1971, 9:23-11:20 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai again focused their discussions on the joint communiqué and the announcement of President Nixon's visit. Kissinger explained that domestic constraints prevented him from agreeing to any language critical of specific U.S. foreign policies, especially in regards to Taiwan and the war in Indochina.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. All brackets and ellipses are in the source text. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People. Attached at Tab A is the first Chinese draft. See Document 56 for text of the draft.

53. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 25, 1971, 10:21-11:00 a.m.

Beijing, October 25, 1971, 10:21-11:00 a.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger rejected the inclusion by the Chinese of the words “world revolution” in the joint communiqué. Chinese Premier Chou En-lai, in turn, insisted upon an official commitment to reduce U.S. troops in Taiwan and restrain Japanese rearmament.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. All brackets and ellipses are in the source text. The meeting was held at the Government Guest House. Attached at Tab A is the second Chinese draft of the communiqué; attached at Tab B is the third U.S. draft of the communiqué. See Document 56 for text of these drafts.

54. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 25, 1971, 9:50-11:40 p.m.

Beijing, October 25, 1971, 9:50-11:40 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger rejected the inclusion by the Chinese of the words “world revolution” in the joint communiqué. Chinese Premier Chou En-lai, in turn, insisted upon an official commitment to reduce U.S. troops in Taiwan and restrain Japanese rearmament.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. All brackets and ellipses are in the source text. The meeting was held at the Government Guest House. Attached at Tab A is the second Chinese draft of the communiqué; attached at Tab B is the third U.S. draft of the communiqué. See Document 56 for text of these drafts.

55. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 26, 1971, 5:30-8:10 p.m.

Beijing, October 26, 1971, 5:30-8:10 p.m.

During the final meeting between Chinese and American officials, President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger cautioned that he was out in front of official U.S. policy on Taiwan and could not guarantee that President Nixon would agree to the entire formulation. He agreed that the U.S. would not challenge the reality of one China and that Taiwan was a province of China. Chinese Premier Chou En-lai maintained that where there were fundamental differences, especially in the interpretation of words such as “peaceful competition” and “individual freedom,” the differences should remain in the communiqué.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. The meeting was held at the Government Guest House, Attached at Tab A is the third Chinese draft of the communiqué. See Document 56 for text of the draft. At Tab B is the final agreed tentative draft, which is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969-1972, volume XVII, China, 1969-1972, as an attachment to Document 165. The final version of the draft is in ibid., Document 203.

56. American and Chinese Drafts of the Joint Communiqué, Beijing, October 22-26, 1971

Beijing, October 22-26, 1971

Each nation submitted three drafts of the joint communiqué for President Nixon's visit to China.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. No classification marking. All brackets in the source text. See Documents 165 and 203, Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII, China, 1969-1972, for the final agreed tentative draft and final version of the communiqué

57. Note From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, October 30, 1971 and Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 31, 1971, 6 p.m.

October 31, 1971, 6 p.m.

Haig transmitted three points, concerning President Nixon's visit, for Walters to make orally to the Chinese. Military Attaché Walters and Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen discussed how the new and growing relationship between the U.S. and China would benefit humankind.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Haig handwrote the addressee instructions, the date, and an additional “eyes only” classification on the note. No time of transmission or receipt appears on the note, but Walters subsequently indicated in his October 31 memorandum of record that he received the telegram at midnight and finished deciphering it at 3:30 a.m. The October 31 memorandum that Walters drafted does not bear any classification markings. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly.

58. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, November 16, 1971

Paris, November 16, 1971

Unable to arrange a meeting for November 15, Military Attaché Walters met with Chinese diplomat CHAN YUNG CHIEH the next day. Walters informed him of President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's upcoming visit and handed him the note expressing Kissinger's desire to meet with the Chinese in New York. Chieh indicated that he would transmit the note to Peking via “electrical means.”

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Walters. The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy.

59. Instructions to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, undated

Washington, undated

Walters was asked to request an appointment with the Chinese ambassador on November 15 and inform him that President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger would arrive in Paris on November 20 and wished to meet with Huang Chen at 9 a.m. that morning. An accompanying note, which Walters was to hand to the Chinese, inquired as to if the Chinese would be willing to meet secretly with Kissinger in New York after the Chinese delegation was seated at the United Nations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Published from an unsigned copy. Attached is the note requesting the secret meeting between Chinese officials and Kissinger.

60. Memorandum for Record, Paris, November 18, 1971

Paris, November 18, 1971

Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen told Military Attaché Walters that the Chinese wished to move the announcement of President Nixon's visit from November 23 to November 29.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Walters. A handwritten notation reads: “Lord.” The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. Although a precise time is not indicated on the memorandum, Walters indicates that the meeting was held during the morning of November 18.

61. Note From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, November 18, 1971

Washington, November 18, 1971

Haig relayed Military Attaché Walters's information concerning the announcement of President Nixon's China trip.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive.

62. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, November 19, 1971

Washington, November 19, 1971

Haig instructed Walters to hand Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen two messages during Walters's November 20 meeting. The first message confirmed November 29 as the date for the announcement of President Nixon's trip. The second message contained Kissinger's comments on the present negotiating situation with North Vietnamese officials; Kissinger noted that the talks scheduled for November 20 in Paris would not take place.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Published from a copy that indicates Haig signed the original. Attached are the two messages.

63. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, November 20, 1971, 11:30 a.m.

Paris, November 20, 1971, 11:30 a.m.

Military Attaché Walters met with Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen in order to deliver the messages Haig had transmitted the previous day. Huang provided Walters with a Chinese written message concerning a potential meeting between Ambassador to the United Nations Huang Hua and Kissinger in New York.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical Files-China, Chron, 1 September-29 December, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Walters. The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy. Attached is the English-language version of the Chinese message, with the handwritten notation: “11/20/71.”

64. Message From the Government of the People's Republic of China to the Government of the United States, undated

undated

The message expressed the Chinese belief that the Indian Government was “interfering in Pakistan's internal affairs,” and offered Chinese military and political support for Pakistan, in the event of an attack.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical Files-China, Chron, 1 September-29 December, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusive Eyes Only. The message bears the handwritten notation: “11/20/71.”

65. Checklist of Undertakings With the Government of the People's Republic of China, Washington, June 17, 1972

Washington, June 17, 1972

The checklist contained the circumstance, nature, and status of each undertaking between the two nations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 87, Country Files, Far East, China, Commitments to the PRC [10/71-7/73]. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Sent for information. Lord transmitted the checklist to Kissinger and Haig under a March 17 covering memorandum. Lord updated the checklist by hand on June 17. The copy published here is the June 17 version of the checklist.

66. Memorandum for the Record, Washington, November 21, 1971

Washington, November 21, 1971

NSC staff member Winston Lord recounted that President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger had instructed him to telephone Chinese Ambassador Huang Hua in order to communicate a message from Kissinger. Lord also indicated that NSC staff member Commander Jonathan Howe would directly communicate the message on November 22.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Lord on November 22. Huang Hua was staying at the Hotel Roosevelt in New York.

67. Memorandum for the Record, New York, November 22, 1971, 2-2:25 p.m.

New York, November 22, 1971, 2-2:25 p.m.

NSC staff member Howe met with Chinese Ambassador to the United Nations Huang Hua and agreed that Huang and President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger would meet the next evening at 10 p.m. They also discussed the visit of U.S. officials to China during the previous month.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Howe. The meeting was held at the Hotel Roosevelt. The note is attached but not published.

68. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, November 23, 1971, 10-11:55 p.m.

New York, November 23, 1971, 10-11:55 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Ambassador to the United Nations Huang Hua agreed to resist Indian military action against Pakistan and agreed on how they would handle the South Asian controversy in the United Nations Security Council. Kissinger also disavowed any U.S. involvement with the Formosan Independence Movement.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. According to information contained in Document, the meeting was held in an unidentified apartment building in New York. Howe noted that it was not in an “affluent area but had been selected primarily to insure privacy.” A typed notation on the memorandum of conversation indicates that the meeting was held on the East Side. For text of the draft UN Security Council resolution, see Document 69. For Kissinger's summary of this meeting, see Foreign Relations, 1969-1972, volume XVII, China, 1969-1972, Document 173.

69. Message From the United States Government to the Government of the People's Republic of China, Washington, November 29, 1971

Washington, November 29, 1971

The message proposed the logistics and particulars for an advance trip prior to President Nixon's February 1972 visit. It also outlined approaches U.S. officials had made concerning the India-Pakistan situations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Haig transmitted the message under a November 28 covering memorandum to Walters, requesting that Walters seek a meeting with Huang Chen on November 29 and indicating that Haig would provide him with an additional oral message for the Chinese. See Document 70 for information concerning the oral message. For the November 20 Chinese note, see Document 64. Attached is a copy of the United Nations Security Council resolution concerning the India-Pakistan crisis. Documentation on the India-Pakistan situation can be found in Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XI, South Asia Crisis, 1971 and Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume E–7, Documents on South Asia, 1969-1972.

70. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, November 29, 1971, 5 p.m.

Paris, November 29, 1971, 5 p.m.

Military Attaché Walters relayed to Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen details of President Nixon's trip to China as well as Nixon's and his Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's views on the Indo-Pakistan crisis to Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Walters on November 30. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. For the message Walters delivered to the Chinese, see Document 69.

71. Memorandum for the Record, New York, December 3 and 4, 1971

New York, December 3 and 4, 1971

Commander Howe reported on his telephone calls and meetings with two Chinese diplomats: Wang Hai-jung and T'ang Wen-Sheng. Howe had been instructed to communicate to the Chinese that the Pakistani Government had left it up to the United States Government to determine whether or not to request a meeting of the United Nations Security Council.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Drafted by Howe. A handwritten notation indicates that Haig saw the memorandum. Attached at Tab A is the message outlining communication channels between the U.S. and China and the steps the United States was taking in order to diffuse the situation. Handwritten notes on the attached message read: “Delivered by Jon Howe to Miss Tang 10:15 pm, 12/13/71” and “Win Lord.” For discussion of the communication channels agreed upon at the November 23 meeting, see Document 68. Attached at Tab B but not published is Howe's hand-written note, dictated by Haig on December 4.

72. Message From Nancy Oullette to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Paris, December 10, 1971

Paris, December 10, 1971

Oullette indicated that Chinese officials had informed her that three Americans would be granted early release from their prison sentences and a fourth, convicted of espionage, would have his sentence reduced from life imprisonment to 5 years.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Secret; Eyes Only. No time of transmission or receipt appears on the message. A handwritten notation reads: “Winston,” in reference to Lord. Oullette served as Walters' secretary in Paris.

73. Message From the Government of the United States to the Government of the People's Republic of China, Washington, December 17, 1971

Washington, December 17, 1971

The message summarized the exchanges between the United States and Soviet Union concerning the India-Pakistan situation.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. No classification marking. A handwritten note reads, “Handed to Gen Walters 17 Dec 71 for delivery Dec 18.”

74. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, December 18, 1971, 11 a.m.

Paris, December 18, 1971, 11 a.m.

Military Attaché Walters read Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen the text of the U.S. message regarding U.S. activities concerning the India-Pakistan situation.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusive; Eyes Only. Drafted by Walters on December 20. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly.

75. Backchannel Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Beijing, January 4, 1972

Beijing, January 4, 1972

Haig reported that Chinese Premier Chou En-lai blamed Soviet “meddling” in South Asia and Indochina on their anger at the Chinese-U.S. rapprochement and criticized Washington's continued bombing of North Vietnam.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1015, Haig Special File, Haig China Trip File [Haig Advance Party, Dec. 29, 1971 to Jan. 10, 1972] [1 of 2]. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only.

76. Backchannel Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Beijing, undated

Beijing, undated

Haig communicated the fact that Chinese Premier Chou En-lai was willing to consider the U.S. views on Southeast Asia and that he had agreed to other aspects of President Nixon's visit.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1037, Files for the President-China Material, China-AH January [1972] visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only.

77. Backchannel Message From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Washington, undated

Washington, undated

In reference to the joint communiqué, Kissinger informed Haig that it could be strengthened in terms of scientific and cultural exchanges. He also noted that with regards to South Asia, communication between the United States and China would take place via the Paris channel and that Haig should stress to the Chinese the U.S. readiness to accept a non-aligned Southeast Asia.

National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1037, Files for the President-China Material, China-AH January [1972]visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A typed notation indicated that the message was to be “delivered in sealed envelope directly to Gen. Haig.” Kissinger wrote next to the reference number: “and your immediately following message with identifier 008.”

78. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing January 6, 1972, 11 a.m.

Beijing January 6, 1972, 11 a.m.

President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs Haig, acting on Kissinger's instructions concerning the communique, informed Acting Chinese Foreign Minister Chi P'eng-fei that the United States wanted to strengthen trade, cultural, and scientific relations between the two nations and added that Moscow was blocking negotiated settlements in Indochina and South Asia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1037, Files for the President-China Material, China, Haig trip-memcons January 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People.

79. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, January 7, 1972, 11:45 p.m.

Beijing, January 7, 1972, 11:45 p.m.

Chinese Premier Chou En-lai voiced the Chinese views concerning the joint communiqué, which President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs Haig indicated he would convey to President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and President Nixon.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1037, Files for the President-China Material, China, Haig trip-memcons, January 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People. The memorandum is mistakenly dated January 7, 1971.

80. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, January 24, 1972

Washington, January 24, 1972

Haig furnished instructions for documents Walters was asked to deliver to the Chinese ambassador on January 26.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, January 1-February 29, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. The tabs are attached but not published. Walters' account of the January 26 meeting is Document 82.

81. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, January 25, 1972

Washington, January 25, 1972

Haig instructed Walters to hand-deliver two messages to the Chinese, including a proposal for a negotiated settlement of the Vietnam war.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, January 1-February 29, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Tab I is the substitute version of an enclosure attached to a note at Tab A in Document 80. Tab II is attached but not published.

82. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, January 26, 1972, 7:30 p.m.

Paris, January 26, 1972, 7:30 p.m.

Military Attaché Walters handed the Chinese the U.S. proposal for Indochina.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, January 1-February 29, 1972. No classification marking. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. No drafting date appears on the memorandum. Walters added the handwritten notation “Provided” next to the sentence beginning with “He also said that they did not know…” For additional information about the attached tabs, see Document 80.

83. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, January 30, 1972

Paris, January 30, 1972

Military Attaché Walters reported an “uncomfortable” meeting with Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen on January 30th in response to the January 26th U.S. proposal on Indochina.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, January 1-February 29, 1972. No classification marking. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. The meeting time is not indicated. A handwritten notation on the memorandum reads: “Win.”

84. Memorandum for Record, Paris, February 1, 1972

Paris, February 1, 1972

Military Attaché Walters reported that his meeting with the Chinese had been cordial, which was a marked change from his previous meeting.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, January 1-February 29, 1972. No classification marking. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. The meeting time is not indicated. A handwritten notation on the memorandum reads: “Win.”

85. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, February 11, 1972, 4 p.m.

Paris, February 11, 1972, 4 p.m.

Additional discussion concerning the Chinese support for the North Vietnamese. President Nixon's reelection prospects were also mentioned.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, January 1-February 29, 1972. No classification marking. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly.

86. Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff, Washington, undated

Washington, undated

The paper provided a summary of Chairman of the Communist Party of China Mao Tse-tung's major philosophical and political themes and offered a brief history of China since the Communists assumed power in 1949.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical Files, China, Trips, February 1972, Briefing Book. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Published from an undated draft. Kissinger transmitted the paper to Nixon under a February 15 covering memorandum. A handwritten note reads “Put in President's Mao/Chou book Feb. 15 AM.” Tab A, Mao Tse-tung's 1949 article, is attached but not published. Brackets and ellipses are the source text.

87. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, February 17, 1972, 5 p.m.

Paris, February 17, 1972, 5 p.m.

Military Attaché Walters's meeting with the Chinese covered President Nixon's departure to China, Nixon's pursuit of an open dialogue with China, and U.S.-West German relations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, January 1-February 29, 1972. No classification marking. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly.

88. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 21, 1972, 2:30-2:40 p.m.

Beijing, February 21, 1972, 2:30-2:40 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai briefly discussed the toasts each would give that evening at dinner.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. Another set of these documents is ibid., President's Trip, February 1972, HAK Conversations. Unless noted otherwise, the versions are identical. The meeting was held at the President's Guest House, Beijing. All brackets are in the source text.

89. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 21, 1972, 4:15-5:30 p.m.

Beijing, February 21, 1972, 4:15-5:30 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger explained that only Secretary of State Rogers had seen portions of the draft communique. Other Department of State officials were unaware of the specifics of Kissinger's discussion with Chinese Premier Chou En-lai.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum, presumably Lord was the drafter. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2. All brackets and ellipses are in the source text.

90. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 22, 1972, 10:05-11:55 a.m.

Beijing, February 22, 1972, 10:05-11:55 a.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Ch'iao Kuan-hua discussed the wording of the communiqué, specifically in relation to the South Asia crisis and the continuing dilemma over Taiwan. The main sticking point for Ch'iao remained Washington's unwillingness to withdraw all its troops from Taiwan. Kissinger responded that the U.S. was “confronting …a very complex domestic situation” in reference to the “China Lobby.”

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum, presumably drafted by Lord. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

91. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 22, 1972, 2 p.m.

Beijing, February 22, 1972, 2 p.m.

Topics discussed at the first counterpart meeting between Secretary of State Rogers and Chinese Foreign Minister Chi P'eng-fei included normalization of relations, people-to-people exchanges, trade expansion, and Most Favored Nation status.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 7 US/NIXON. Secret;Nodis; Homer. Drafted by Nicholas Platt and approved in S on February 28. The meeting was held in the Sinkiang Room, Great Hall of the People. The third, fourth, and fifth counterpart meetings are published as Documents 94, 101, and 107. Part II is Document 198, Foreign Relations, 1969-1972, volume XVII, China, 1969-1972.

92. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing February 23, 1972, 9:35 a.m.-12:34 p.m.

Beijing, February 23, 1972, 9:35 a.m.-12:34 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Ch'iao Kuan-hua discussed the communiqué, confidential information on Soviet conventional and strategic weaponry, and the current status of U.S.-Soviet negotiations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, President's Trip, Feb 1972, HAK Conversations. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. Ellipses in the source text. Also present on the Chinese side was Yeh Chien-ying, Vice Chairman of the Military Commission. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2. Tabs A-C are attached but not published.

93. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 24, 1972, 9:59 a.m.-12:42 p.m.

Beijing, February 24, 1972, 9:59 a.m.-12:42 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Ch'iao Kuan-hua continued to discuss the communiqué. Kissinger informed Ch'iao that the U.S. Ambassador to France, a close friend of President Nixon's, would replace Walters and maintain the secret Paris channel.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

94. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 24, 1972, 3 p.m.

Beijing, February 24, 1972, 3 p.m.

During the third counterpart meeting between Secretary of State Rogers and Chinese Foreign Minister Chi P'eng-fei, Chi attributed the “lack of tranquility” in the world to U.S. post-World War II policies and Soviet intervention. He stressed that easing international tensions required respect for the five principles of peaceful co-existence. Rogers, in turn, provided a different version of the world situation. The two officials also discussed Vietnam and Cambodia.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 7 US/NIXON. Secret;Nodis; Homer. Drafted by Calvin Mehlert and approved in S on March 3. Copies were sent to S, U, J, EA, S/S, and Kissinger. The meeting was held in the Sinkiang Room, Great Hall of the People. Eliot sent the memorandum to Rogers under a March 3 covering note. Rogers subsequently approved the memorandum.

95. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 24, 1972, 3:30-3:45 p.m.

Beijing, February 24, 1972, 3:30-3:45 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Chi'iao Kuan-hua discussed aspects of the communiqué, specifically the wording concerning the relationship between Taiwan and China.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

96. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 12:50-1:15 a.m.

Beijing, February 25, 1972, 12:50-1:15 a.m.

Chinese Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Ch'iao Kuan-hua and President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger continued to debate the semantics of the communiqué as they applied to Taiwan.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2, Beijing.

97. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 9:34-10:58 a.m.

Beijing, February 25, 1972, 9:34-10:58 a.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Ch'iao Kuan-hua returned to the issue of the specific wording of U.S. withdrawal of forces from Taiwan.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. Brackets and ellipses in the source text. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

98. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 2:35-2:45 p.m.

Beijing, February 25, 1972, 2:35-2:45 p.m.

Discussions resumed on the Taiwan portions of the communiqué.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

99. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 3:35-4 p.m.

Beijing, February 25, 1972, 3:35-4 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger resisted the phrase “final withdrawal” in relation to Taiwan because it would appear that the administration had made too many concessions to China.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

100. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 4:50-5:25 p.m.

Beijing, February 25, 1972, 4:50-5:25 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger thanked Chinese Premier Chou En-lai for agreeing to language on Taiwan that would help President Nixon mollify his domestic critics.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

101. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 5:45 p.m.

Beijing, February 25, 1972, 5:45 p.m.

Topics discussed at the fourth counterpart meeting between Secretary of State Rogers and Chinese Foreign Minister Chi P'eng-fei included contacts and communication, U.S. and PRC commitments to public welfare, and Thailand.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 7 US/NIXON. Secret; Nodis; Homer. Drafted by Platt and approved in S on March 8. Copies were sent to S, S/S, U, J, EA, and Kissinger at the White House. The meeting was held in the Guest House.

102. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25-26 1972, 10:30 p.m.-1:40 a.m.

Beijing, February 25-26 1972, 10:30 p.m.-1:40 a.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Ch'iao finalized the communiqué wording concerning Taiwan, discussed specifics on the development of trade relations, and considered editorial changes to the section on Vietnam.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. Brackets in the source text. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

103. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 26, 1972

Beijing, February 26, 1972

President Nixon and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai both agreed that common ground had been achieved, even though differences in principles existed. Secretary of State Rogers added that the discussions “helped clear up a number of misunderstandings,” noting that fast and frequent communications aid in this process. Chinese Foreign Minister Chi P'eng-fei concurred, highlighting areas of agreement concerning trade relations and people-to-people exchanges. Nixon termed the visit “the story of the century.”

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 91, Country Files, Far East, China, Memoranda of Conversation Between Secretary Rogers and PRC Officials, February 1972. Secret; Nodis; Homer. Drafted by Alfred Jenkins and approved in S on March 10. Copies were sent to S, S/S, U, J, E, and to Kissinger at the White House. The meeting was held in the VIP Lounge of the Beijing Airport prior to the parties' departure to Hangchow. The precise time of the meeting is not indicated on the memorandum.

104. Memorandum of Conversation, Hangchow, February 26-27, 1972, 10:20 p.m.-1:40 a.m.

Hangchow, February 26-27, 1972, 10:20 p.m.-1:40 a.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger informed Chinese Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Ch'iao Kuan-hua that Secretary of State Rogers had suggested three minor changes to the Taiwan portion of the communiqué. Ch'iao refused to agree to the changes on Taiwan since both President Nixon and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai had already accepted the wording on February 26.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. Ellipses in the source text. The meeting was held at the Hangchow Hotel.

105. Memorandum of Conversation, Shanghai, February 27, 1972

Shanghai, February 27, 1972

Secretary of State Rogers and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai briefly discussed how both President Nixon and Chairman of the Communist Party of China Mao Tse-tung had overcome, but would continue to face, domestic opposition in order to continue the normalization process.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 7 US/NIXON. Secret; Nodis; Homer. Drafted by Platt and approved in S on March 8. Copies were sent to S, S/S, U, J, EA, and Kissinger at the White House. The meeting was held in the Guest House Hotel, Shanghai. The time of the meeting is not indicated on the memorandum.

106. Memorandum of Conversation, Shanghai, February 27, 1972, 11:30 a.m.-1:55 p.m.

Shanghai, February 27, 1972, 11:30 a.m.-1:55 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Ch'iao Kuan-hua made a few minor stylistic changes to the communiqué and agreed that the Paris channel would remain open as the normalization process continued.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. Ellipses in the source text. The meeting was held at the Guest House Hotel.

107. Memorandum of Conversation, Shanghai, February 28, 1972, 8:45 a.m.

Shanghai, February 28, 1972, 8:45 a.m.

During their fifth counterpart meeting, Secretary of State Rogers and Chinese Foreign Minister Chi P'eng-fei agreed to gradually strengthen relations in the areas of communications, sports, cultural, and scientific exchanges.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 7 US/NIXON. Secret; Nodis; Homer. Drafted by Platt and approved in S on March 10. Copies were sent to S, S/S, U, J, EA, and Kissinger at the White House. The meeting was held in the Guest House Hotel.

108. Message From the Government of the United States to the Government of the People's Republic of China, Washington, March 3, 1972

Washington, March 3, 1972

The message informed PRC officials that the U.S. Government proposed to announce Paris as the “public contact point” for communication between the two nations. It also described the nature of a conversation between President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Soviet Ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin, and thanked the Chinese for inviting two U.S. senators to visit China.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the message. A typed notation on the message indicates that Peter Rodman of the National Security Council staff delivered the message to Shih Yen-hua, a member of the PRC delegation to the UN.

109. Message From the Government of the People's Republic of China to the Government of the United States, undated

undated

The message indicated Chinese acceptance of the disclosure of the Paris channel and discussed the visit of House Majority Leader Hale Boggs and House Minority Leader Gerald Ford.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. No classification indicated.

110. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, March 6, 1972, 7:15-8:20 p.m.

New York, March 6, 1972, 7:15-8:20 p.m.

Chinese Ambassador to the United Nations Huang Hua raised several subjects with Commander Howe including the Chinese agreement to disclosure of the Paris channel, invitations to House Majority Leader Hale Boggs (D-Louisiana) and House Minority Leader Gerald Ford (R-Michigan) to visit China, security issues surrounding the death of a member of the Chinese delegation from nicotine poisoning-which the Chinese believed to be caused by foul play-and the problem of securing adequate facilities for the Chinese mission to the UN. He appealed for President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's assistance in the ensuing investigation by the New York Police Department.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Transmitted by Haig to Kissinger under a March 7 covering note. Attached is a message from the Chinese Government discussing the prospective visit of Boggs and Ford; Document 109. Howe indicates that the meeting was held at “our special meeting place in New York City.” For additional information about the death of the delegation member, see Documents 113 and 114.

111. Letters From President Nixon to the Chairman of the Communist Party of China Mao Tse-tung and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai, Washington, March 14, 1972

Washington, March 14, 1972

Kissinger transmitted two letters to Nixon with the recommendation that he sign the letters.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 525, Country Files, Far East, PRC, Vol. III, Jan-Mar 1972. No classification marking. Kissinger's covering memorandum, sent for action, is dated March 10 and indicates that Ray Price cleared the letters. A notation on memorandum indicates that Nixon saw it. A handwritten note from Nixon reads: “K-where an occasion justifies it-see that I write Chou from time to time.” The letters are published from copies that bear Nixon's handwritten signature.

112. Message From the Government of the People's Republic of China to the Government of the United States, undated

undated

In reference to President Nixon's proclamation of March 26-April 1, 1972, as a “national week of concern for prisoners of war,” and the U.S. bombing campaign in North Vietnam, Chinese officials indicated that the U.S. Government would not obtain the release of U.S. prisoners of war unless the United States accepted the seven point proposal offered by the Democratic Republic of Vietnam delegates to the Paris Peace talks.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. No classification indicated. A notation on the memorandum indicates Nixon saw it. Attached to the March 24 memorandum of conversation; Document 114.

113. Airgram A-925 From the Delegation to the United Nations to the Department of State, June 19, 1972

June 19, 1972

Ambassador to the United Nations Bush recounted that he had informed Chinese Ambassador to the UN Huang Hua that he was personally satisfied that the New York Police Department had explored all angles of the death of the Chinese delegate and had been assured that the case would remain open.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 17 CHICOM-US. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Harry E. T. Thayer on June 8 and cleared by Joseph Glennon and Bush. Received at the Department of State on June 21.

114. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, March 14, 1972, 4:40-6 p.m.

New York, March 14, 1972, 4:40-6 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger assured Chinese Ambassador to the United Nations Huang Hua that the White House had taken a “direct interest” in aiding in the investigation of the death of the Chinese delegate, explained that the U.S. Ambassador to the UN, George H.W. Bush, would not be privy to their conversations, and reported on his recent conversations with Soviet Ambassador to the United States Dobrynin concerning China. The attached message from the Government of the People's Republic of China stressed that the United States must end its bombing campaign against North Vietnam.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The precise location of the meeting is not indicated. Ellipses in the source text. Lord sent the memorandum to Kissinger under a March 18 covering memorandum, on which he had written “Thru Haig.” Kissinger wrote: “OK HK” on the covering memorandum. Tabs A-C are attached but not published. Tab D, the attached message, has no classification marking. A notation on the message indicates the President saw it. It is published as Document 112.

115. Telegram 5316 From the Embassy in France to the Department of State, March 20, 1972, 1612Z

March 20, 1972, 1612Z

Ambassador to France Watson recounted his March 20 meeting with Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen. The two officials discussed the upcoming visit of the PRC Table Tennis team to the United States. Huang requested that the U.S. Government refuse entry to a Taiwanese table tennis group.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL CHICOM-US. Secret; Nodis; Homer; Immediate. Received in the Department of State at 12:49 p.m. Telegrams 46040, 47029, and 42369 to Paris are ibid.

116. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, March 5, 1972

Paris, March 5, 1972

Military Attaché Walters and Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen reflected on the role that they had played in the normalization process.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Walters on March 23. A notation on the memorandum reads: “C-exchange.” The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly.

117. Telegram 625 From the Embassy in France to the White House, March 13, 1972, 1219Z

March 13, 1972, 1219Z

Ambassador to France Watson asked how he should handle press inquiries about his talks with the Chinese.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1037, Files for the President-China Material, China, March 10, 1972-April 1973. Secret; Eyes Only. Sent to the White House eyes only for Kissinger. A handwritten notation on the telegram reads: “HAK, Haig, Lord.”

118. Telegram 626 From the Embassy in France to the White House, March 13, 1972, 1219Z

March 13, 1972, 1219Z

Ambassador to France Watson informed President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger of his first meeting with Chinese Ambassador to France Huang Chen and relayed Huang's relief that their talks in the future would only be shared with Kissinger and President Nixon.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1037, Files for the President-China Material, China, March 10, 1972-April 1973. Secret; Eyes Only. Sent to the White House eyes only for Kissinger. A handwritten notation on the telegram reads: “HAK, Haig, Lord.”

119. Memorandum From Winston Lord of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), New York, April 3, 1972

New York, April 3, 1972

Lord met informally with Shih Yen-hua of the Chinese Mission to the UN and communicated President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's belief that there was “no policy he believed in more than improving relations with the People's Republic of China.” The undated message references several points raised by the United States in the April 3 message.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the new quarters for the PRC Mission, located near Lincoln Center. The precise time of the meeting is not indicated. The United States message that Lord delivered is printed as Document 219, Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII.

120. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, March 24, 1972, 6:05-7:05 p.m.

New York, March 24, 1972, 6:05-7:05 p.m.

Chinese Ambassador to the United Nations Huang Hua protested that on two occasions the U.S. military had violated Chinese territorial waters and Chinese airspace. The President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs Haig responded that he was unaware of such incursions and promised to investigate the allegations. Huang and Haig also discussed several minor administrative matters, including the Chinese Mission's new quarters, adequate security measures, and the upcoming visit of the PRC Table Tennis team.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Ellipsis in the source text. The precise location of the meeting is not indicated.

121. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, April 16, 1972, 3-3:35 p.m.

New York, April 16, 1972, 3-3:35 p.m.

NSC staff member Rodman described his meeting with Shih Yen-hua as cordial and limited to polite small talk including discussion of pandas, pollution in the Great Lakes, and the cultural activities at Lincoln Center. The U.S. note referenced the North Vietnamese decision to call off the April 24 private meeting and proposed a compromise solution.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Attached is the U.S. note, upon which is written: “Handed by Rodman to Miss Shih 3:00 PM.”

122. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, April 18, 1972, 1-1:35 a.m.

New York, April 18, 1972, 1-1:35 a.m.

NSC staff member Rodman and Chinese Ambassador to the United Nations Huang Hua discussed the historians and philosophers Rodman had studied while a student at Harvard University. The Chinese note, which constituted a protest, stated that a U.S. military aircraft had intruded into Chinese airspace and that the aircraft was “very obviously one of the U.S. planes that bombed Haiphong on the same day.”

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Shih Yen-hua was also present. Brackets in the source text. Published from a copy that bears Rodman's initials. Attached is the Chinese note, which bears the handwritten notation: “Amb. Huang handed to Rodman 4/18/72-1:00 AM

123. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, April 19, 1972, 10:05 a.m.-12:52 p.m.

Beijing, April 19, 1972, 10:05 a.m.-12:52 p.m.

NSC staff member Lord provided President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger with a brief summary of Senators Mansfield and Scott's trip to China.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1038, Files for the President-China Material, Mansfield/Scott Trip to China [April-May 1972]. The precise location of the meeting is not indicated on the memorandum. Lord transferred the memorandum to Kissinger under a May 12 covering memorandum that was sent for information. No classification marking appears on the memorandum of conversation. The covering memorandum is classified Secret; Sensitive. Attached but not published at Tabs A and B are Mansfield and Scott's reports. Attached at Tab C of the covering memorandum are the memoranda of their conversations with Chou En-lai and Ch'iao Kuan-hua. The text of the first conversation is published herein and is presumably drafted by Norvil Jones, a staff member of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. Texts of the subsequent conversations are published as Documents 124-26. Tabs D and E are attached but not published.

124. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, April 20, 1972, 10:45 a.m.-1:22 p.m.

Beijing, April 20, 1972, 10:45 a.m.-1:22 p.m.

Senators Mansfield and Scott and Chinese Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Ch'iao Kuan-hua discussed Vietnam, Korea, and Taiwan.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1038, Files for the President-China Material, Mansfield/Scott Trip to China [April-May 1972]. No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Jones. Presumably the meeting was held at the Great Hall of the People.

125. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, April 20, 1972, 8:55-10:40 p.m.

Beijing, April 20, 1972, 8:55-10:40 p.m.

Senators Mansfield and Scott and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai agreed that an American withdrawal from Vietnam would reduce tensions in Asia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1038, Files for the President-China Material, Mansfield/Scott Trip to China [April-May 1972]. No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Jones. The meeting was held at the Great Hall of the People.

126. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, April 22, 1972, 4:30-8 p.m.

Beijing, April 22, 1972, 4:30-8 p.m.

Senators Mansfield and Scott and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai discussed the feasibility of neutralizing all of Indochina, how tensions on the Korean peninsula could be reduced, the state of negotiations between the Soviet Union and China on reducing border tensions, and the status of Cambodia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1038, Files for the President-China Material, Mansfield/Scott Trip to China [April-May 1972]. No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Jones. The meeting was held at the Great Hall of the People.

127. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, April 26, 1972, 5:50-6:30 p.m.

New York, April 26, 1972, 5:50-6:30 p.m.

The President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs Haig relayed to Chinese Ambassador to the UN Huang Hua President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's discussions in Moscow concerning President Nixon's upcoming visit,SALT negotiations, events in West Germany, and Vietnam.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The precise location of the conversation is not indicated. Brackets in the source text. Presumably drafted by Rodman. Shi Yen-hau was also present. See Document 122 for discussion of the April 18 Chinese note.

128. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, May 8, 1972, 8:45-9:10 p.m.

New York, May 8, 1972, 8:45-9:10 p.m.

Chinese Ambassador to the UN Huang Hua informed NSC staff member Rodman that he would be unable to travel to Washington to meet with President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger but would welcome a meeting with Kissinger in New York.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Brackets in the source text. Attached but not published is Nixon's letter to Chou En-lai

129. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, May 16, 1972, 6:10-7:10 p.m.

New York, May 16, 1972, 6:10-7:10 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger alerted Chinese Ambassador to the UN Huang Hua as to the nature of the discussions at the upcoming U.S.-Soviet summit and reassured him that the U.S. would not agree to anything that would hurt Chinese interests.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Attached at Tab A is the U.S.-Soviet Bilateral Agreements; attached at Tab B is the Basic Principles of U.S.-Soviet Relations; and attached at Tab C is the draft Sino-American announcement.

130. Memorandum From Winston Lord of the National Security Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 3, 1972

Washington, June 3, 1972

Lord reported that the Chinese had requested that Kissinger pay an earlier visit to China. Chinese Ambassador to the UN Huang Hua also asked about the Moscow summit, and Lord reminded Huang Hua of Kissinger's upcoming visit to Japan.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Sent for action. Attached but not published at Tab A is the Chinese text. Attached but not published at Tab B is the American version. Attached but not published at Tab C is the Alsop letter to Kissinger.

131. Memorandum From Winston Lord of the National Security Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 5, 1972

Washington, June 5, 1972

Lord provided highlights of his most recent meeting with Chinese Ambassador to the UN Huang Hua. Topics included a Chinese protest note on U.S. intrusion into Chinese airspace and the revised dates of Kissinger's impending visit to China.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A copy was sent to Haig. Attached at Tab A is the Chinese message, which bears the handwritten notation: “Amb H gave to WL 6/5/72.” Attached at Tab B is the American message.

132. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, June 10, 1972, 4-4:45 p.m.

New York, June 10, 1972, 4-4:45 p.m.

Ambassador Ch'en Ch'u, the Deputy Permanent PRC Representative to the UN, complained to NSC staff member Howe about repeated U.S. violations of Chinese airspace by planes returning from bombing sorties against North Vietnam. Howe explained that the U.S. was investigating the allegations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The precise meeting location is not indicated. Drafted by Howe. Attached at Tab A is the Chinese note.

133. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, June 11, 1972, 4:30-5:15 p.m.

New York, June 11, 1972, 4:30-5:15 p.m.

Deputy Permanent PRC Representative to the United Nations Ch'en Ch'u again broached the issue concerning violations of Chinese airspace by U.S. warplanes, noting that bombs had been dropped on Chinese civilian structures and on Chinese merchant ships. Ch'en charged that these sorties “seriously menaced Chinese personnel.” NSC staff member Howe assured Ch'en that the administration took the charges seriously and would investigate.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held in New York. Attached at Tab A is the Chinese note.

134. Memorandum for the Record, Washington, June 11, 1972

Washington, June 11, 1972

President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs Haig explained to Shih Yen-hua of the PRC Mission to the United Nations that both President Nixon and his Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger had instituted procedures to prevent further violations of Chinese airspace.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China, PRC Allegations of Hostile Acts [ca. 6/72]. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. The time of the telephone conversation is not indicated on the memorandum.

135. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, June 12, 1972, 9:50-10:30 p.m.

New York, June 12, 1972, 9:50-10:30 p.m.

NSC staff member Rodman told Shih Yen-hua of the PRC Mission to the United Nations that President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger had informed the Japanese Government that he would be visiting China. The Message acknowledged past accidental incursions into Chinese airspace, promised that new procedures had been instituted to prevent further transgressions, and apologized for the accidental bombing of Chinese territory.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Brackets in the source text. Attached at Tab A is the U.S. response to the Chinese notes on the aircraft incidents; it is published as Document 136. Attached but not published at Tab B is the message outlining details of Kissinger's visit to Peking.

136. Message From the Government of the United States to the Government of the People's Republic of China, undated

undated

The note provided urgent comment on the three notes the Government of the People's Republic of China had submitted to U.S. officials concerning intrusions into Chinese airspace.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. No classification indicated. Attached at Tab A of the June 12 memorandum of conversation.

137. Report Prepared in the Department of Defense, Washington, undated

Washington, undated

The report addressed the allegations raised by the PRC in its June 10 note.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Visit, June 1972 Memcons (Originals). Top Secret; Sensitive. No drafting information appears on the report. A handwritten notation on page three of the report reads: “Mountains would preclude an attack southwest of Ping Hsiang.” For the Chinese note, see Document 133.

138. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Laird to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 16, 1972

Washington, June 16, 1972

Secretary of Defense Laird outlined for the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger the findings of the investigation concerning PRC allegations of airspace intrusion.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 851, President's File-China Trip, Memcons, HAK China Visit 19-23 June 1972 Staff. Top Secret; Sensitive; Codeword. Published from a copy that indicates Laird signed the original.

139. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, June 19, 1972, 10:25-11:20 p.m.

Beijing, June 19, 1972, 10:25-11:20 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger informed Chinese Premier Chou En-lai that the United States would oppose Soviet aggression in the Far East. Kissinger also indicated that the Paris talks had been suspended and that he favored a Sino-Japanese rapprochement.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Visit, June 1972 Memcons (Originals). Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Presumably drafted by Lord. Ellipses and brackets are in the source text. The meeting was held at Guest House #5.

140. Backchannel Message HAKTO 7 From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Beijing, June 19, 1972, 1801Z

Beijing, June 19, 1972, 1801Z

Kissinger described his reception as the “warmest” yet and reported Chinese Premier Chou En-lai's interest in settling the Vietnam war.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China-Dr. Kissinger's June 1972 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A copy was also sent to Rodman. Haig transmitted the message to Nixon under an attached June 19 covering memorandum summarizing Kissinger's points. A notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. An additional notation reads: Haig, Rodman.”

141. Backchannel Message HAKTO 9 From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Beijing, June 20, 1972, 1713Z

Beijing, June 20, 1972, 1713Z

Kissinger noted that he and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai had gathered for four separate meetings on the Soviet Union and Vietnam.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China-Dr. Kissinger's June 1972 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. A copy was also sent to Rodman. Handwritten notations on the memorandum read: “To HAK file” and “Haig, Rodman.” Haig transmitted the message to Nixon under an attached June 20 covering memorandum summarizing Kissinger's meeting. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Nixon saw it. Nixon bracketed the section on McGovern.

142. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, June 21, 1972, 10:05 a.m.-12:30 p.m.

Beijing, June 21, 1972, 10:05 a.m.-12:30 p.m.

Topics discussed included trade mechanisms and increased cooperation between the United States and the People's Republic of China in the areas of medicine and public health-specifically cancer research-scientific and cultural issues, cultural exchanges, and agricultural research

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 87, Country Files, Far East, China, PRC Counterpart Talks, 1971-73. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Richard Solomon. The meeting was held at the Guest House.

143. Backchannel Message HAKTO 12 From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Beijing, June 21, 1972, 1615Z

Beijing, June 21, 1972, 1615Z

Kissinger recounted his 3 ½ hour session with Chinese Premier Chou En-lai. Topics discussed included the Soviet Union and Vietnam. Chou indicated that continuation of the war in Vietnam would not interfere in U.S.-Chinese rapprochement.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China-Dr. Kissinger's June 1972 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A copy was sent to Rodman. Haig transmitted the message to Nixon under an attached June 21 covering memorandum summarizing Kissinger's third meeting with the Chinese. A notation on the memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

144. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, June 22, 1972, 2:38-4:28 p.m.

Beijing, June 22, 1972, 2:38-4:28 p.m.

Topics discussed included the draft agreements on scientific, cultural, and technological matters, people-to-people exchanges, and trade issues.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 87, Country Files, Far East, China, PRC Counterpart Talks, 1971-73. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Solomon. Brackets in the source text. The meeting was held in Government Guest House #3.

145. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, June 22, 1972, 7:10-7:45 p.m.

Beijing, June 22, 1972, 7:10-7:45 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai discussed foreign intervention in China during the late 19th and early 20th centuries and their hopes for continued normalization of relations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Visit, June 1972 Memcons (Originals). Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Brackets in the source text. The meeting was held on a boat on a lake at the Summer Palace. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe.

146. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, June 22-23 1972, 11:03 p.m.-12:55 a.m.

Beijing, June 22-23 1972, 11:03 p.m.-12:55 a.m.

Topics discussed included the Soviet Union, the war in Vietnam, and the presidential campaign.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Visit, June 1972 Memcons (Originals). Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Brackets in the source text. The meeting was held at the Government Guest House #5.

147. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, June 27, 1972

Washington, June 27, 1972

Kissinger provided a summary of his recent discussions with Chinese Premier Chou En-lai, terming them “my most extensive talks ever” with the Chinese leader. Vietnam, the Soviet Union, and various global issues constituted the broad outlines of these discussions.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China-Dr. Kissinger's June 1972 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. On page one President Nixon wrote “Superb job-Covers all the bases with expert Tactics.” On page 4, after Kissinger noted Chou's denial that China had been involved in the recent North Vietnamese offensive, the President wrote: “He may be telling the truth. However it was in his interest to stop the Soviet Summit if possible.” On page 8, regarding Kissinger's declaration that the U.S. would not rule out first use of nuclear weapons, the President noted: “K-The renunciation of use by Soviet & U.S. will send him up the wall.” On page 10, regarding the projected 10-15 percent Mutual and Balanced Force Reductions (MBFR), the President wrote: “a necessary limit.”

148. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, August 4, 1972, 5:15-6:45 p.m.

New York, August 4, 1972, 5:15-6:45 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Ambassador to the UN Huang Hua discussed the recent Soviet nuclear non-aggression proposal, an Algerian proposal for Korean reunification, and the establishment of relations between West Germany and the PRC. Attached are the 12 point negotiating paper and opening statements.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Presumably drafted by Lord. Brackets in the source text. The precise location of the meeting is not indicated.

149. Letter from President Nixon to Chinese Premier Chou En-lai, Washington, June 28, 1972

Washington, June 28, 1972

Nixon thanked Chou En-lai for receiving his Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and promised to continue the work of normalization.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical Files, China, Chron, May-June 1972. No classification marking.

150. Memorandum for the Record, New York, August 30, 1972, 5-5:55 p.m.

New York, August 30, 1972, 5-5:55 p.m.

Deputy Director of the White House Situation Room V. James Fazio presented a U.S. note and report to Shih Yen-hau of the Chinese Mission to the UN. The note referenced the sinking of a PRC lifeboat in the vicinity of Hon Ngu Island, while the report justified the sinking on the grounds that the boat was carrying supplies to North Vietnam.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Drafted by Fazio on August 31.

151. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, August 14, 1972, 3:30-4:10 p.m.

New York, August 14, 1972, 3:30-4:10 p.m.

Chinese Ambassador to the UN Huang Hua reiterated to NSC staff member Howe China's opposition to the Soviet nuclear non-aggression proposal, described a recent visit to China by Gerhard Schroeder of the West German Bundestag, and expressed optimism about a rapprochement between China and Japan. Howe also read the text of a note, outlining U.S. opposition to a Soviet treaty on the non-use of nuclear weapons, informing the Chinese of President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's planned trip to Saigon following a secret meeting with North Vietnamese negotiators in Paris, and noting that Kissinger might consider stopping briefly in Japan on his return trip from Saigon.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The precise location of the meeting is not indicated. Attached at Tab A are the U.S. note and a copy of the Soviet-proposed treaty on the non-use of nuclear weapons.

152. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, August 28, 1972, 5-5:30 p.m.

New York, August 28, 1972, 5-5:30 p.m.

Chinese Ambassador to the UN Huang Hua and NSC staff member Richard T. Kennedy discussed the August 22 sinking of a PRC lifeboat. Kennedy conveyed both written and oral messages to Huang Hua concerning both this incident and the war in Vietnam.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The precise location of the meeting is not indicated. See Document 150 for memoranda describing the bombing incident.

153. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Laird to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 16, 1972

Washington, July 16, 1972

Laird provided information that supported the Joint Chief of Staff's denial that the U.S. had violated China's borders and airspace or dropped bombs on Chinese territory.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Umbra; Handle Via Comint Channels Only. The accompanying three memoranda include a July 12 memorandum from Bruce Palmer to Laird entitled “Alleged Border Violations and Bombings; a July 9 Joint Chiefs of Staff memorandum entitled “PRC Allegations of Border Violations and Bombings by US Aircraft,” which Laird transmitted to Kissinger under a July 11 covering memorandum; and a July 13 memorandum from Daniel J. Murphy to Haig entitled “PRC Merchant Ship Firing Incidents.”

154. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, September 6, 1972, 7:20-7:45 p.m.

New York, September 6, 1972, 7:20-7:45 p.m.

Chinese Ambassador to the UN Huang Hua and NSC staff member Rodman briefly discussed President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's upcoming meeting with Huang. Huang provided Rodman with a message referencing the August 22 sinking of the PRC lifeboat and an additional message with regards to Senator Mansfield's proposed trip to the People's Republic of China.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Tabs A and B are attached. A typed notation on the message at Tab A reads: “Handed to Rodman by Ambassador Huang, 9/6/72.”

155. Note From the Government of the United States to the Government of the People's Republic of China, Washington, undated

Washington, undated

The message, entitled “Prevention of Nuclear War,” specified that any discussion of nuclear weapons must take several factors into account.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. No classification marking. Kissinger furnished the note to Huang during a September 19 meeting, at which Rodman and Shih Yen-hua were also present. The meeting's memorandum of conversation is printed as Document 253, Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII. The texts of additional notes are published as Documents 156, 157 and 158.

156. Note From the Government of the Soviet Union to the Government of the United States, Moscow, September 13, 1972

Moscow, September 13, 1972

The note outlined the Soviet decision to introduce a declaration entitled “On the non-use of force in international relations and on the prohibition for all time of the use of nuclear weapons,” at the 27th session of the UN General Assembly.

National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. No classification marking. A handwritten note indicates that representatives of the Soviet Government delivered the note to U.S. officials on September 13, 1972. Kissinger referenced this message during his September 19 meeting with Huang Hua; see Document 253, Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII.

157. Statement for the North Vietnamese and Ten Point Negotiating Paper, Washington, undated

Washington, undated

The statement asked the North Vietnamese to join the United States in finding a “middle ground” that would end the war. The paper pledged a withdrawal of all U.S. military personnel from South Vietnam, provided that Saigon retained the right to self-determination.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. No classification marking. Kissinger furnished these texts to Huang Hua at their September 19 meeting; see Document 253, Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII.

158. Draft Resolution on the Unification of Korea Prepared by the Government of the People's Republic of China, Beijing, undated

Beijing, undated

The PRC called for a withdrawal of all troops from South Korea and rejected any foreign intervention in Korea.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. No classification marking. Huang Hua presented the draft resolution to Kissinger at their September 19 meeting; see Document 253, Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII.

159. Memorandum for the Record, New York, September 25, 1972, 7-7:20 p.m.

New York, September 25, 1972, 7-7:20 p.m.

Deputy Director of the White House Situation Room Fazio and Shih Yen-hua of the Chinese Mission to the UN briefly discussed Secretary of State Rogers' speech to the UN General Assembly. Shih Yen-hua provided Fazio with a note expressing Chinese views on the Soviet non-use of force proposal.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Drafted by Fazio on September 25.

160. Telegram 3725/SECTO 65 From the United States Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State, New York, October 6, 1972, 2222Z

New York, October 6, 1972, 2222Z

Secretary of State Rogers, Ambassador to the United Nations Bush, and Chinese Vice Minister of Foreign Minister Ch'iao Kuan-hua discussed the continued thawing of relations between the United States and China.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL CHICOM-US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Homer. The meeting was held at Ch'iao's apartment in New York on October 5.

161. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 12, 1972, 3:45-4:05 p.m.

New York, October 12, 1972, 3:45-4:05 p.m.

Deputy Director of the White House Situation Room Fazio indicated that he and Shih Yen-hua of the Chinese Mission to the UN discussed President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's return. Shih Yen-hua provided Fazio with a message that indicated Chinese support for another Kissinger visit and expressed the Chinese hope that the United States and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam would reach an agreement on the settlement of the Vietnam war.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Fazio on October 13. Attached is the Chinese message, upon which is written: “Handed to Fazio by Mrs. Shih 10/12/72.”

162. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 8, 1972, 1:45-2:15 p.m.

New York, October 8, 1972, 1:45-2:15 p.m.

Deputy Director of the White House Situation Room Fazio and Shih Yen-hua of the Chinese Mission to the UN discussed recent demonstrations at the Chinese Mission against Chinese-Japanese rapprochement.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Fazio on October 9. A notation on the memorandum reads: “China exchange.”

163. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 25, 1972, 4:30-4:55 p.m.

New York, October 25, 1972, 4:30-4:55 p.m.

Deputy Director of the White House Situation Room Fazio and Shih Yen-hua of the Chinese Mission to the UN exchanged notes concerning the war in Vietnam and a dinner engagement between U.S. and Chinese officials.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Fazio on October 26. For the text of the note Shih Yen-hua handed to Fazio, see Document 259, Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII. Attached are three U.S. messages, two of which bear the handwritten notation: “Handed to Mrs. Shih by J. Fazio, 10/25/72, NYC.” The last message bears the handwritten notation: “Read to Mrs. Shih by J. Fazio, 10/25/72, NYC.”

164. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 27, 1972, 8:40-9 p.m.

New York, October 27, 1972, 8:40-9 p.m.

Shih Yen-hua of the Chinese Mission to the UN informed Deputy Director of the White House Situation Room Fazio that Vice Foreign Minister Ch'iao Kuan-hua and Chinese Ambassador to the UN Huang Hua had accepted President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's dinner invitation. Fazio provided the text of a U.S. message responding to an October 26 message from the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN.

165. Message from the Government of the United States to the Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, New York, undated

New York, undated

The United States pledged to end the war “as rapidly as possible and on a basis just to all.”

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. No classification marking. Kissinger handed the message to Huang Hua in New York on October 24. A handwritten note on the message reads “10/24/72.”

166. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, November 13, 1972, 7:30-10 p.m.

New York, November 13, 1972, 7:30-10 p.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and Chinese Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Ch'iao Kuan-hua discussed the prospects of a settlement in Vietnam, the Sino-Soviet border question, their mutual concern about a “nationalistic” Japan, and the continuation of good relations between the U.S. and China.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Presumably drafted by either Holdridge or Lord. Ellipses and brackets in the source text. The meeting was held at the Century Club. Also in attendance on the U.S. side were Governor Nelson Rockefeller (R-New York) and Haig.

167. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 31, 1972, 3:30-3:55 p.m.

New York, October 31, 1972, 3:30-3:55 p.m.

Shih Yen-hua of the Chinese Mission to the UN informed Deputy Director of the White House Situation Room Fazio that Vice Foreign Minister Ch'iao Kuan-hua and Chinese Ambassador to the UN Huang Hua would not be able to accept President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's dinner invitation.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN.

168. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 16, 1972, 2:30-3:10 p.m.

New York, October 16, 1972, 2:30-3:10 p.m.

Deputy Director of the White House Situation Room Fazio and Shih Yen-hua of the Chinese Mission to the UN discussed general matters. Fazio furnished Shih Yen-hua with a message concerning the question of restricting military supplies to North and South Vietnam by outside powers.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. A handwritten notation on the attached message reads: “Handed to Mrs. Shih by J. Fazio, Oct 16, 1972, NYC.”

169. Memorandum of Conversation, Paris, November 25, 1972, 12:35-1:30 a.m.

Paris, November 25, 1972, 12:35-1:30 a.m.

President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger linked the normalization of relations with North Vietnam to the normalization of relations between the U.S. and China. He also asked PRC Ambassador to France Huang Chen to convince Hanoi to withdraw its troops from South Vietnam.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the PRC Embassy in Paris.

170. Backchannel Message From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to William Hood, Washington, December 18, 1972, 2240Z

Washington, December 18, 1972, 2240Z

Kissinger instructed Hood to inform the Chinese that the United States “remains prepared to sign an agreement on Vietnam which would meet the aspirations of the world's peoples.” The Message transmitted the text of a note to the North Vietnamese.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive.

171. Backchannel Message From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig) to William Hood, Washington, December 22, 1972

Washington, December 22, 1972

Haig transmitted a copy of a message entitled “Message Delivered to North Vietnamese, December 22, 1972,” and provided additional text.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The time of transmission is not indicated on the backchannel message.

172. Memorandum for the Record, December 22, 1972, New York, 3:45-4:15 p.m.

New York, December 22, 1972, 3:45-4:15 p.m.

Deputy Director of the White House Situation Room Fazio handed Shih Yen-hua a set of transcripts of President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger's meeting with the North Vietnamese negotiators on December 13.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. Attached are a December 29 memorandum for the record by David Y. McManis, Director of the NSC Situation Room, recounting his meetings with Shih Yen-hua and a message from the Government of the United States to the Government of the People's Republic of China indicating that U.S. representatives in Paris would deliver a message to representatives of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. A handwritten notation on McManis' memorandum reads: “NOTE: USSR also received Dec. 11, 1972 & transcript on 12/23/72.” A handwritten notation on the message for the Chinese reads: “Delivered to NYC by McManis, 11:00 p.m. 12/28/72.”

173. Message From the Government of the United States to the Representatives of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, December 29, 1972

December 29, 1972

The message indicated that the United States accepted proposals for the resumption of talks on January 2, 1973, and for a meeting attended by North Vietnamese Special Adviser Le Duc Tho and Minister Xuan Thuy with President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger on January 8, 1973, in Paris. Additionally, the message reiterated the U.S. gesture to cease the bombing of North Vietnam north of the 20th parallel by 7 p.m., Washington time, on December 29, 1972.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. No classification markings.

174. Backchannel Message From William Hood to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Washington, December 29, 1972, 1711Z

Washington, December 29, 1972, 1711Z

Hood relayed an official Chinese protest that a U.S. missile had been fired into China.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Hood indicated that the message had been picked up at “1130 Hours, 29 December 1972.”

175. Backchannel Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to William Hood, December 30, 1972, 0420Z

December 30, 1972, 0420Z

Haig instructed Hood to inform the Chinese that the U.S. regretted the missile incident.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only via Swinger. Haig dated the message December 29, although the message was not transmitted to Hood until December 30. It was received in the White House Situation Room at 10:01 a.m. on December 30.

1. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, December 19, 1969 1. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, December 19, 19691

Washington, December 19, 1969

MEMORANDUM
OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Agha Hilaly, Ambassador of Pakistan

Henry A. Kissinger

Harold H. Saunders

DATE AND PLACE: Friday, December 19, 1969, in Dr. Kissinger's Office

Ambassador Hilaly began by recalling his last call on Dr. Kissinger with the Pakistani Minister of Information and National Affairs, Sher Ali, on October 10. He recalled that, at that time, Dr. Kissinger had indicated that the Pakistanis might inform the Communist Chinese informally of U.S. intentions to pull out two destroyers from the Taiwan Straits.

Ambassador Hilaly explained the passage of time before that message was conveyed. Sher Ali did not leave the U.S. for Pakistan until October 25th. President Yahya did not return to Pakistan from his State visit to Iran until November 5th.

Shortly after November 5, President Yahya called in the Chinese Communist ambassador in Rawalpindi and explained his feeling that the U.S. is interested in normalizing relations with Communist China and as a gesture was withdrawing two destroyers from the Taiwan Straits. President Yahya based what he said on his conversation with President Nixon on August 1.

In a letter of November 28 to Ambassador Hilaly, Minister Sher Ali reported that the ambassador's immediate reaction had been that the U.S. always “double-talked.” The ambassador cited China's shooting down of a U.S. intelligence plane. President Yahya asked the ambassador to convey President Yahya's views to Chou En-lai.

Ambassador Hilaly then said that on December 13 he had received another letter from Minister Sher Ali reporting the Chinese ambassador's reply after hearing from Peking. The Minister's letter reported that reply in these words: “They appreciate our [the Pakistani] role and efforts. As a result, they [the Chinese] had let off the two Americans the other day.” Dr. Kissinger surmised that the two Americans referred to were two yachtsmen who had been recently released.

Ambassador Hilaly asked whether there is anything further of a substantive nature that could be discussed between President Yahya and Chou En-lai. Pakistan does not have a firm date yet for Chou's visit. The Chinese had been trying to persuade President Yahya to visit China first, but President Yahya has told them it is their turn to visit Pakistan. Ambassador Hilaly surmised that there might be some issue for China in the fact that this would be Chou's first foreign trip following the cultural revolution and it might have to be related to other visits.

Ambassador Hilaly suggested that perhaps the prompt Chinese response in resuming the Warsaw talks had resulted from the message the Pakistanis had passed to them.

In response to Ambassador Hilaly's question, Dr. Kissinger said that we could now do the following: 1. When a date for Chou En-lai's visit to Pakistan is settled, he would give to Ambassador Hilaly something that the Pakistanis could say to the Chinese.

2. The Pakistanis could tell the Chinese now that the U.S. appreciates this communication and that we are serious in our desire to have conversations with them. If they want to have these conversations in a more secure manner than Warsaw or in channels that are less widely disseminated within the bureaucracy, the President would be prepared to do this.

Ambassador Hilaly noted that President Yahya might pass these thoughts to the Chinese so that when Chou En-lai comes to Pakistan he can have thought about this suggestion. When he asked whether Dr. Kissinger, in referring to other channels, intended to continue using the Pakistani channel, Dr. Kissinger said we have no problem doing this through Pakistan but would be open to any other suggestions the Chinese might have.

Ambassador Hilaly noted the possibility that should it be desirable for this channel to be active at a high level sooner than Chou En-lai's visit to Pakistan, President Yahya is probably now in a position to send Sher Ali himself to Peking. Delegations are going back and forth now in the normal course of events.

Ambassador Hilaly and Dr. Kissinger agreed that they would keep the channel between them active.

A brief exchange of views on the Warsaw talks followed. Ambassador Hilaly said he assumed they were in the nature of a preliminary exchange of views, and Dr. Kissinger said that this was consistent with our impression.

Ambassador Hilaly turned to the subject of the forthcoming U.S. decision on military supply policy. He said that he had been working for three years with members of the Congress urging them to understand Pakistan's difficulties. Now the House Foreign Affairs Committee has submitted a report which favors the resumption of military sales to South Asia. He thought the State Department favored resumption of some sort of arms sales and therefore he assumed that the question was up to the White House. He noted that President Yahya would be going in the early spring to the Soviet Union and then perhaps to China on visits and hoped that Pakistan would have a decision on U.S. arms supply policy before then. He also noted the important political steps that President Yahya has taken recently and said that the U.S. military supply decision would be important support for him.

Dr. Kissinger interjected that we are not in the business of changing Pakistan's domestic structure, but he acknowledged the fact that a U.S. decision might be helpful. He explained that the decision should be made in the near future. The White House has not been holding up this decision, but must hold a meeting on it, probably in January. Dr. Kissinger noted that he could not say what the answer would be, and Ambassador Hilaly said that it was important to have an answer, whatever it might be, although he assumed that there were good chances it would be favorable.

Harold H. Saunders

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1031, Files for the President-China Material, Exchanges Leading up to HAK Trip to China, December 1969-July 1971. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Saunders. All brackets in the source text. The conversation was held in Kissinger's office at the White House. There is no indication as of the time of the meeting.

2. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, December 23, 1969 2. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, December 23, 19691

Washington, December 23, 1969

MEMORANDUM
OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Agha Hilaly, Ambassador of Pakistan

Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President

Harold H. Saunders, NSC Staff

DATE AND PLACE: Tuesday, December 23, in Dr. Kissinger's Office

Dr. Kissinger opened the conversation by handing Ambassador Hilaly the original of a letter from President Nixon to President Yahya (Tab A). He noted that the President wanted to stay in communication with the Pakistani President and had asked Dr. Kissinger to deliver this on his behalf.

Dr. Kissinger said that the President had greatly appreciated the message that Ambassador Hilaly had given him on December 19. When the date of Chou En-lai's visit to Pakistan is set, he will have more to say.

Ambassador Hilaly said that very shortly after his return to the office following the December 19 talk with Dr. Kissinger, he had received a letter from President Yahya dated December 14. In that handwritten letter, President Yahya had asked that the two following sentences be conveyed to President Nixon: 1. “It is our assessment that the Chinese appear willing for resumption of talks at Warsaw at the Ambassador level without insisting on preconditions.”

2. “Quite apart from the public renunciation of the recent agreement between the US and Japan, the Chinese are greatly concerned over it and see in it a revival of Japanese militarism which will threaten not only China but the whole of Southeast Asia.”

Ambassador Hilaly said he was not sure exactly how these points came to President Yahya. The letter from Minister Sher Ali Khan to Ambassador Hilaly which the Ambassador had reported to Dr. Kissinger last week had been written on December 13. This letter from President Yahya had been written the following day. It appeared, Ambassador Hilaly said, that he had felt that these two points needed to be added to the communication from Sher Ali Khan.

Dr. Kissinger said that we appreciate this communication very much.

Ambassador Hilaly said that the U. S. would have a chance to judge the significance of this report when it determined whether the message conformed to what the Chinese had said at Warsaw.

Ambassador Hilaly then presented the brief letter from President Yahya (Tab B) thanking President Nixon for “his timely action” in helping meet Pakistan's food needs.

Dr. Kissinger accepted this and said that he also had in mind the question about U.S. military supply policy which the Ambassador had raised the previous day.

Harold H. Saunders

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1031, Files for the President-China Material, Exchanges Leading up to HAK Trip to China, December 1969-July 1971. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Saunders. The conversation was held in Kissinger's office. There is no indication as to the time of the meeting. Tab A is a letter from President Nixon to Pakistani President Yayha reiterating Nixon's desire to stay in communication with Yayha. Tab B is a second letter from Yayha thanking Nixon for helping to meet Pakistan's food needs. Both are attached but not published.

3. Airgram A-25 From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of State, January 24, 1970 3. Airgram A-25 From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of State, January 24, 19701

January 24, 1970

TO:

Department of State

FROM:Amembassy WARSAW

SUBJECT:

Stoessel-Lei Talks: Report of 135th Meeting, January 20, 1970

AIRGRAM

Department of State

Warsaw A-25

DATE: January 24, 1970

The American side was met at the front door of the PRC Embassy by staff members and led to the second floor where the Chargé, Lei Yang, and his staff were waiting. Both sides introduced themselves and there were handshakes all around.

Participants on both sides were:

United States

Ambassador Walter J. Stoessel, Jr.

Paul H. Kreisberg - Advisor

Donald M. Anderson - Interpreter

Thomas W. Simons, Jr. - Scribe

People's Republic of China

Chargé d'Affaires Lei Yang

Li Chu-ching - Advisor

Ch'ien Yung-nien - Interpreter

Yeh Wei-lan - Scribe

The group then proceeded to a large conference room. Enroute to the conference room, interpreter Ch'ien explained to Anderson that the two sides would be seated as if at a meeting, and that the press would be permitted to enter and make photographs. After the photo session, he explained, the group would move to a smaller room where the actual meeting would be conducted. It was agreed that, following past practice, it was the U.S. turn to speak first and that the Chinese side would propose the date for the next meeting. It was also agreed that we would continue the practice of having an informal meeting on the day following the formal meeting to discuss any technical problems which might arise during the meeting.

After moving to the smaller conference room, Lei Yang asked to say a few words before I began my opening statement.

Lei said:

Shall we start, Mr. Ambassador? (I nodded assent.) Mr. Ambassador, according to the agreement reached by our two sides, the 135th meeting of the Sino-US ambassadorial talks takes place today at the Chinese Embassy. In my capacity as chief of the Chinese mission, I welcome Mr. Ambassador to the Chinese Embassy. Since the Sino-US ambassadorial talks are being continued at your request, I would like to listen to your statement first at this meeting.

I said:

I wish to thank the Chargé d'Affaires for his words of welcome. Mr. Chargé d'Affaires, today marks the first opportunity for both of us to represent our respective governments in a formal meeting. In our informal conversations December 11 and January 8, however, I described to you the general spirit with which President NIXON has instructed me to approach this meeting today. I observed that the United States wished to improve relations between our two countries, that it did not seek to stand in isolation from China or to join in any condominium with the Soviet Union directed against China. Specifically, we do not support the Brezhnev doctrine.

It is my Government's hope that today will mark a new beginning in our relationship. It is our hope that together we can take a fresh and constructive look at the whole range of possibilities for the improvement of relations between our two countries. We hope to explore what practical steps we can take to eliminate many of the barriers to those understandings from which our two countries could mutually benefit. We do not deny that there are serious differences between our two Governments. But we believe that we should make every effort possible to overcome these and that it should be possible to make progress in this effort.

The United States intends to honor its commitments but the United States has no intention of attempting, either unilaterally or in concert with others, to exclude the People's Republic of China from developing normal, friendly relations with its Asian neighbors and pursuing its own legitimate national interests in this area. It is in this sense that I believe that whatever constructive contribution your Government can make toward reaching a just and equitable peace in the area and in easing the legitimate concerns of other Asian governments would contribute toward more rapid achievement of the goal of a reduction of military tension in the area and a reduced American military presence in Southeast Asia, which we recognize is near the southern borders of China.

We are prepared to discuss with you any proposals designed to improve relations and reduce tensions between our two countries. These might include agreements on trade, renunciation of the use of force, and matters related to disarmament. Other subjects for discussion might be the exchange of reporters, scholars, scientists, medical personnel and scientific information. As recently as November 25, 1968, your proposal for resumption of these meetings referred to the desirability of concluding an agreement on the five principles of peaceful coexistence. There may be other topics your Government would like to propose. Those I have mentioned are all specific areas in which we feel that early and meaningful progress can be achieved. Perhaps even more important, however, is achievement through our frank discussions at these meetings of understanding between our two governments on our objectives in Asia, their limits, and our mutual acceptance of the fact that improvement in our relations serves the interests of both our countries. It is my Government's sincere belief that substantive political dialogue can and should be a significant contribution toward this goal.

Since coming to office in January 1969, President Nixon has taken several actions that give concrete expression to our hope that barriers to normal intercourse between our two peoples can gradually be lowered. On July 21 of last year my Government eased its regulations on travel to the People's Republic of China and amended its long standing trade restraints. On December 19 a further and more significant amendment of our trade controls was announced. We are now prepared, should you be interested, to discuss the whole question of trade between our two countries and the settlement of outstanding debts and obligations.

Mr. Chargé d'Affaires. Without doubt the single most complex problem existing between our two sides is the question of Taiwan and the United States relationship with the Republic of China. The United States will continue to maintain its friendly relations with the Government in Taipei and honor its commitment to that Government to assist it in defending Taiwan and the Pescadores from military attack. However, the United States position in this regard is without prejudice to any future peaceful settlement between your Government and the Government in Taipei. Our only concern is that this issue not be resolved by force of arms. In this same spirit we will also not support and in fact will oppose any offensive military action from Taiwan against the mainland. The limited United States military presence on Taiwan is not a threat to the security of your Government, and it is our hope that as peace and stability in Asia grow, we can reduce these facilities on Taiwan that we now have.

Mr. Chargé d'Affaires. The problem of controlling weapons of mass destruction is a vital question for peoples of every country. The talks on disarmament started last year between the United States and the Soviet Union are not designed to perpetuate the nuclear monopoly of the United States and the Soviet Union or to threaten any other country. I made it abundantly clear in my statement to you of January 8, and the United States has stated as clearly as possible publicly, that it does not intend to interfere in the disputes of others or seek to gain advantage from them. We think disarmament is a matter of vital concern to the welfare of both our peoples and would welcome an expression of interest on the part of your Government in commencing bilateral discussions between our two governments on the subject.

My Government and the people of the United States welcomed the release December 7 of Bessie Hope Donald and Simeon Baldwin who inadvertently entered Chinese-claimed territorial waters while sailing from Hong Kong to Macau. There remains, however, the longstanding question of the remaining Americans being held in prison by your authorities. Anyone familiar with American people of all political views will agree that the question of United States citizens imprisoned or missing in China is one of great concern to them. Forward movement on this issue, through the release of those now held or, at minimum, through identification of those held and permission for visits by family members, would be a constructive move toward improved relations between our two countries.

Mr. Chargé d'Affaires. If as these talks progress it would seem to be useful and your Government would so desire, my Government would be prepared to consider sending a representative to Peking for direct discussions with your officials or receiving a representative from your Government in Washington for more thorough exploration of any of the subjects I have mentioned in my remarks today or other matters on which we might agree.

In any event, in closing, Mr. Chargé d'Affaires, I would like to restate once again my Government's hope that regular contacts between us can take place at frequent intervals and that these talks will enable us to move toward a new phase in Sino-American relations based on mutual respect.

This concludes my statement.

Lei said:

Mr. Ambassador, in dealing with the question of relations between countries having different social systems, the Government of the People's Republic of China, following the principles of diplomatic policy personally set forth by Chairman Mao Tse Tung, has consistently stood for peaceful coexistence based on the principles of mutual respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in the internal affairs of others, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. In pursuing these principles the Chinese Government has in the past twenty years established and developed normal friendly relations with many countries. These principles initiated by our Government have won active support and warm praise from all countries and peoples of the world who genuinely cherish peace. Only by strictly adhering to the five principles can peaceful coexistence be realized. If one country forcibly occupies the territory of another country, encroaches on its sovereignty, and interferes in the internal affairs of that country, how can one speak of peaceful coexistence? The People's Republic of China never will commit aggression or interfere in other countries, but on no account can it tolerate interference and aggression against China by other countries, wherever the interference and aggression may come from.

In your statement read out at our meeting on the 8th, Mr. Ambassador expressed the wish of the U.S. Government to widen the dialogue and contacts between us but failed to mention a single word about Taiwan. We must point out that there have long existed serious disputes between China and the U.S. and that the crux of these lies in the question of Taiwan. This question is a political one, having direct bearing on the five principles of peaceful coexistence. It is not a question of ideology. Taiwan is an inalienable part of China's territory; it is a province of the People's Republic of China. Both the Cairo Declaration and the Potsdam Declaration, to which the U.S. Government affixed its signature, explained that Taiwan and the Pescadores Islands should be returned to China. Even as late as January 5, 1950, the then U.S. President and Secretary of State still issued solemn statements recognizing that Taiwan is China's territory. Shortly afterward, in June 1950, the U.S. Government, using the Korean War as a pretext, dispatched the Seventh Fleet to Taiwan and the Taiwan Straits area, and has since been occupying the area by force of arms. An armistice in the Korean War was brought about as early as 1953. But not only has the U.S. Government failed to pull out its forces from Taiwan and the Taiwan Straits area, what is more, it signed in December 1954 the so-called Treaty of Joint Defense with the Chiang Kai Shek clique, which has long been repudiated by the Chinese people, in an attempt to legalize by this treaty this occupation of Taiwan. Thereafter the U.S. Government has all along used Taiwan as a base for continuing to pose war threats against the Chinese people and to use it for maneuvers to carry out “two China” or “one China-one Taiwan” activities in an attempt to separate Taiwan from China. Recently the U.S. Government still talked a great deal about pledging to honor its so-called treaty commitments to the Chiang Kai Shek clique and announced it would give the Chiang clique a batch of military planes. All of this constitutes interference and aggression against China. The Chinese people will assuredly liberate Taiwan; this is a question of China's internal affairs. The Chinese people absolutely will not allow any country to occupy Chinese territory and to interfere in its internal affairs. With regard to this question of important political principles, the position of the Chinese Government is firm and unswerving. All fond hopes that China will change its position are doomed to fail.

Mr. Ambassador, the talks between China and the U.S. have gone on for over ten years. In the course of these talks, the U. S. Government has invariably advanced an evasive attitude toward the questions of fundamental principles between the two countries and has confined itself to side issues, thus preventing the talks achieving results on fundamental issues between the two countries. Now that the U.S. Government wishes to increase the dialogue with our country and improve Sino-US relations, presumably the question of how to deal with the fundamental principles of the relations of our two countries is already under your consideration. The Chinese Government has always stood for the peaceful settlement of disputes between China and the U.S. through negotiations; it has done so in the past and is prepared to do likewise in the future. We would welcome studies and explorations on the fundamental question of how to settle relations between the two countries. We are willing to consider and discuss whatever ideas and suggestions the U.S. Government might put forward in accordance with the five principles of peaceful coexistence, therefore really helping to reduce tensions between China and the U.S. and fundamentally improve relations between China and the U.S. These talks may either continue to be conducted at the ambassadorial level or may be conducted at a higher level or through other channels acceptable to both sides. I have carefully listened to the statement the Ambassador just made. We will study it and set forth our views at the next meeting.

I said:

Mr. Chargé d'Affaires, I listened carefully and with interest to the views expressed by you in your statement. I noted in particular the position expressed by you concerning the problem of Taiwan. As I said in my statement today, the position of the U.S. on this subject is without prejudice to any future peaceful settlement between your Government and the Government in Taipei. Our only concern is that this issue not be resolved by force of arms, and I note from your statement that you also believe this issue should be settled peacefully. For this reason, I feel that we are in agreement that this problem should be resolved peacefully, and I believe that through such an approach we can make progress in solving our bilateral problems and improving our relations.

At this point, in my view, it would be advisable to report to our Governments what has been said today and to consider the subjects which might be taken up at our next meeting. Of course, we will be prepared to hear anything else today which the Chargé would wish to raise. If there is nothing more from your side, we would have nothing more and would be interested in suggestions from the Chargé as to when we would meet again.

Lei said:

Mr. Ambassador, I would only like to add a few points. With regard to Mr. Ambassador's proposal regarding sending a representative either to Peking or to Washington, I will transmit the proposal to my Government. As I already pointed out, the position of my Government on the question of Taiwan is very clear and known to everybody. The so-called treaty concluded by the U.S. and the Chiang Kai Shek clique is not recognized by the whole Chinese people. And I must point out that Taiwan is not a state; it is part of the People's Republic of China. Mr. Ambassador must be aware that there is only one China: this is the People's Republic of China. If Mr. Ambassador has nothing more to say, may I make a proposal for the date of our next meeting?

I said:

I have heard with attention what you have said. I understand your views concerning Taiwan, and I hope that you have understood the point of view that I have presented in my statement. I will report to my Government everything you have said today, including what you mentioned regarding meetings at a higher level. I believe the Chargé also mentioned that the meetings might be in another channel, and I would like to inquire what might be involved. Any explanation from the Chargé would be useful.

Lei said:

Concerning the question of the Chinese territory of Taiwan, which Mr. Ambassador has mentioned, I have already explained in clear terms the position of my Government. Therefore I would not like to repeat them. Mr. Ambassador also mentioned the question of talks at a higher level or through other channels. If the U. S. Government is interested in talks at a higher level or through other channels, you may put forward your draft proposal, or a draft proposal may be worked out through consultation of the two sides at these ambassadorial talks. If Mr. Ambassador has nothing more to say, may I make a proposal for the date of the next meeting? I propose that the date of the next meeting be decided on later through consultation via the liaison personnel of our two sides. Mr. Ch'ien will be liaison officer of our side.

I said:

I accept, and I look forward to meeting again at an early date. Our liaison man will be Mr. Simons.

Lei said:

Well, shall we conclude our meeting today?

I said:

We always have the question of the press. (Lei and Ch'ien chuckled when they heard the statement in interpretation.) There are many press people today outside your Embassy. I would plan to say when they question me that “Chinese Chargé d'Affaires Lei Yang and I met for one hour today and discussed a number of matters of mutual interest. By mutual agreement, however, our discussions and the topics we covered are held in confidence. No specific date was set for the next meeting but it is agreed that we would be in touch at an early date to consider this question further. The meeting was conducted in a businesslike atmosphere. (Ch'ien clarified the word “business-like” to Lei during interpretation.) We are pleased that these talks have been renewed today and I believe today's meeting was useful.” This is all I would say to the press.

Lei said:

Mr. Ambassador, on the question of releasing news to the press, we can act on past practice, each side releases its own news to the press.

I said:

Agreed.

Lei said:

That's all.

I said:

I thank the Chargé for his hospitality.

STOESSEL

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL CHICOM-US. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by Paul H. Kreisberg and Donald M. Anderson on January 20; cleared by Thomas W. Simons; and approved by Stoessel. The meeting was held at the PRC Embassy in Warsaw.

4. Airgram A-84 From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of State, February 21, 1970 4. Airgram A-84 From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of State, February 21, 19701

February 21, 1970

TO:

Department of State

FROM:Amembassy WARSAW

SUBJECT:

Stoessel-Lei Talks: Report of 136th Meeting, February 20, 1970

AIRGRAM

Department of State

Warsaw A-84

DATE: February 21, 1970

The American side met the Chinese side in the lobby of the American Embassy. The two principals shook hands and, after the two sides had stood briefly to allow press photography, proceeded together by elevator to the Embassy fourth floor and to the conference room.

Participants on both sides were:

United States

Ambassador Walter J. Stoessel, Jr.

Paul H. Kreisberg - Advisor

Donald M. Anderson - Interprete

Thomas W. Simons, Jr. - Scribe

People's Republic of China

Chargé d'Affaires Lei Yang

Li Chu-ching - Advisor

Ch'ien Yung-nien - Interpreter

Yeh Wei-lan - Scribe

Enroute to the conference room, Anderson told Ch'ien that I would like to invite the Chargé to have a cup of tea in my office following the formal meeting. Ch'ien passed the word to Lei Yang as they were taking off their coats, but he did not respond to the question.

I opened the meeting.

I said: Mr. Chargé, I am pleased to welcome you today to the American Embassy and would be very glad to hear any statement you wish to make.

Lei said: First of all I would like to thank Mr. Ambassador for your words of welcome.

Mr. Ambassador. At the 135th meeting, you formally stated that the United States Government wishes to improve Sino-US relations and to relax the tensions between the two countries. You also said that every effort possible should be made to overcome the serious difficulties existing between the two countries and that you looked forward to progress in this respect. The Chinese Government expresses its welcome to these indications from the United States Government. The Chinese Government has all along stood for conducting relations with countries of different social systems in accordance with the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and for settlement of disputes between China and the United States through peaceful negotiation. As far back as 1955 we openly declared that the Chinese people are friendly to the American people. The Chinese people do not want to have a war with the United States of America. The Chinese Government is willing to sit down and enter into negotiations with the United States of America to discuss the question of relaxing tensions in the Far East, and especially to discuss relaxing tensions in the Taiwan area. This is what we have done consistently in the past fifteen years, and we are prepared to continue to do so in the future. The United States should be aware of this position of the Chinese Government.

We noted that in Mr. Ambassador's statement of January 20, you did not evade the crucial question in Sino-US relations. You referred to the question of concluding an agreement on the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and dwelt upon the Taiwan question in some detail, admitting that this is the single most complicated problem in the relations between the two countries.

But at the same time you listed a series of other questions which you considered could be discussed, among which were not only questions concerning relations between the two countries but some international questions, and among the questions concerning relations between the two countries some were side issues. In this way, primary and secondary are confused and essential and non-essential are reversed. Thus the crucial question in the relations between the two countries is blurred.

We have consistently held that the question of fundamental principle in the relations between the two countries should first of all be solved and that is the Taiwan question, which is related to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. Only when this question is solved can fundamental improvement be brought about in Sino-US relations and the settlement of other questions be promoted. We are fully aware that the settlement of the Taiwan question requires making every effort to create the conditions.

The Sino-US ambassadorial talks which had been suspended for two years have now been resumed. In your statement at the first meeting, you expressed the hope that this would mark a new beginning. We also wish the same. However, we cannot but point out with regret that on the crucial Taiwan question there has still not been much change in your basic position. While indicating your wish to improve relations with the People's Republic of China, you declared that you intended to maintain “friendly” relations with the Chiang Kai Shek clique long overthrown by the Chinese people. While expressing willingness to discuss with us the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, you declared your intention to honor the so-called “commitment” to the Chiang Kai Shek clique. Is this not self-contradictory? Although in your statement at the previous meeting you said that you considered the Government of the People's Republic of China has the right to settle the Taiwan question as its own internal affair, you still do not give up the position of creating “two Chinas” or “one China, one Taiwan”, and you are very clear that this is what the entire Chinese people absolutely will not accept.

In order to resolve this important contradiction “more thorough exploration is indeed necessary”, as said by Mr. Ambassador at the first meeting. There are certain difficulties in undertaking this task in the ambassadorial talks between the two countries. It appears that our two sides have both foreseen this situation. At the first meeting both came forward separately with the same view, that talks at a higher level might be held, and you went even further putting forward the idea of sending a representative to Peking or to Washington for discussion. If the U. S. Government wishes to send a representative of ministerial rank or a special envoy of the United States President to Peking for further exploration of questions of fundamental principle between China and the United States, the Chinese Government will be willing to receive him.

Mr. Ambassador. I would like to emphasize once again the importance of settling the crucial question between China and the United States. Once a way to settle this question is found, the way will be paved for the settlement of other questions. As for the side issues in relations between the two countries, they are not difficult to solve. For instance, with regard to questions of U.S. criminals in China which you mentioned in your statement at the last meeting, customary practice can be followed; packets and letters can be transmitted, and visits by family members can be arranged through the Red Cross societies of the two countries, and this can still be done in the future.

That's all I have to say.

I said: Mr. Chargé d'Affaires, the views of your Government, which you expressed at our meeting on January 20, have been given careful consideration at the highest level of my Government. I have listened with great interest to your remarks here today. I feel, as I suggested at our last meeting, that in spirit the views of our two governments on a number of issues may be closer now than they have been since these talks first began in 1955. I sincerely hope this is the case.

At our meeting on January 20 and again today, Mr. Chargé d'Affaires, you have emphasized the importance to your Government of the question of Taiwan and the necessity for some progress toward the resolution of this issue as part of any general improvement of Sino-US relations. The question of Taiwan is, without doubt, a major obstacle to better relations between our two governments, and we hope that as these meetings progress we will be able to arrive at some meeting of minds on this subject. My Government feels, however, that in our discussions we can and should move forward simultaneously, not only on the question of Taiwan, but also on the whole range of bilateral issues between our two countries. Progress on some such issues can be expected to contribute toward further progress on others. We have a problem of atmosphere, of building of confidence. This is essential to the easing of tensions and in turn, will contribute to a more rapid resolution of the more fundamental problems between us.

Mr. Chargé d'Affaires, let me state as clearly and as frankly as possible our position on the question of Taiwan. It is my Government's position that the question of the relationship between Taiwan and the mainland of China is one to be resolved by those directly involved. While we will continue to adhere to the principle that the resolution of this question should be by peaceful means, without resort to the threat or use of force, we do not intend to interfere in any peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question which might be reached between the People's Republic of China and the government in Taipei. Our relationships with the Republic of China are consistent with that position. The limited United States military presence in this area is not designed to influence the political settlement of this problem nor is it a threat to the security of the People's Republic of China. Furthermore, it is my Government's intention to reduce those military facilities which we now have on Taiwan as tensions in the area diminish. I believe my Government's position on this question is consistent with the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, and my Government is willing, should you agree, to discuss with you a joint declaration incorporating the principles which I have discussed and affirming our two governments adherence to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence.

Mr. Chargé d'Affaires; at our meeting on January 20 you stated that your Government is willing to consider and discuss whatever ideas and suggestions my Government might put forward in accordance with the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, therefore really helping to reduce tensions between China and the United States.

I will not review again today all the proposals which I mentioned in my statement of January 20 on which my Government feels that meaningful progress can be made. I would, however, like to mention one or two specific matters relating to the question of greater contacts between our two peoples. As you know, my Government has progressively eased its regulations on travel to the People's Republic of China which were imposed in 1950. On March 15 of this year these regulations must again either be renewed or abolished. We are seriously considering their non-renewal in the hope that this will contribute to freer contact between the people of our two countries.

Similarly, my Government has amended its regulations governing trade with the People's Republic of China, permitting at least the beginning of an exchange of goods between our two peoples. The United States believes that further amendment of our controls on trade should be possible in the near future. An expression of interest on your part in improving and developing contacts in such areas would be noted with great interest by my Government and the American people.

Mr. Chargé d'Affaires, as you know, in December of 1950 my Government and the Government of the People's Republic of China both took action to block the financial assets of the other country's citizens. The effect of these actions has been to prevent the development of trade and the settlement of obligations legitimately owed to the other side. Your Government in the past has expressed interest in resolving these questions. I am prepared, should you be interested, to discuss arrangements for the expansion of trade in general and for the settlement of all debts between our two countries, including the unblocking of those financial assets now controlled by both sides.

Mr. Chargé d'Affaires, at our meeting on January 20 I indicated the importance with which the American people view the question of United States citizens who are either missing or held prisoner in China. I want to emphasize again that progress on this issue would be taken as a welcome sign that our two countries have moved away from the old hostilities of the past and have moved toward a new and more constructive relationship. For example, in those cases where an American has nearly completed his prison sentence, it would be a small but significant step if your Government could arrange to commute the short period which still remains and enable him to return to the United States. The families of Americans who are missing in the area of China inquire regularly about the fate of these men. Simple confirmation of whether they are alive or dead would be greatly appreciated.

In conclusion, Mr. Chargé d'Affaires, I would like to express my Government's pleasure that this series of ambassadorial-level meetings has been resumed and that we have met again after only one month. As I indicated in our previous meeting, the United States is prepared to consider with you the possibility of sending a representative to your country or receiving your representative in the United States, should progress at these talks indicate that this would be useful in improving relations between our two countries. I have noted your specific statement today, about receiving a representative in Peking, and I will transmit it to my Government. As you know, it is my Government's view that these exchanges can make a valuable contribution toward the gradual resolution of the problems between our two countries. I believe we have made a useful start, and I hope that we will be able to make further progress based on a spirit of mutual understanding.

Lei said: Mr. Ambassador. I have listened to your statement carefully. On the question of Taiwan, I have clearly set forth the position and attitude of our Government in my statement made at our first meeting as well as in my statement today. I will therefore not repeat them again. As regards your statement today, I will report this to my Government. I am not prepared to make any comment on such concrete questions as trade, exchange of personnel, exchanges of visits by personnel of our two countries, that you have mentioned today. That's all.

I said: Mr. Chargé. I noted that you referred in your statement to the question of letters, packages, and visits by family members to prisoners in China. This of course is welcomed as a continuation of your policies of the past. However, unfortunately this does not carry us any further beyond the present situation.

Mr. Chargé d'Affaires, in my statement today I mentioned the question of prisoners who have nearly completed their sentences and those Americans missing in the area of China. I would like to mention specifically two persons as examples of the type of cases we have in mind. Robert Fecteau, who was captured by your authorities in 1951, has nearly completed the twenty years to which he was sentenced, and the wife of Lt. Joseph Dunn, whose plane was, shot down near Hainan Island, frequently asks about his fate. I hope that your Government will give sympathetic consideration to the view I have set forward on those cases, as well as to the more general problem posed by other Americans either imprisoned or missing in China.

Mr. Chargé, on another question, I would like to ask a question for clarification. You mentioned higher-level meetings. Is it your understanding and preference that a higher-level meeting would replace our ambassadorial-level meetings, or would you envisage that we would continue our ambassadorial-level meetings in preparation for any higher-level meeting in the future?

That's all.

Lei said: I am not prepared to make any further comments today on the question of American prisoners in China. But I will report what Mr. Ambassador has said today on this question to my Government.

As regards the question of meetings at a higher level, which Mr. Ambassador has referred to in your statement, I have already indicated our position very clearly in my statement today (sic), but I will be interested in listening to any ideas Mr. Ambassador has on this question.

If on this question, that is, meetings at a higher level, if Mr. Ambassador has any ideas or any suggestions, I'll be ready to report them to my Government.

I said: On the question of higher-level meetings, we naturally would like to provide the U. S. Government with as clear an idea as possible of what you have in mind. For example, one question which might arise concerning such a meeting is whether such a visit would be given publicity or would be maintained in confidence. Any other indications from your Government as to your views would be appreciated. However, if you are not able to add today to what you have said on this subject, I will report to my Government what you have stated.

Lei said: Well, Mr. Ambassador, I have nothing more to say today.

I said: Mr. Chargé, would you like me to make a suggestion with regard to our next meeting.

Lei said: Yes, please.

I said: I would suggest that we handle the question the same way as last time, that is that our liaison officers are to be in touch with regard to our next meeting, which would be at your Embassy.

Lei said: I agree to Mr. Ambassador's suggestion regarding the date for our next meeting, that is, that the date would be discussed and decided on later by our liaison personnel. Since this time our side proposed the date, it would be your turn to propose the date for the next meeting.

I said: We agree.

Mr. Chargé, again with regard to the press, I suggest that we handle the press the same way as last time.

Lei said: Yes. I agree.

I said: Mr. Chargé, I think we are finished with official business for today, and would like to invite you for tea in my office next door.

(Lei began to answer before the interpretation. Ch'ien reminded him of the need to await the interpretation. Anderson asked Lei whether he had understood everything. He replied—laughing with some embarrassment—that he had but nonetheless invited Anderson to interpret.)

Lei said: I thank you for your invitation, but since I already have appointments, that question of having a cup of tea can be settled through our liaison personnel. We can find some other time. I will let you know. Thank you for the concrete arrangements for this meeting and for your hospitality. Goodbye.

(On departing, Lei made a brief statement, interpreted into English by Ch'ien, to the press in the lobby. It noted that the 136th ambassadorial-level meeting had taken place here today and that the two sides would be in touch concerning the date of the next meeting.)

STOESSEL

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL CHICOM-US. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by Kreisberg and Anderson on February 20; cleared by Simons and approved by Stoessel. The meeting was held at the U.S. Embassy in Warsaw.

5. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon, Washington, May 5, 1971 5. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon, Washington, May 5, 19711

Washington, May 5, 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR:

THE PRESIDENT

FROM: ALEXANDER M. HAIG

SUBJECT:

China

Pakistani Ambassador Hilaly visited today, in Henry's absence, and asked that the following information be passed to you: “The message which Dr. Kissinger gave him on April 28 was transmitted directly to President Yahya that same evening. President Yahya has cabled Hilaly confirming that Yahya personally conveyed the message to the Ambassador of Communist China on Saturday morning, May 1. It most probably reached Chou-En-lai the same day or the following day.”

Hilaly stated he wanted this message conveyed because of the criticism from Peking against your Administration, reported in this morning's press. He stated that in his view, while Peking had received your message of April 28th, they were already reacting to two things: — The State Department spokesman's statement that the two Chinas could negotiate their problems with each other, and

— Secretary Rogers' statement in London.

Ambassador Hilaly said that he had sent a telegram to President Yahya Friday morning after the press conference, saying that your statement of Thursday evening appeared to be an effort to correct the damage done by Secretary Rogers. Ambassador Hilaly recommended that Yahya pass on this interpretion to the Chinese Ambassador. Hilaly also confirmed that a message had been conveyed to the Chinese to the effect that your hands would be tied if other American politicians are brought into the matter of U.S.-Peking relations. Therefore, it would be best if the Chinese Government would not discuss the matter with any other American politician until a solid government-to-government channel has been established. This does not mean that there is any objection from here to the continuation of the people-to-people program and we would welcome invitations to other kinds of American visitors - students, reporters, scholars, etc.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1031, Files for the President-China Material, Exchanges Leading up to HAK Trip to China, December 1969-July 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Nixon saw it. A handwritten notation reads: “Special File in HAK's Office.”

6. Memorandum of Conversation, Palm Springs, California, May 7, 1971, 2:50-5:45 p.m. 6. Memorandum of Conversation, Palm Springs, California, May 7, 1971, 2:50-5:45 p.m.1

Palm Springs, California, May 7, 1971, 2:50-5:45 p.m.

Participants:

Joseph S. Farland, U.S. Ambassador to Pakistan

Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

David R. Halperin (notetaker)

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

Date: Friday, May 7, 1971—2:50 - 5:45 p.m.

Place: 1836 Aquanetta Circle, Palm Springs, California (Home of Mr. Theodore Cummings)

After an exchange of pleasantries, Ambassador Farland stated that the State Department had accepted his cover story without question. Mr. Kissinger expressed appreciation for the cables sent by Ambassador Farland, and for his loyalty over the past weeks.

Mr. Kissinger then stated that McNamara was preparing to submit a devastating report concluding that it would take $250 million to give Pakistan breathing room; he then asked Ambassador Farland whether it is, in fact, possible to provide breathing room, and whether $250 million is a realistic estimate of the support required. Ambassador Farland replied that although he thought it would be possible, there are some real problems to contend with: — Ambassador Keating seems to have gone berserk; he has violated security and appears determined to break Pakistan. For example, he recently called in a New York Times reporter and, although he did not release the text, he did tell him the essence of Blood's report. Ambassador Farland is convinced that Keating is determined to make a political issue out of the Pakistani situation, and is attempting to discredit the Administation in the process.

— Another problem is the quality of political reporting in Dacca. The reporters there are missionaries without significant practical experience. They have never before seen war and are grossly exaggerating the amount of killing and bloodshed there. Moving to the primary item of business, Mr. Kissinger explained to Ambassador Farland that for some time, we have been passing messages to the Chinese through the Pakistanis. Because of the communications problem, it had not been possible to inform Ambassador Farland of this previously, and messages have been conveyed directly to Yahya by the President, or through Ambassador Hilaly. Mr. Kissinger then outlined the exchange of messages that has occurred to date:

— The channel was established in August, 1969. At that time, while visiting Pakistan, the President indicated to President Yahya (and Mr. Kissinger told the former Air Force Chief of Staff) that the United States desired to normalize relations with China.

— President Yahya then called in the Chinese Ambassador who thanked him for his interest and indicated that China would be interested in hearing something positive.

— Mr. Kissinger then told Hilaly that we would remove two destroyers from the Taiwan Straits as a gesture of good will. (In point of fact, this had already been decided for budgetary reasons.)

— The Chinese responded by releasing two American yachtsmen.

— Two days or a week later, the Chinese told Yahya that they were willing to resume talks in Warsaw. They also expressed concern about the Japanese.

— In a subsequent message delivered by Yahya, it was said that a war between China and the U.S. is seen now as a very remote possibility.

— For a while, the Rumanian channel was used; then, when Yahya came to the U.S. in October, the President suggested to him that the Chinese could begin talking to us in secure channels.—On December 9, 1970, the Chinese replied as follows (Dr. Kissinger stressed that this must be treated with the greatest sensitivity): “This (meaning the reply) is not from me alone but from Chairman Mao and Vice Chairman Lin Piao as well. China has always been willing and has always tried to negotiate by peaceful means. A special envoy of President Nixon's will be most welcome in Peking. We have had messages from the United States from different sources in the past, but this is the first time that the proposal has come from a Head, through a Head, to a Head.”

— We replied in early January: “In the light of the remarks of Premier Chou En-Lai to President Yahya, as well as the continuing United States interest in U.S. -China discussions at a higher level, the United States Government believes it would be useful to begin discussions with a view of bringing about a higher level meeting in Peking. The meeting in Peking would not be limited to the Taiwan question but would encompass other steps designed to improve relations and reduce tensions. The United States therefore proposed that representatives of the two Governments meet at an early convenient moment in a location convenient to both sides to discuss the modalities of the higher-level meeting. These modalities would include the size of the delegations, the duration of the meeting, the agenda and a clear understanding on the status and amenities which the U.S. delegation would enjoy while in the People's Republic of China.” Orally, we suggested that the preliminary meeting be in Pakistan.

— Last week, we received from Ambassador Hilaly a message probably written by the Chinese: “The Chinese Government reaffirms its willingness to receive publicly in Peking a Special Envoy of the President of the U.S. (for instance, Mr. Kissinger) or the U.S. Secretary of State or even the President of the U.S. himself for a direct meeting and discussions. Of course, if the U.S. President considers that the time is not yet ripe, the matter may be deferred to a later date. As for the modalities, procedure and other details of the high-level meeting and discussions in Peking, as they are of no substantive significance, it is believed that it is entirely possible for proper arrangements to be made through the good offices of President Yahya Khan.”

Mr. Kissinger stressed that these developments could be of great diplomatic significance, both with respect to Vietnam and the Soviet Union. Because (outside of the President), Mr. Kissinger is the only person who can talk to the Chinese understanding all of the inter-related aspects of the negotiations, it is desired that Mr. Kissinger be the first contact—the subsequent one to be with the President himself.

— Mr. Kissinger stated that we intend to reply that the U.S. is prepared to talk on all outstanding issues and cannot confine the meeting to one topic. Each side will be free to raise whatever issues are of concern to them. The President is prepared to go to Peking, but there should be a preliminary secret meeting between Mr. Kissinger and Cho En-Lai at which time Mr. Kissinger will be empowered to select a time and the general circumstances of a Presidential visit—possibly next year.

Mr. Kissinger then indicated to Ambassador Farland that the President will not go to Peking unless Vietnam is concluded. Mr. Kissinger will propose to meet with Chou En-Lai or his representative either in Pakistan or a location in Southern China which is easily accessible from Pakistan.

TECHNICAL DETAILS OF MEETING

Mr. Kissinger and Ambassador Farland proceeded to discuss a number of technical details related to the meeting between Mr. Kissinger and the Chinese.

Mr. Kissinger stated that Ambassador Farland would receive a copy of everything given to Yahya. [text not declassified]Mr. Kissinger asked Ambassador Farland if he thought Hilaly would permit our messages to be ready by the foreign office. Ambassador Farland thought there was no danger of this since, in his view, Hilaly does not trust either his staff or the foreign office.

Mr. Kissinger next raised the question of whether our next message should be delivered to Yahya through Hilaly or through Ambassador Farland.

Mr. Kissinger asked Ambassador Farland whether it would be possible to get to Pakistan without attracting attention. The Ambassador felt that a visit by Mr. Kissinger could be easily explained in terms of the East-West crisis.

Mr. Kissinger next questioned whether it would be better to meet in Pakistan where the Pakistanis would tape the meeting—or in China where the Chinese would do the taping. Ambassador Farland felt the latter would be preferable, and Mr. Kissinger agreed.

Mr. Kissinger outlined a proposed itinerary in which he would go to Vietnam on an inspection trip, stop in Bangkok, New Delhi, Islamibad on Friday, have Ambassador Farland take him off for the weekend—and then go to Southern China for roughly 24 hours. Mr. Kissinger stated he would then go on to Tehran on Monday. He will probably travel in one of the large Presidential aircraft—possibly Air Force 2.

Mr. Kissinger asked if there were an American Press Corps in Rawalpindi; Ambassador Farland said there was one fellow named Zeiber.

Mr. Kissinger suggested that he could say he was going to the Khyber Pass or to the hill station, and Ambassador Farland could cover for him. Ambassador Farland stated that Yahya has a summer house which could be used; it would be best if President Yahya invited Mr. Kissinger there for the weekend. Ambassador Farland stated that the Chinese have an airfield just the other side of the mountains which could be used for the meeting.

COMMUNICATIONS

Mr. Kissinger stated there were several possible channels which he could use in communicating with Ambassador Farland: — [text not declassified]

— [text not declassified]

— Navy Channel ending in Karachi (a commercial plane would have to be used to get the message up to Rawalpindi, however).

— Ambassador Farland could be shown how to use one-time pads (however, encryption and decryption each take about four hours).

[text not declassified] The Ambassador felt the Navy channel would probably be best; in his own office only his (non-State Department) secretary would handle the messages. Ambassador Farland felt it would be best to have the special Navy communicator in Karachi where the Attache is stationed. Mr. Kissinger stated that [text not declassified] he would have the Navy Channel set up by next week (Monday, if possible), after Admiral Moorer clears the Attache (named Dros).

TRANSPORTATION ARRANGEMENTS

Mr. Kissinger stated that he presently thought he would leave Rawalpindi Saturday morning and return Sunday evening—with a stay in China of about 24 hours to permit three separate sessions.

Ambassador Farland pointed out that he would be expected to have a large reception for Mr. Kissinger who agreed that everything required by protocol must be done to avoid arousing suspicion.

Mr. Kissinger raised the question of whether the country director at State should be permitted to send a representative along on the trip—which would pose real problems in Pakistan. Ambassador Farland suggested that the Vietnam country director be permitted to send his representative on that portion of the trip only.

PAKISTAN'S ECONOMIC SITUATION

Mr. Kissinger stated that he would talk to McNamara on Monday, May 10, and tell him that Yahya must be kept afloat for six more months; one problem will be that McNamara is emotionally against Yahya—as is the entire liberal community. Ambassador Farland pointed out that matters won't be helped by the fact that Keating is now on his way back to conduct a series of conferences, including some with his old Senate confreres. Mr. Kissinger stated that he would tell McNamara that this is the only channel we have, and he must give Yahya at least three months. Ambassador Farland stated that six months should be the goal.

Ambassador Farland stated that he had urged Yahya to tell his staff to make a new presentation to the consortium. Ahmad is coming to the United States next week, and Ambassador Farland has stressed this to him. The Ambassador stated that one inherent problem is that the lower echelon in the Pakistani bureaucracy feels they have a commitment from China to support operations in East Pakistan. Although Japan is negative in their position, Ambassador Farland felt that Germany will not let Pakistan go down the drain and the British will probably help as well. Mr. Kissinger asked whether the $250 million will be applied entirely to debt re-scheduling—and whether Yahya could propose a plan applicable to West Pakistan. Ambassador Farland thought some of the $250 million would be a new loan, and that a consortium proposal would be geared to East Pakistan with the West receiving/administering the funds.

Mr. Kissinger next asked what he could do bureaucratically to help. Ambassador Farland said that the most important contribution would be to get McNamara to head up the consortium. Mr. Kissinger replied that he did not think McNamara would agree to this because it would antagonize his liberal friends. Ambassador Farland then pointed out that the IMF was another possibility that should not be overlooked. Assali had previously requested a standby loan from the IMF which was turned down; however, the loan request could be reactivated. Mr. Kissinger indicated that he would take this issue up with Peterson or Shultz, and that he would report on his meeting with McNamara through the Navy channel. [text not declassified]

POLITICAL SITUATION

Mr. Kissinger asked how it was that the election results were so unexpected. Ambassador Farland said that everyone has missed in their predictions. In East Pakistan, Rahman had been able to capitalize on the cyclone. When the western nations began to pour in assistance, the Benghalis realized for the first time that they were part of the world. In the West, everyone had thought the landowners could continue to retain substantial support.

* * * *

Ambassador Farland voiced some mild complaints about living in Pakistan and expressed the hope that if the China meeting came off successfully, a new post could be offered. Mr. Kissinger replied noncommittally that if this gets done, “we will owe you a great debt of gratitude.”

Mr. Kissinger asked if there is any way West Pakistan can hold on to East Pakistan. Ambassador Farland said no, not in the long run. Mr. Kissinger then said that all we need is six months. East Benghal is bound to become an economic disaster; Chinese influence will grow there, and, it will not be possible to win any permanent friends there. Ambassador Farland agreed and pointed out the difficulty of making a financial commitment to the Benghalis.

Ambassador Farland asked if Mr. Kissinger could have Hanna pass the word down through regular channels that we are going to work things out and support the government. Mr. Kissinger said he would insure this gets done. Ambassador Farland then said that our interest in trying to save Pakistan be conveyed to the heads of government in Britain, Germany—and possibly also Japan. Mr. Kissinger replied that he might be going to Britain on other business and would speak to Heath about this. Ambassador Farland pointed out that at this point, the other members of the consortium do not know our position.

SUMMARY

Mr. Kissinger indicated, by way of summary, that he would: (1) Have Hanna told that we want a positive attitude and six months time;

(2) Talk to McNamara along the lines above;

(3) Look into the IMF Loan;

(4) Personally talk to Heath;

(5) Have Rush talk to Brandt in two weeks time—or, in any event, before the end of the month; and

(6) Possibly get the State Department to get to Japan if there is a convenient way to do this.

Mr. Kissinger then asked Ambassador Farland to check back with him if at any point he received instructions from the Department which were intolerable.

DELIVERY OF U.S. MESSAGE

With regard to the means of delivering the message to Yahya, Ambassador Farland felt that he should give it to Yahya (rather than Hilaly) since he could use this to build up credence with Yahya. Ambassador Farland also suggested that this could be used as a lever to get some things done which he has been pressing for in East Pakistan. Mr. Kissinger pointed out that the two were separate, and must be kept that way. Mr. Kissinger stated that in any event the message would be shown to Hilaly and Ambassador Farland would get a copy to discuss with Yahya. All technical coordination will be done through Ambassador Farland—who should discuss with Yahya Mr. Kissinger's around-the-world trip, his intention to stop in Pakistan for the weekend and then go on (presumably) to Tehran after leaving Pakistan. A one-day official program in Pakistan would probably have to be planned. Ambassador Farland should discuss with Yahya the fact that he met with Mr. Kissinger and also discuss the technical arrangements of the visit.

Ambassador Farland asked that the Navy attache contact him as soon as the channel is open, and Mr. Kissinger assured him this would be done—probably by Monday.

Scenario for China Visit

A number of details were then discussed without any definite decisions being made: — Whether to fly to China using a Pakistani, Chinese or U.S. aircraft.

— Whether to employ a second U.S. plane (possibly a Jetstar) for the flight into China in order to leave the larger aircraft parked conspicuously at Rawalpindi.

— Whether or not Ambassador Farland should accompany Mr. Kissinger into China.

— Whether to fly into China from Rawalpindi or Sargoda.

Ambassador Farland pointed out that Mr. Kissinger would be least likely to be observed in Sargoda, a military base 45 minutes south of Rawalpindi. Mr. Kissinger might initially land there on the pretext of visiting the surrounding countryside. After his large plane had left for Rawalpindi to refuel, he could transfer to a smaller plane which would take his party to China and return him to Rawalpindi the following day. The problem with this plan would be that Mr. Kissinger could not normally visit a defense installation like Sargoda without arousing suspicion.

The final determination with regard to technical details was left in the hands of Ambassador Farland who indicated he would submit several well-developed alternatives to Mr. Kissinger for review.

After a few parting remarks, the meeting was concluded at 5:45 p.m.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1031, Files for the President-China Material, Exchanges Leading up to HAK Trip to China, December 1969-July 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. Drafted by David R. Halperin. The conversation was held in Palm Springs, California, at the home of Mr. Theodore Cummings. For more information about the Blood report, see Foreign Relations, 1969-1972, volume XI, South Asia Crisis, 1971.

7. Backchannel Message TOSIT 26 From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), July 11, 1971, 1330Z 7. Backchannel Message TOSIT 26 From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), July 11, 1971, 1330Z1

July 11, 1971, 1330Z

FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER

TO:

GENERAL HAIG, WHITE HOUSE

July 11, 13:30 Z

TO SIT: 26

1. Conversations were the most intense, important, and far reaching of my White House experience.

Principal host spent 17 hours with us, his associates another four, the latter mostly devoted to communique drafting.

2. Other side first suggested meeting next summer, then fell back to Spring, finally settled on formulation of “before May 1972” which they interpret as from December onward. It is obvious they are planning a big welcome. All technical issues, including size of press corps and prior political visits, settled as President wished. Agreed time for joint announcement which I am bringing back with me is 2230 July 15, D.C. time. They were insistent on mentioning site and cast of weekend meeting.

3. Talks on other subjects including one of particular concern very encouraging but too sensitive for cable. Will write report on plane.

4. Please inform President that I strongly urge no further dissemination even to guest until I return. Just say I thought matter too sensitive for cable.

5. Please keep everyone steady. Other side made special point about need to keep word meticulously. They will not understand even a minor leak and will consider it deliberate affront and proof of unreliability. Please keep P.R. types ignorant. A leak or even a hint is almost certain to blow everything. I cannot be too strong on this.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1031, Files for the President-China Material, Exchanges Leading up to HAK Trip to China, December 1969-July 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only.

8. Backchannel Message SITTO 88/WH 12696 From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), July 11, 1971, 1920Z 8. Backchannel Message SITTO 88/WH 12696 From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), July 11, 1971, 1920Z1

July 11, 1971, 1920Z

TO

HENRY A. KISSINGER IN AIRCRAFT

FROMGENERAL HAIG

REFERENCE

TOSIT 26

00 AFBAH

DE WTE 1796 19211926

1971 JUL 11 2112

O 111920Z JUL 71

FM GENERAL HAIG

TO

HENRY A. KISSINGER

ZEM

JULY 11, 1971

SIT TO 88

1. LEADER HAS ASKED THAT I CONVEY FOLLOWING MESSAGE TO YOU: “YOU REPORTED CONVERSATIONS WERE THE MOST INTENSIVE, IMPORTANT AND FAR-REACHING OF YOUR WHITE HOUSE EXPERIENCE. IF WE PLAY THE GAME UP TO THE HILT FROM NOW ON OUT, HISTORY WILL RECORD YOUR VISIT THE MOST SIGNIFICANT FOREIGN POLICY ACHIEVEMENT OF THIS CENTURY. WHEN YOU RETURN, I PLAN TO GIVE YOU A DAY OFF IN COMPENSATION FOR YOUR SUPERB SERVICE TO THE NATION—FAR BEYOND THE CALL OF DUTY. PLEASE EXTEND MY APPRECIATION TO THE DEDICATED MEMBERS OF YOUR STAFF WHOSE SUPERB EFFORTS HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO THIS ACHIEVEMENT.”

2. LEADER HAS ASKED THAT YOU PREPARE HIGHLY SANITIZED VERSION OF YOUR DISCUSSIONS WHICH CAN BE GIVEN TO HIS GUEST AFTER YOU ARRIVE. LEADER WANTS YOU TO KNOW, THAT GUEST IS VERY ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT THE ENTERPRISE AND HAS BEEN STRONGLY ADMONISHED THAT HE CAN SHARE KNOWLEDGE OF FACT OF ENTERPRISE WITH NO ONE LEADER INDICATES THAT HE IS THINKING OF HAVING GUEST MEET YOU AT EL TORO TUESDAY A.M. AND ACCOMPANY YOU DIRECTLY TO A MEETING WITH LEADER RECOGNIZING THAT HOUR WILL BE EARLY HERE. AT THIS MEETING YOUR SANITIZED REPORT WOULD BE GIVEN. YOU WOULD THEN MEET WITH LEADER PRIVATELY FOR DETAILED EXCHANGE.

3. LEADER WANTS YOU TO KNOW THAT NO ONE WITH THE EXCEPTION OF HALDEMAN, HIS GUEST, AND HIMSELF ARE AWARE OF THE EVENT AND HE INTENDS TO KEEP IT THAT WAY UNTIL THE VERY LAST MINUTE. WITH THE EXCEPTION OF THE “MESSENGER”, LEADER BELIEVES IT WOULD BE WELL TO HAVE GUEST INFORM CERTAIN ALLIED GOVERNMENTS AT VERY LAST MINUTE BEFORE PRESENTATION OF COMMUNIQUE. LEADER BELIEVES IT ESSENTIAL THAT HE PERSONALLY DELIVER COMMUNIQUE ON TV WITH SOME ADDITIONAL COMMENT. I HAVE WARNED HIM THAT THERE MAY BE SOME ARRANGEMENT WITH YOUR HOST WHICH WOULD RESTRICT PRESENTATION ONLY TO COMMUNIQUE.

4. AS A RELATED MATTER LEADER NOW BELIEVES IT ESSENTIAL THAT THE ADMINISTRATION MAKE A STRONG STATEMENT ON SOUTH VIETNAM, LAOS AND CAMBODIA AND THE NEED FOR NOT ABANDONING ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES UNDERLYING U.S. INTERESTS MERELY IN RETURN FOR RELIEF OF POW'S. HE BELIEVES IT WOuLD BE ADVISABLE TO HAVE HIS GUEST IN THE FOREFRONT AND HAS TOLD HIM TO BE PREPARED TO MAKE A TOUGH SPEECH ALONG THESE AT BAR ASSOCIATION MEETING IN LONDON ON JULY 19. I EMPHASIZED TO LEADER THAT IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT THE SPEECH BE CLEARED WITH YOU IN LIGHT OF YOUR DISCUSSIONS WITH HOST AND HE AGREES COMPLETELY.

5. LEADER ALSO WISHES TO CALL YOU ON OPEN TELEPHONE LINE AT AMBASSADOR'S RESIDENCE JUST PRIOR TO YOUR LUNCHEON AND BEFORE YOUR AFTERNOON SESSION. RECOGNIZING THAT DISCUSSION WITH YOU MAY BE TAPPED BY HOST GOVERNENT, HE WILL SPEAK IN STRONG TERMS ABOUT NEED TO CUT OFF TALKS BARRING NO PROGRESS AND HINT AT OTHER SOLUTIONS IF THE OTHER SIDE DOES NOT NEGOTIATE SERIOUSLY. WE PLAN TO PLACE THE CALL AT 12 NOON PARIS TIME (4 A.M. SAN CLEMENTE TIME JULY 12). PLEASE ADVISE IF THIS TIME DOES NOT APPEAR APPROPRIATE.

6. THANKS FOR TOSIT 59. WE WILL CONVEY INSTRUCTIONS TO SMITH BOTH IN STATE AND BACKCHANNEL.

7. I WILL BE AT EL TORO ON TUESDAY AM; HOWEVER, YOU MAY WISH TO CALL ME FROM PARIS OR HAVE WIN DO SO TO BE SURE THAT I HAVE YOUR THINKING ON ESSENTIAL ISSUES AND THUS BE BETTER ABLE TO CONTROL FLOW OF EVENTS HERE.

8. LEADER IS EXTREMELY ENTHUSIASTIC AND GRATEFUL FOR YOUR OBVIOUS ACCOMPLISHMENT. EMPHASIS ON SECURITY WILL LIMIT IDEA MONGERING TO LEADER AND HIS CHIEF OF STAFF SINCE HIS GUEST IS AT LAKE TAHOE AND WILL NOT RETURN UNTIL LATE SUNDAY. LEADER HAS ASSURED ME HE WILL NOT SHARE ANY FURTHER DETAILS WITH GUEST. HE ALSO RECOMMENDS YOU NOT SEND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ON SUBJECT BY ANY ELECTRONIC MEANS BUT HOLD ON FURTHER REPORTING UNTIL YOU ARRIVE HERE. BEST REGARDS.

650

1796

1 Source: Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 432, Backchannel Files, Backchannel Messages, Very Sensitive Trip Cables-Not Held by Sit Room. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only.

9. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, July 14, 1971 9. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, July 14, 19711

Washington, July 14, 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR:

THE PRESIDENT

FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER

SUBJECT:

My Talks with Chou En-lai

July 14, 1971

Introduction

My two-day visit to Peking resulted in the most searching, sweeping and significant discussions I have ever had in government. I spent seventeen hours in meetings and informal conversation with Chou En-lai, flanked by Marshal Yeh Chien-ying, member of the Politburo and of the Military Commission; Huang Hua, the new Chinese Ambassador in Ottawa; and Chang Wen-chin, head of the West European and American Department in the Foreign Ministry. Another four hours was spent with Huang and Chang, mostly on drafting a communique. These meetings brought about a summit meeting between you and Mao Tse-Tung, covered all major issues between our two countries at considerable length and with great candor, and may well have marked a major new departure in international relations.

It is extremely difficult to capture in a memorandum the essence of this experience. Simply giving you a straightforward account of the highlights of our talks, potentially momentous as they were, would do violence to an event so shaped by the atmosphere and the ebb and flow of our encounter, or to the Chinese behavior, so dependent on nuances and style. Thus, this memorandum will sketch the overall sequence of events and philosophic framework, as well as the substance of our exchanges. For the intangibles are crucial and we must understand them if we are to take advantage of the opportunities we now have, deal effectively with these tough, idealistic, fanatical, single-minded and remarkable people, and thus transform the very framework of global relationships.

What Happened

The Chinese treated the entire visit with elaborate correctness and courtesy. They were extremely tough on substance and ideological in their approach, but their dealings were meticulous; they concentrated on essentials; they eschewed invective and haggling over details. The atmosphere on the human plane was relaxed and cordial, matter-of-factly; (one did not have the sense that they were carrying out instructions to be cordial as is often the case with Dobrynin.)

Thus Chinese hospitality started in Pakistan as we boarded the Pakistani plane in pre-dawn obscurity to be greeted by four senior Chinese officials, headed by Chang, flown up from Peking two days earlier along with three Chinese navigators (they had insisted on boarding the plane half an hour before us). And it continued right through to our return flight to Islamabad two days later with all the Chinese officials (except Chou) at the airport and the plane loaded with one last round of Chinese dishes, the latest English version of Mao's works, and photo albums of our visit prepared throughout the night.

We were met at noon at the Peking airport by the very senior Marshal Yeh who, like Chang aboard the plane, sought to confirm that you were in principle prepared to visit their, country and that I was there for constructive talks between equals. Both were worried about why I had come secretly (Yahya had told me the same thing). Was I ashamed to acknowledge meeting them? Here, and in Chou's specific references on several occasions, the Chinese showed extreme sensitivity to slights such as Dulles' refusal to shake Chou's hand in Geneva in 1954.

We were whisked in Chinese-built limousines, curtains drawn, through wide, clean streets, with little traffic except bicyles. We passed through the huge Tiennmen Square, capable of holding 500,000 people, to a stately, serene, totally secluded government guest house in the Western section of the capital. After drinking tea with our Chinese hosts, we rested, consumed the first of a series of Chinese meals of staggering variety and quantity, and prepared for Chou's arrival.

He came at 4:30 p.m. At our first encounter like the entire visit, he was matter of fact, urbane, and totally at ease without any of the self-conscious sense of hierarchy of Soviet officials. After a few minutes of ice-breaking small talk and an official photograph, we moved to a conference table and launched into three hours and twenty minutes of discussions.

I gave the substance of the opening statement you had approved, considerably truncated to get to the point quickly, laying out a possible agenda which we in fact took up point-by-point in our meetings—the summit, Taiwan, Indochina, relations with major countries such as Japan and the Soviet Union, South Asia, future American-Chinese communications, arms control, and any other topics of interest to the Chinese. He immediately moved to their fundamental concern, Taiwan, and I rejoined with our position on Indochina.

We broke at 8:00 p.m. for dinner, continuing a low-keyed substantive discussion. Indochina came up again as we finished off the last few of the fifteen or so dishes.

Our resumed session from 9:50 to 11:20 p.m. was dominated by the subject of great power relations in general. Chou spoke of the Chinese fear of a remilitarized Japan, and violently and contemptuously attacked Soviet imperialism which he claimed had learned its lessons from the U. S. I explained the philosophical framework of U.S. foreign policy in the postwar period culminating in the Nixon Doctrine. Chou listened raptly, asking very probing but non-contentious questions, some based on the President's remarks in Kansas City of July 6. (It was characteristic of Chou that when I indicated that I had seen only press reports, I found Chou's own annotated copy of the text waiting for me at breakfast with a request to return it since it was the only copy he had.)

On Saturday morning, July 10, we were taken to the Forbidden City, where the entire, enormous Imperial Palace grounds had been closed off from the public for a half day so that we could take a secret tour. For two and a half hours we absorbed the magnificently simple and proportionate sweeps of the red and gold buildings, the courtyards each with its own character, and the living quarters of past emperors. The Director of all of China's archeological museums guided us past ancient relics of China that had been unearthed in recent years.

We then proceeded to the Great Hall of the People where we were greeted by Chou for another four and a half hours of discussions sandwiched around a one and a half hour roast duck lunch.

Before lunch Chou made a one and a half hour presentation, as always without notes, responding to each of the seven points on my original agenda. This was an extremely tough presentation, though put forward without rhetorical flourish—the preoccupation with Taiwan; the support for the North Vietnamese; the spectre of big power collusion, specifically of being carved up by the U.S., USSR, and Japan; the contempt of the Indians, hatred for the Russians and apprehension over the Japanese; the disclaimer that China is, or would want to be, a superpower like the Russians and we who have “stretched out our hands too far”; and throughout, the constant view that the world must move toward peace, that there is too “much turmoil under the heavens.” There were light touches as well, such as Chou's revelation that James Reston was taking a slow train from the border which would conveniently get him to Peking right after our departure. Still, Chou ended with a challenge—whether there was any sense in a high-level meeting given our vast differences.

I responded very toughly, pointing out that they had raised the issue of a Presidential visit and that we could not accept any conditions. I would not raise the issue again; they had to decide whether to issue an invitation. I then launched into a deliberately brusque point-by-point rebuttal of Chou's presentation. Chou stopped me after the first point, saying the duck would get cold if we did not eat first.

At lunch the mood changed and Chou's geniality returned. I gathered the impression that his speech had been largely for the record.

At the end of lunch Chou launched into a moving account of the Cultural Revolution which he continued to relate even after I noted that this was China's internal affair. One could tell that the Revolution was an anguishing period for him. He described China as torn between its fear of bureaucracy and the excesses of revolution, with each side claiming to speak for Mao until the acknowledged excesses threatened to destroy the fruits of some fifty years of struggle.

After lunch I continued my comments on his remarks, having covered Taiwan and Japan before the break. On Indochina, as on Taiwan, I noted the need for time for a political evolution and I re-emphasized the link between the two questions. After moving through the other issues such as great power relations, South Asia, communications between our governments and arms control, we had laid a sound substantive framework. Chou, suddenly, matter-of-factly returned to your visit to China. He suggested the summer of 1972, indicating that they would prefer it if you met the Soviet leaders first. He said that they were not afraid of anyone but they were not looking for unnecessary trouble either. I said that a U.S.-Soviet summit had been agreed in principle but I could make no promise and would accept no condition. I also said that a summer summit might look like a political campaign gesture. Chou then moved your visit up to the spring.

We adjourned at six so Chou could go to another meeting (he normally works from noon to early morning) and agreed to meet four hours later to draft the joint announcement. We returned to the guest house for dinner and an evening of fits and starts, of nighttime strolls and cancelled meetings and a complicated, occasionally painful minuet of communique drafting. This process is described in the section dealing with the summit.

The next morning we held a final two hour meeting which wrapped up the summit, the communique, and final substantive comments. In the first forty minutes we reached agreement with Huang and Chang on the Communique at Tab A. This capped a drafting process that had its quota of tension but was marked by the other side's clear willingness to meet us half way. Our negotiating over the language was free of the pettiness and elbowing that we have experienced with the Russians. And once the basic bargain was struck, the rest of our business flowed comparatively easily.

Chou, who had been waiting nearby—so as to avoid a confrontation over language—suddenly appeared after the announcement was agreed, and we proceeded to settle all the major principles of your visit along the lines you wished.

After bidding farewell to Chou, we and the other Chinese officials had a final lunch. All tension was gone and Marshal Yeh's normally impassive face was finally creased by smiles. On the way to the airport he recounted some of his experiences—how over forty years ago as a division commander of Chiang, he heard of Mao and his 2000 followers in the mountains and joined them. And as we drove up toward the waiting Pakistani plane he remarked that none of them on the Long March had ever dreamed to see victory in their lifetimes. They had thought their struggle was for future generations.

Yet, he said, “here we are and here you are.”

The Chinese

Two qualities in the Chinese came across with particular force during this initial encounter: their inward philosophical tension and their inward strength.

For us this episode is, of course, a major new turn in international relations. For the Chinese Communists it is no less than a personal, intellectual, and emotional drama. They have endured fifty years of the Long March, struggle against the Japanese and Kuomintang, the Great Leap Forward, and the Cultural Revolution.

Yet here they were, dealing with arch capitalists, while what they call a “war of liberation” was going on at their borders, acting out a drama of philosophic contradictions. The moral ambivalance of this encounter for them was reflected in a certain brooding quality, in the occasional schizophrenia of Chou's presentations, in the jagged rHythym in drafting the announcement, and the tales of the Cultural Revolution and the Long March and Mao Tse-Tung's inspirational leadership. This ambivalence showed up also in their request during our Saturday Imperial Palace tour for an oral summary statement to be made on tape by both sides the final day. I suggested this idea be shelved until we had finished our discussions and they confirmed it would be for internal use only. When Chou arrived at the guest house late that evening he said that they no longer considered the tape necessary. I suspect they wanted the tape for Mao Tse-Tung.

Thus these were men in some anguish. Yet their long history of past suffering gave them an inner confidence that was reflected in a certain largeness of spirit. There was none of the Russian ploymanship, scoring points, rigidity or bullying. They did not turn everything into a contest. Profoundly committed and firm on principle, they dealt in historical terms; and once we reached basic understandings, such as on the announcement, details fell into place without maneuvering for petty gains.

They can be expected to be meticulous in their diplomacy. Indeed they stressed over and over again that they considered meticulous observance of even the spirit of our agreements the key to good future relationships. When I mentioned the fact that the Russians had put out their own, and different, English translation of the May 20 SALT announcement, Chou showed obvious contempt and assured me that the Chinese would never resort to such a gambit. Our hosts stressed that the television film and photos of our visit would be held until we agreed to their use.

The Chinese are clearly men of deep conviction and a wide chasm of ideology and isolation separates us. But they were nevertheless willing to paint prospects not only of normalizing relations but moving onward to friendship and cooperation.

Chou En-lai epitomized these qualities. He spoke with an almost matter of fact clarity and eloquence. He was equally at home in philosophic sweeps, historical analysis, tactical probing, light repartee. His command of facts, and in particular his knowledge of American events, was remarkable. He insisted on admitting faults in their society, and protesting that their lavish hospitality was only “what they should do.”

There was little wasted motion, either in his words or his movements. Both reflected the brooding inner tension of a man concerned both with the revolutionary fire of the next generation and the massive daily problem of caring for 750 million people, one who endured the tribulations of the Long March and was now inviting the President of the United States to visit his capital.

Chou was also genial and urbane, with a refreshing sense of humor. He displayed an easy egalitarianism—with his interpreters who had a free though respectful relationship with him, or with all of our party who he consistently ushered into and out of elevators in front of him. And he was considerate in his genuine concern when one of my colleagues wasn't feeling well, in briefing me just before my departure of events in the world from which I had been insulated, and in making sure that we would continue to use the Yahya channel occasionally because “one should not burn bridges that have been useful.”

In short, Chou En-lai ranks with Charles De Gaulle as the most impressive foreign statesman I have met.

Of course, these people were on their best behavior. These were the cream of their current elite; and it is inconceivable that the next generation there will produce leaders tempered by such experiences. Almost all of the positive qualities we saw are Chinese, not communist, and can be found in Taiwan or Singapore or San Francisco. Much of their ideology is distasteful, and living in China today would be a numbing, depressing experience. They are certainly fanatically tough. They do not wish us well. Their new society has been purchased at a terrible cost—in freedom, spontaneity, color, and family life. But the present generation of leaders understand big conceptions. Our dealings will be difficult, especially as we inaugurate a brand new relationship. The rewards and risks will be great. But if we keep our nerve and are clear about our purposes we can start a new historical course.

Summit

The summit emerged as the cause of a major Chinese ambivalence. Even before the meetings started the Chinese were anxious to get confirmation that you were in principle willing to go to China. On the other hand they pretended that they had responded to your request. On substance Chou took an initially hard position that the summit should be in the context of improving Sino-U.S. relations and that the best way to accomplish this was by the establishment of diplomatic relations. He eventually backed away—only after considerable give-and-take by reluctantly acknowledging that recognition was not an “absolute” precondition for a summit, though this direction should be set by it.

This was in the earlier stages of our talks. Later on, Chou again toughened his position by stating that the initiative for a summit had come from you and not from the Chinese. I referred to the actual messages, which I had brought with me, but suggested that if it was so difficult perhaps we should drop the idea of a summit for the time being and go on to substantive matters.

By the second day, the Chinese stand again had softened. On the way to our tour of the Forbidden City, Ambassador Huang referred to Chou's interest in a statement on a summit. Chou himself raised the subject in our discussions that afternoon and after making no headway with a ploy that a summit should be in a climate of Sino-U.S. friendship to be established by recognition, proposed at about 5:30 in the evening that a drafting committee for a joint summit communique meet that night at about 8:30 p.m. He told me that he had another appointment, but would personally appear about 10:30 p.m.

Having gone this far, Chou was willing to look more deeply into the summit issue. He listened to my thoughts on general principles, and insisted that another high-level meeting between our representatives would be necessary before the summit took place to fix the agenda and details. The U.S. representative, he said, should be either me or someone else of similar stature close to you. I mentioned Ambassador Bruce and in his final statement he said that it should be either Bruce or I. This time, though, the visit should be an open one.

Chou in addition expressed a desire to have your summit with Mao Tse-Tung take place after any similar meetings with the Soviets. Even though he was willing to be flexible when I explained our problems, this was a significant sign (and perhaps the most significant) of the Chinese worries about their confrontation with the USSR.

Producing a mutually satisfactory communique proved to be a tense process. Their drafters failed to appear at the stipulated time, and at about 10:45 p.m. we were told that they would not arrive before 9:00 the next morning. I had in the meantime been walking in the grounds of the guest house to discuss with my associates the possible reasons for the delay, and I also had made it plain to their protocol people that I had to leave Peking no later than 1:00 p.m. the next day whatever the state of our discussions. I also said that as the President's representative they had to give me a precise meeting time and could not keep me on standby. They must have sensed my irritation, for just as we were going to bed we were informed that Chou was coming. He arrived at about 11:15, referred to my departure time, apologized for getting us up, and said that his drafters would appear shortly. He departed after an hour's friendly conversation dealing with Taiwan, India, the Berlin issue, and the Soviet Union.

I then spent several hours with the Chinese officials going over a draft by their side which would have had the initiative for the visit coming from you, and which would have keyed the summit just to seeking “normalization of relations.” (Tab B). I insisted that the origin of the visit had to be put in terms of mutual interest. They agreed after a while, although there were differences over the exact language. Where they had trouble was over my insistence that the summit meeting should have a broader scope than just the normalization of relations. At about 1:40 a.m., they proposed a 30-minute recess in which they would try to work out language on both points suitable to us, and left the room. We took another brief walk in the grounds and returned to await their arrival; at 3:00 a.m. we learned that they had left the building entirely (they must have gone to Chou En-lai's office) and would not return until 9:00 a.m.

Ultimately, at 9:40 a.m., on July 11, Chou and the other officials reappeared. At this point there was some confusion; Chou, it seemed, would be strolling outside while the others came in to discuss their draft communique with me. Our first word, however, was that all were to come in together, and the Chinese seemed rather embarrassed at the sudden shift in plan. In their new version of the communique they had gone very far to meet my requirements, and their wording needed only a few minor changes to be fully acceptable. The agreed joint communique (Tab A) suggests a mutual desire for the summit with you accepting their invitation, and its purpose has been broadened to “questions of concern to both sides.”

With agreement reached on the communique, Chou quickly appeared. Presumably for “face” reasons, he had not been prepared to present himself unless or until there was such an agreement. Once in the meeting, he accepted easily all the details for the summit which I then put forward. He made the point that Chairman Mao had personally endorsed the summit meeting, and accepted my proposed date and time for the public release of the joint communique, even though “this may cause us a little trouble.”

I can only account for the fits and starts in the drafting of the joint communique by attributing them to a deep conflict between ideological and practical considerations on the Chinese side. Ideologically, the concept of Chairman Mao sitting down with the leader of what they call the “imperialist camp” must be extremely difficult for some Chinese to accept, despite the prospect of its moving forward their campaign against Taiwan.

On the other hand, I believe they are deeply worried about the Soviet threat to their national integrity, realistically speaking, and see in us a balancing force against the USSR. And, unlikely as it may superficially seem, I sense that they actually do appreciate the balancing role we play in Asia. Nevertheless, it is hard for life-long revolutionaries to act against their own principles, and we must be exceptionally careful not to drive them away.

The Chinese will undoubtedly stress the Taiwan issue as the key to normalization of relations, but we can maintain that all issues of mutual concern will be discussed for the sake of Asian and world peace. On all other issues Chou in effect left all the other basic principles up to you, giving us precisely what you wished: — A visit of up to five days.

— Probably one other city besides Peking. (He mentioned Mao might be outside the capital for more quiet talks with you.)

— Small official delegation, to include Secretary Rogers, myself and a couple of aides.

— Agenda will probably look somewhat like the one Chou and I had, with this subject to be pursued by Bruce and/or me.

— Small press delegation; he said this could mean around ten. They will establish the ground rules after we tell them what they should be.

— Minimum secret service; I really don't think security will be any problem. They said security is the responsibility of the host country.

— The PRC will not invite other U.S. political leaders before your visit. I emphasized that it was important that our new departure in relations start at your level and not be muddied by eager politicians in advance. This would not rule out newsmen and cultural exchanges in the interim.

Taiwan

This was described by Chou as the basic issue between the U.S. and the PRC, going back to the Korean war, when we “surrounded” Taiwan and declared—in contrast to our previous position—that its status was “undetermined.” Chou maintained that this was still our position, citing as a case in point a recent statement by the State Department press spokesman to the effect that Taiwan status was legally undetermined. (You will recall that you took considerable exception to this statement.) I emphasized that they might have noted that the remarks by the press spokesman had not been repeated. There was considerable laughter on the Chinese side over this, and frequent later references. Chou asked whether we could apply the same method to Laird's comments about nuclear weapons for Japan. I am sure that they were already aware that you had clamped down but wanted confirmation.

Chou then went on to say that to establish diplomatic relations with the PRC, the U.S. must: — Recognize that Taiwan is an inalienable part of China, and a province of China.

— Recognize the PRC as the sole legitimate government of China.

— Withdraw all its armed forces and military installations from the area of Taiwan and the Taiwan Strait within a limited period.

— Consider that the U.S.-ROC Mutual Defense Treaty is invalid.

I responded that the Chinese were going beyond what they had said to us in their messages and in the two 1970 Warsaw talks, in which they had requested the removal of our military presence only. I said that we had to distinguish between what could be done immediately and what had to be left to historical evolution. With respect to military presence there were two components to our forces on Taiwan—those related to the defense of Southeast Asia, especially Vietnam, and those related to the defense of Taiwan. The former could be withdrawn after the end of the war in Vietnam; the latter would depend on the general state of our relations with the PRC.

Chou asked whether I was linking the Taiwan issue to Indochina. When I affirmed it he did not demur but turned to a discussion of Indochina, pointing out only that it was easier for the Chinese who were not at war to take a long view than for the Vietnamese.

On the political future of Taiwan, I said we did not advocate a “two Chinas” or a “one China - one Taiwan” solution but would accept any political evolution agreed to by the parties. We hoped that this evolution would be peaceful, and Chou said the PRC would try to keep it so.

I said that we could not accept recognition as a condition to your visit to Peking. Chou, after much give and take, said that recognition was not a precondition but that the visit should set recognition as the ultimate direction of pur policy. He accepted my position that some time would be required, i.e., well into your second term.

Chou said that if China was to be patient it needed three assurances: first, that the U.S. would not support “two Chinas” or a “one China, one Taiwan” policy; second, that we would not support the indigenous Taiwan independence movement; and third, that we would not permit Japanese troops to move in. I stressed that this would be our policy but noted that some events on Taiwan might be beyond our ability to control. Chou interposed no objection.

Regarding the UN, I said we might support a position where the admission of the PRC would be by a majority vote, but the expulsion of other countries,i.e., Taiwan, would be by a 2/3 vote with the Chinese Security Council seat going to the PRC. As soon as the PRC gained the necessary 2/3, it would be China's sole representative in the UN.

Chou stated that the PRC did not regard getting into the UN as a particularly urgent matter. It had lived without the UN for 21 years, and could continue to do so. However, if others asked, the PRC would of course maintain its stand that its legitimate rights in the UN must be restored. China would have to oppose the U.S. position which I had described. When I suggested that he mute the rhetoric, he agreed smilingly. Chou added that our proposed stand would cause more difficulty to us than to the PRC. He did not take undue exception to it as long as we would not put it forward ourselves, but would simply support it if proposed by others. (Significantly, discussion of the UN issue came well before agreement on the summit and the joint communique, showing that the one was not an obstacle to the other.)

As a final point on Taiwan, Chou noted that the agreement on your meeting with Chairman Mao would “shake the world.” Afterwards, Chiang Kai-shek might collude with the USSR or Japan, and would demonstrate against you. Chiang would try to operate independently of the U.S. Chou knew this from his previous associations with Chiang, and the U.S. “should beware.”

Indochina

Chou En-lai was as forthcoming as we could have hoped. His attitude throughout reflected the ambivalance of Peking's position. For ideological reasons, he clearly had to support Hanoi. On the other hand, it was apparent that he did not wish to jeopardize the chances for an improvement in our relations, especially after I explained the positions we had taken in Paris and warned of the danger of escalation if negotiations failed. He came back to this latter point again and again, without threat or bluster, simply using it as an argument for the desirability of peace.

Thus Chou went back and forth between a formal theoretical defense of Hanoi's position (though in much lower key than Le Duc Tho at Paris) and concrete questions that sought to discover areas of agreement. He stressed Peking's support of Hanoi while insisting that there had not been advisers in Indochina nor would there be. He critized American aggression but stressed Chinese interest in an “honorable exit” for the U.S.

From the outset, I linked the Indochina conflict and our relations with Peking: — I pointed out that two-thirds of our forces in Taiwan were linked to the war and their removal would depend on an end of the conflict.

— I also pointed out that an end to the war would accelerate the improvement in our relationship.

In addition, I reviewed the current situation in Paris and pointed out that the talks were blocked because of Hanoi's insistence on the overthrow of Thieu and its refusal to agree to a ceasefire. I warned that a breakdown in the negotiations would mean continuation of the war, with incalculable consequences.

Chou addressed Indochina several times during the first two days of our talks.

On the first day he asked a number of questions about our position, generally in an intelligent and sympathetic manner. These were: — Were we really ready to pull out?

— Would we close all our bases?

— Why would we wish to leave a “tail,” such as some advisers and/or the Thieu Government?

— Would we be prepared to accept having the Indochinese people determine their own future?

— Why did we wish a cease-fire?

— Would we wish to continue giving aid to the present government?

It was clear that he understood the linkage between Taiwan and Vietnam and did not object to it. He also was extremely concerned about the possibility of escalation. In addition, he made the following points: — He revealed that he had not been informed about the secret meetings we have had with the North Vietnamese in Paris recently.

— He said that China only had two objectives with regard to a Vietnam settlement:

— There must be a withdrawal of U.S. and Allied forces.

— The peoples of the three Indochinese countries must be left to decide their own future.

— He insisted that China would keep hands off after a settlement.

On the second day Chou took a harder line. As part of a generally tough presentation, he attacked the Thieu and Lon Nol Governments and he charged us with having committed “aggression” in Indochina since World War II. He warned that we should pull out completely and not leave a “tail” behind in the form of advisers since these would be the entering wedge for a new involvement.

He warned about the dangers of escalation but also made clear that China would not intervene. He explained several times that Chinese assistance to Hanoi had never included combat forces—there had only been some bridgebuilding and road repair crews during the bombing.

He stressed that there were no Chinese advisors in Indochina nor would there be.

The morning of our departure, without prompting, Chou returned to Indochina in an astonishingly sympathetic and open manner. He made the following points: — He hoped our negotiations in Paris would be successful and he wished me luck.

— He would talk to Hanoi after the announcement of the. President's visit to Peking had been made.

— Peking supports Mme. Binh's seven point proposal but they were negotiable.

— He hopes our withdrawal will be complete, thorough and honorable.

— He thought that we would find Hanoi more generous than we believed.

This means he will talk to the North Vietnamese and may be able to exert some influence. The mere fact of his talking to them is likely to compound the shock of your announced visit to Peking. In any case, he knows that the very fact that we and Peking are moving closer will have an impact in Hanoi.

Japan

Chou repeatedly expressed concern about the revival of Japanese militarism, and I have no doubt that the PRC relationship with Japan is in fact a serious matter for the Chinese. Chou maintained that the rapid development of Japanese economic power would inevitably carry rearmament in its wake. In this, he said that Japan's economic expansion would lead to political expansionism. He pointed to the great budgetary increase of Japan's Fourth Defense Plan over its predecessors as a case in point. He quoted Sato as mentioning that Japan's rapid economic growth would permit this plan to be completed in two to three years rather than the five originally contemplated.

He noted also that Sato had now spoken of the defense of Taiwan, Okinawa, and Korea being essential to the defense of Japan, and took Sato's mention of this in our 1969 Joint Communique with him as an indication that the U.S. was supporting Japan's rearmament. Japanese troops might even go to Taiwan. At one point he mentioned the possibility of Japan colluding with the U.S. and the USSR to carve up China, and cited Secretary Laird's speech in Japan as a sign of U.S. interest in Japan's developing nuclear weapons. He doubted that the return of Okinawa would be without nuclear weapons. Chou plainly was holding us responsible for trends in Japanese policy which appeared to threaten China.

I declared flatly that we were not encouraging, and indeed opposed, any revival of Japanese expansionism. I agreed on the military implications of Japan's economic growth and said that the U.S. and PRC interests coincided in trying to keep this growth under control. All the U.S. supported was Japan's ability to defend itself. Paradoxically, the presence of U.S. troops on Japan helped to restrain the Japanese rather than the reverse. We would never collude with other countries in carving China up.

I strongly denied that what Secretary Laird had allegedly said was Administration policy, and pointed out that once Okinawa reverted to Japan our bases would be under the same restrictions as now exist for those in Japan. Chou accepted this, and later personally called attention to the State Department spokesman's comments on Secretary Laird's speech.

Although Chou had started off with a very rigid position on Japan, I believe that he understands the restraining role which we play with respect to the Japanese. This came through toward the end of our meetings, when he asked that we see to it that, as U.S. troops are withdrawn from Taiwan, Japanese troops are not moved in to replace them. I said that this would be done.

Korea

Korea was cited by Chou as another area of “turmoil under heaven.” This arose first from the fact that there was no peace treaty there despite China's efforts in 1954 to extend the Geneva Agreements to Korea. Chou had proposed this to get something better than a ceasefire in Korea, and Anthony Eden, in the chair, had gone along until Walter Bedell Smith had “waved his arms” and caused Eden to reject the move on procedural grounds. Presumably, Chou was suggesting that China wanted an arrangement in Korea which had legal status.

Chou went on to say that there was constant conflict along the DMZ; U.S. forces were still present; and ROK troops were in Vietnam. There was now a joint U. S.-South Korean army in which Thailand was also represented. Park Chong-Hee was as aggressive as Syngman Rhee. Therefore, the DPRK—and China—had a right to be concerned.

I said that what happened in Korea depended very much on the general relationships in the area. If the war in Indochina ended and U.S.-PRC relations developed, the ROK troops in Vietnam would return, and it was conceivable that before the end of your next term most of the U.S. troops in Korea would be withdrawn. Chou himself suggested that in those terms the process had already begun with our removal of 20,000 men, and I agreed. On Chou's other points, I said I knew of no Thai troops in the ROK. The joint U.S.-ROK military command was not a new policy; it was intended to make our withdrawal easier and was not a new commitment.

Chou's remarks on alleged ROK aggressiveness gave me an opportunity to highlight North Korean actions. I said that the PRC was opposed to ROK military aggression against the North Koreans, but North Korea for its part was very harsh in its military meassures against both the U.S. and the ROK. We believed it would be very helpful to Asian peace if the PRC could restrain North Korea in the use of force against the U.S. and the ROK. Chou did not reply, but I think that his silence may be taken as a form of assent—he could hardly admit that an ally of the PRC was behaving aggressively.

South Asia

Chou described the South Asian subcontinent as a prime area of “turmoil under heaven.” This was because India had long ago under Nehru adopted an expansionist philosophy, not only committing aggression against Pakistan but against China as well.

Chou went into great detail to outline the development of the hostile relationship between China and India. This began, he said, when the Indians became aware in 1959 that the Chinese had built a road across Indian-claimed territory between Sinkiang and the Ali region of Tibet—but how could this have been Indian territory when the Indians weren't even aware when the road was built?

The Indians had then attacked a Chinese military post in this region, but had lost heavily because the Chinese position was uphill from where the Indians were and was strongly fortified. But world opinion (including Khrushchev) felt that the Chinese must have started hostilities because of the heavy Indian losses. The Indians had also used force against the Chinese in other areas. The culmination was the Sino-Indian war of 1962.

Chou made the following points: — India was responsible for the present turmoil in East Pakistan. It was supporting Bangla Desh and had allowed a Bangla Desh “headquarters” to be set up on Indian territory.

— In the light of Indian expansionist ambitions, India would use any military aid—such as that given by the USSR—for aggressive purposes. Chou acknowledged that we were not giving military assistance to India, but said that one had to keep the consequences of any aid in mind.

— China would stand by Pakistan in the present crisis. This position began to develop with a rather low-key remark at dinner the first night that China “could not but take some interest in the situation,” and ended with a request to me at the end to convey assurances of Chinese support to President Yahya Khan.

I told Chou that we were trying very hard to discourage an Indo-Pak war.

I assured Chou that we were bringing all the influence we could to bear on India to try to prevent a war from developing. Chou said that this was a good thing, but he inferred that we might not be able to do too much because we were 10,000 miles away. China, however, was much closer. Chou recalled the Chinese defeat of India in 1962 and hinted rather broadly that the same thing could happen again.

The Chinese detestation of the Indians came through loud and clear. Conversely, China's warm friendship for Pakistan as a firm and reliable friend was made very plain. The lesson that Chou may have been trying to make here was that those who stand by China and keep their word will be treated in kind.

Communications

I explained that it was essential for our two governments to be able to communicate rapidly, reliably and secretly—without the intervention of third parties, however friendly. This had two aspects—how to get in touch with each other and whom to deal with in the government. I suggested three levels of contact: — A hot line between Washington and Peking for urgent messages.

— A secure direct channel between the Chinese leaders and yourself which would not be vulnerable to the bureaucracies or developments in a third country. This would be used for important and sensitive matters, to agree on basic principles and to clarify misunderstandings. It would be kept free of the bureaucracy to prevent both leaks and formalism. I mentioned Paris, London or Ottawa as possible contact points.

— A diplomatic contact such as Warsaw for more technical issues and implementation of agreements reached through the secure channel.

Chou's first reaction was rather cool, with a suggestion that it might be premature. On the second day Chou returned to the subject to say that he would let me know the next morning at our final session.

On Sunday morning he never mentioned the hot line proposal and stated that revival of the Warsaw Talks would be a waste of time. They took more of everybody's effort in preparing instructions then they were worth. He agreed that we did need a secure White House/Peking channel and chose the Chinese embassy in Paris, saying that their Ambassador there was a member of the Central Committee and that Ottawa would be too much in the limelight. I said that General Walters would be our contact in Paris and would be in touch on July 19. We shall communicate either by sealed envelopes or through messages to be transmitted by their Ambassador. Chou added that we should continue to pass some non-substantive notes through President Yahya who had been a good friend.

Great Power Relations

Chou professed apprehension over the possibility that the U.S., USSR, Japan and even India might collaborate to carve up China. He showed deep bitterness against the Soviets and contempt for their petty tactics. The Soviets, he said, were proceeding down the U.S. road in “spreading their hands out too far.” While he was confident they would be ultimately defeated, he inferred that difficult times might be expected before this came about. Fear of revived Japanese militarism was a major theme throughout our discussions. Japan's economic growth was to him equated with expansionism, and he felt that rearmament to back it was already taking place. In addition, China's historical distrust of the Indians came through strongly.

I emphasized that the U.S. would never collude with other powers against China and that this would be shortsighted since the U.S. and China had no real conflicting interests. Indeed, in the area of relations among large countries our interests were very comparable. With respect to Japan, we were interested in its having the ability to defend itself, but would oppose Japanese militarism. While the objective consequences of U.S. actions might sometimes look like collusion, we would strive consciously to avoid this. I assured Chou on the following: — that you were prepared to inform them in advance of major decisions we have with other great powers that might affect them.

— that you would take their views into account.

— that we would consult on items of interest to them and try to reflect their concerns. I offered to explain to him our approach on other negotiations we were conducting, such as SALT. Except for a general question on Berlin issues, he did not take this suggestion up.

Chou several times emphasized that China lacked the economic base to be considered a great power, but had no desire to be considered one, and indeed wished to avoid the kind of great power rivalry existing between the Soviet Union and the U.S. Chou alleged that even after China's economy became developed it would still not act as a great power. The Chinese clearly like to picture themselves as free from the vice of great power ambitions which have only served to stir turmoil in the world and brought problems for the powers themselves. They prefer to be cast in the role of championing the less powerful and fortunate countries of the world. Their attitude toward great powers now is a mix of hostility, suspicions and fear. This may be rather disingenuous, however, for while they profess not to envy those who are undisputably great powers, they may be making a virtue out of a necessity. And their very interest in a U.S.-Chinese summit has them playing a great power game.

Arms Control

I asked for their views on the Soviet proposal on a five power nuclear conference, reminding him that you had held up our response so as to get Chinese views. They flatly rejected the idea as a Soviet attempt to lasso them. I said we would be slow in our response; that other countries' pressures might force us to go along; and that if such a conference were held we would seek to make sure that China was not put at a disadvantage. On SALT I assured them we would conclude no agreement directed against them, and that we recognized that limiting their embryonic strategic program at this time would be discriminatory. I said we were willing to discuss accidental war agreements with them such as we were discussing with the Russians; Chou replied that we could raise this with them whenever we wished. I added that we were prepared to consider a renunciation of force agreement such as Chou had proposed in 1955. He responded in low key that Taiwan was linked to this issue and immediately went on to say he hoped my Paris Talks with the North Vietnamese would bear fruit.

Americans Detained in China

At the very end I said that we would be grateful for a pardon of all or some of the four Americans still held in China when the PRC thought conditions were ripe. We were not making a request and recognized it was China's matter to decide, but we would consider their release a voluntary act of mercy. Chou said that their law allowed shortened sentences for good behavior and they Would continue to study the matter. (This could well mean they might make a gesture.)

Conclusion

I am frank to say that this visit was a very moving experience. The historic aspects of the occasion; the warmth and dignity of the Chinese; the splendor of the Forbidden City, Chinese history and culture; the heroic stature of Chou En-lai; and the intensity and sweep of our talks combined to make an indelible impression on me and my colleagues.

These forty-eight hours, and my extensive discussions with Chou in particular, had all the flavor, texture, variety and delicacy of a Chinese banquet. Prepared from the long sweep of tradition and culture, meticulously cooked by hands of experience, and served in splendidly simple surroundings, our feast consisted of many courses, some sweet and some sour, all interrelated and forming a coherent whole. It was a total experience, and one went away, as after all good Chinese meals, very satisfied but not at all satiated.

We have laid the groundwork for you and Mao to turn a page in history. But we should have no illusions about the future. Profound differences and years of isolation yawn between us and the Chinese. They will be tough before and during the summit on the question of Taiwan and other major issues. And they will prove implacable foes if our relations turn sour. My assessment of these people is that they are deeply ideological, close to fanatic in the intensity of their beliefs. At the same time they display an inward security that allows them, within the framework of their principles, to be meticulous and reliable in dealing with others.

Furthermore, the process we have now started will send enormous shock waves around the world. It may panic the Soviet Union into sharp hostility. It could shake Japan loose from its heavily American moorings. It will cause a violent upheaval in Taiwan. It will have major impact on our other Asian allies, such as Korea and Thailand. It will increase the already substantial hostility in India. Some quarters may seek to sabotage the summit over the coming months.

However, we were well aware of these risks when we embarked on this course. We were aware too that the alternative was unacceptable—continued isolation from one-quarter of the world's most talented people and a country rich in past achievements and future potential.

And even the risks can be managed and turned to our advantage if we maintain steady nerves and pursue our policies responsibly. With the Soviet Union we will have to make clear the continued priorities we attach to our concrete negotiations with them. Just as we will not collude with them against China, so we have no intention of colluding with China against them. If carefully managed, our new China policy could have a longer term beneficial impact on Moscow.

With Japan our task will be to make clear that we are not shifting our allegiance in Asia from her to China. On Taiwan we can hope for little more than damage limitation by reaffirming our diplomatic relations and mutual defense treaty even while it becomes evident that we foresee a political evolution over the coming years. With our other Asian allies we will need to stress both our continued bonds and our hope that reconciliation between us and the Chinese will serve the cause of regional peace. And in India, after the initial shock, our China moves might produce a more healthy relationship.

For Asia and for the world we need to demonstrate that we are enlarging the scope of our diplomacy in a way that, far from harming the interests of other countries, should instead prove helpful to them.

Our dealings, both with the Chinese and others, will require reliability, precision, finesse. If we can master this process, we will have made a revolution.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1032, Files for the President-China Material, Polo I Record, July 1971 HAK Visit to PRC. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Tabs A and B were attached but not published.

10. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, July 20, 1971 10. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, July 20, 19711

Washington, July 20, 1971

July 20, 1971

Dear Dick:

Attached you will find two enclosures. The first is a two-page message which is to be handed to the Chinese Ambassador for the promptest transmission to Premier Chou En-lai. The second is an instruction to you for oral transmission to the Ambassador.

You will note from both enclosures that Mr. Kissinger would like to see the Chinese Ambassador on either the 25th or 26th. Hopefully, a meeting could be arranged in the Ambassador's residence before midnight on the 25th. In this case, you might proceed directly to your residence from the airport, drop off luggage and one passenger and proceed directly to the Ambassador's residence. If, however, as you mentioned on the phone, a change will have to be made as to the arrival airfield, a meeting at the residence on the afternoon of the 26th would also be acceptable as a second choice.

Concerning this weekend, option 1 or 3 would be acceptable for accommodations. The schedule for the trip includes:

Departure from Andrews

0830 local, July 25

Arrive Rhein Main

2050 local

Arrive Paris

2235 local

Since the last discussion was not precise on this issue, you will wish to confirm with the North Vietnamese that the meeting on the 26th should be at 1030 local.

Best regards,

Alexander M. Haig, Jr.

Brigadier General, U. S. Army Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Major General

Vernon A Walters
Military Attache
American Embassy, Paris

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Attached but not published are the two messages, which were to be handed to the Chinese ambassador for transmission to Chou En-lai.

11. Letter From the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Paris, July 22, 1971 11. Letter From the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Paris, July 22, 19711

Paris, July 22, 1971

22 July 1971

Dear Al:

Herewith the scenario of the latest episode. Today 21 July at 1300 I met the courier with your envelope. After opening and reading it, I telephoned to Tsao Kuei Sheng, 1st Secretary of the-Embassy of CPR, to ask when I could see the Ambassador. He suggested 1700 this evening and I agreed.

At 1700 I drove to the general neighborhood of their Ambassador's residence and leaving my car several blocks away I walked to the residence where I was let in. I was received by Tsao Kuei Sheng and a few minutes later the Ambassador came in. I told him that I had received a message from Kirschman for transmission to the Prime Minister. He took it, passed it to Tsao Kuei Sheng who read it to him in Chinese. Tsao speaks fluent English and Wei Tung fluent French. At the meeting today only the Ambassador the Tsao were present. After hearing the translation he said that he would send this at once to the Prime Minister. He then asked about Kirschman's visit and I replied that he was coming to Paris on Sunday evening late and would like to see the Ambassador either late that night or Monday afternoon. He indicated a preference for the afternoon.

He then asked about the verbal message and I told him that Kirschman felt it might not be too early to examine the technical details of the trip referred to in the previous message I had given him for the Prime Minister. He seemed slightly puzzled and said he was not sure what trip was being discussed as there had not been mention in the Peking Conversations of such a trip.

I replied that I believed it was the trip by Gen Kirschman and Amb Bruce referred to in the previous message. Gen Kirschman would like to know what their thoughts were on the mechanics and I proceeded to give him the questions in a low key. He said initially that where we came from was our problem and he did not see the need for a Chinese navigator, but after talking to Tsao in Chinese, he said that he would pass the question on. Again, on the matter of the participants and duration of the stay, he seemed slightly puzzled. I explained that I thought that we were “thinking out loud” to get their reactions and I would pass on any views of their side. However, as he had asked that if he were to see Gen Kirschman and the latter were to have any questions, he would like to know a few days in advance so he could get instructions on them. He then asked whether Gen Kirschman would expect to have the answers to these questions on Monday. I said that he hoped he might but if they did not arrive in time I was sure that it would be all right for me to transmit them subsequently. He appeared relieved at this and said that he thought that he would have the answers to at least some of the questions by Monday.

He commented that these were fairly complicated questions. I said that Gen Kirschman had long been a professor and they liked things neatly arranged. He laughed and said that he and I were soldiers and we liked things neatly arranged too.

The Ambassador said that in principle he agreed to see Gen Kirschman on Monday afternoon (providing his government authorized him to do so) and I could call Tsao to fix the exact time. The meeting would be at his residence some ten blocks from my home.

I did not indicate to him what was the purpose of Gen Kirschman's visit to Paris and he asked for no details.

After several cups of jasmine tea and sweets, he walked me to the door, clapped me on the back and said that with all the languages I knew I should also learn Chinese. He could not have been more cordial throughout.

Frankly, I think he was a little taken aback at the speed of our action. His oriental mind is not yet used to the brisk American way of doing business. Time has a different dimension to him than it has to us. However, once he had recovered and had understood that our questions were exploratory in nature and aimed only at getting his government's thinking on these matters, he relaxed visibly. I also believe that he is held on a tight rein by his government and does not enjoy anything like the freedom of action enjoyed by a Western Ambassador. I think he has authority to eat three meals a day, drink unlimited amounts of tea and make whatever visits are necessary to the sanitary facilities and little else. I may, however, be quite wrong in this.

I spoke in English. This was translated by Tsao and when he answered, it was also translated into English. No one else was present. I was with them about 45 minutes. The location was at 35 Boulevard du Chateau in Neuilly. The building is a large private home set back in a garden. There is a high wall and iron gate in front but this can be opened and cars driven right up to the entrance of the house. This is a quiet residential neighborhood on a wide tree-lined street.

Faithfully,

P.S. The sweets are small pieces of preserved apple (quite good) and Lichee nuts which I would eat only in the service of my country.

Dave

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. Kirschman is in reference to Kissinger.

12. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, undated 12. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, undated1

Washington, undated

MEMORANDUM FOR:

THE PRESIDENT

FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER

SUBJECT:

July 26 Meeting with Chinese Ambassador in Paris

I established contact with the Chinese Ambassador in Paris, Huang Chen, on the afternoon of Monday, July 26, after my other session. (You will recall that Chou designated him as our secret point of contact.) Although he was hospitable and friendly, it was clear that he has little latitude, operates narrowly within instructions, and will serve chiefly as a transmittal belt for messages between us and the PRC. He had just returned from Peking where he was called back after my trip there.

In our discussion the Ambassador relayed the following verbal points from the PRC.

— The Chinese government agrees to an interim visit by me in the latter part of October. (We had suggested late September or early October.)

— “Owing to understandable reasons, it would not be appropriate for Mr. Bruce to come to China.”

— Our aircraft should go directly to Shanghai from Alaska. (Presumably they don't want an American plane crossing the bulk of their country.)

I pointed out that Chou had suggested an interim visit; that Bruce would be leaving the Paris talks next week; that you had total confidence in him; and I thus hoped Chou would review our conversations and make it possible for Bruce to maintain contact with the PRC in the future when I am unable to do so. (Comment: Chou expressly agreed to an interim visit by Bruce or me. The Chinese have now apparently decided that it would be too awkward for them to receive Bruce and me, given their troubles with Hanoi and the speculation about a U.S.-PRC deal on Indochina. Thus I did not press Bruce's acceptability for an interim visit but hope to get Peking to reconsider him for future assignments.)

I made a few other points to Ambassador Huang: — The Nationalist Chinese are stirring a campaign against my trip to Peking and your forthcoming visit. There is press speculation about my conversations with Chou which is designed to embarrass both the U.S. and the PRC. My backgrounder which I sent to the Chinese will remain the only U.S. Government commentary on these subjects and any speculation doesn't come from government sources.

— We will continue to inform the PRC of any talks we have with other socialist countries which concern it.

— We will show restraint with the press in our comments about the PRC in any event, but we would appreciate it if they would do the same. The best way for us to keep our right-wing opposition under control is to demonstrate that we are pursuing an independent policy; this is made easier if the PRC does not encourage left-wing spokesmen.

At the end of the meeting I told him that we would alert him whenever I was coming to Paris in case he had messages for me or it seemed worthwhile for us to meet. As for the technical details of my October visit, I said these could be passed through Walters and there was no particular urgency.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Sent under a July 30 covering memorandum from Winston Lord to Kissinger for inclusion in Kissinger's files. Kissinger's memorandum to Nixon was not sent.

13. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, August 5, 1971 13. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, August 5, 19711

Washington, August 5, 1971

August 5, 1971

Major General Vernon Walters

Senior Military Attache

American Embassy

Paris, France

Dear Vernon:

As part of this package, our courier will hand you two messages—one for the PRC Ambassador which you should deliver in written form (Tab A) and the second (Tab B) which you should read to the North Vietnamese representative, leaving no copy. We are most anxious that the messages be delivered on Friday.

At Tab C is the game plan for the next round which is in memorandum form and which includes the planning details which you will need, less aircraft numbers and types. I will provide that information to you telephonically. You will note that we have changed the major arrival and departure fields to assist in maintaining cover. The rest of the details follow the standard pattern. As of this writing, there will be no side meetings during the next round.

You may wish to raise with Henry your return visit. Dependent on the outcome of the next session, I believe the circumstances are fortuitous.

Thank you again for your invaluable contributions which have proved so successful up to now. You will note that in his press conference yesterday, the President may have inadvertently added to the specification that secret meetings are being conducted. His comments will further complicate your already difficult task.

Best wishes,

Alexander M. Haig, Jr.

Brigadier General, U.S. Army

Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Enclosures

[Tab A]

The President wishes to call the attention of the Government of the People's Republic of China to the following matters:

The U.S. Government has not replied formally to the Soviet proposal for a conference of the five nuclear powers. It is transmitting an oral comment to the Soviet Foreign Ministry through the U.S. Ambassador in Moscow along these lines:

The subject of nuclear disarmament is worthy of serious consideration. A conference would require careful preparation and agreement among the five powers as to what subjects were feasible for discussion. The views of non-nuclear states should be considered. All five powers must be willing to attend.

It is not anticipated that a formal reply will be made.

[Tab B]

Despite press speculations, the President will maintain strictly and scrupulously the secrecy of the Le Duc Tho/Xuan Thuy - Kissinger channel. He expects the DRV Delegation to do the same.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive. Attached at Tab A and B are two of the notes. Attached but not published at Tab C is the memorandum containing logistical details about the trip.

14. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, August 6, 1971, 1530Z 14. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, August 6, 1971, 1530Z1

Paris, August 6, 1971, 1530Z

After meeting Sgt Sigler this morning at 0800 I immediately called Tsao at PRC Embassy. Actually, Wei answered. I told him I had a message and asked when I could deliver it. He said that 1530 would be convenient for them at PRC Residence.

After completing my meeting with the NVN, I went to the CPR Embassy and arrived exactly on time. Was let in by Wei and Tsao. Led to same room where Henry saw them. More jasmine tea and lichee nuts. I gave the written message to Tsao who read it to the Ambassador in Chinese.

Ambassador said he presumed this was in line with our informing them on such matters. I said that was my understanding. He asked how it came. I said by courier and he seemed pleased and said he would pass it on.

He said he was pleased to see me as we were both Generals. I replied that I knew he had had two very distinguished careers as a soldier and as a diplomat. Again he seemed pleased.

He discussed the time it takes to get from Paris to Peking (21 hours) and Paris to Washington. He had no idea how long it took. I told him 7 or 8 hours.

The Ambassador then asked where Henry's plane would come from in Alaska. I said I did not know. It could be Anchorage or perhaps from further West such as Adak or Attu. He noted that some of those islands had been taken by the Japanese early in the war but that they had been taken back by us. All had gone well for the Japanese at the beginning but after that they had been defeated. At this point Tsao said Japanese militarism had been reborn. I said I hoped not as the world was too small for wars. The Ambassador nodded vigorously and said that it was “just a small ball”.

He then asked if I would accompany President Nixon or Doctor Kissinger on their trips to China. I said that this was a matter beyond my competence and I had no idea of the composition of the parties, but I would be happy if asked to go. (I give you my word of honor he brought it up and foregoing is exact report.)

We then (with Tsao and Wei) discussed languages, the study thereof, that I should learn Chinese (I interjected, “The language of nearly a quarter of mankind.” They liked that.) etc., two more cups of tea, preserved apple. They seemed genuinely anxious to have me stay. I suspect they may not have too much contact with foreigners and enjoy it. I was escorted to the door and patted on the back, etc.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy.

15. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, August 8, 1971 15. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, August 8, 19711

Washington, August 8, 1971

August 8, 1971

Dear Dick (correct this time)

Henry would like you to see the PRC Ambassador on Monday and deliver orally the two self-explanatory messages at Enclosure 1.

Additionally, Dr. Kissinger wishes to move the meeting with the North Vietnamese to 11:00 A.M. on the 16th so that he can visit the Chinese Ambassador before the meeting with them.

Pursuant to our telephone conversation, Dr. Kissinger has decided to bring the data on moon explorations with him at the time of the next meeting.

Best wishes.

Alexander M. Haig. Jr.

Brigadier General, U.S. Army

Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Major General Vernon A. Walters

Military Attache

American Embassy

Paris, France

Haig/vmr 8-8-71

ORAL NOTE

MESSAGE NO. 1

“In an interview with Mr. Szulc of the New York Times, the Ambassador of the Peoples Republic of China in Canada hinted at the possibility of reopening a Warsaw channel. The President shares the common assessment of Premier Chou En-lai and Dr. Kissinger in Peking that the reopening of the Warsaw channel would be unwise at this time. The difficulty of instructing Ambassadors and keeping the contacts secret and the danger of confusion of channels would make the reopening of the Warsaw channel inadvisable prior to the President's trip. Confining exchanges between the Governments to this channel offers the best guarantee of achieving the malt expeditious implementation of the objectives agreed to during Dr. Kissinger's visit to Peking.”

MESSAGE NO. 2

“Dr. Kissinger will be in Paris secretly on August 16 on other business and wishes to meet briefly with the Ambassador of the Peoples Republic of China at 9:00 A.M. In addition to a technical matter, Dr. Kissinger, in line with his discussions in Peking with the Prime Minister of the Peoples Republic of China, wishes to discuss the President's current outlook on the situation surrounding events in East Pakistan. Consistent with the discussion held in Peking which contemplated that we would inform the Peoples Republic of China of any steps we might take affecting the interests of the Peoples Republic, Dr. Kissinger proposes to outline the general approach being considered by the President designed to prevent the outbreak a hostilities between India and Pakistan. The President will allow sufficient time before implementing the specific steps contemplated his general approach in order to permit the Government of the Peoples Republic of China to offer its views should it desire to do so.”

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Published from a copy that indicates Haig signed the original.

16. Letter From the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Paris, August 9, 1971 16. Letter From the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Paris, August 9, 19711

Paris, August 9, 1971

9 August 1971

Dear Al:

Herewith the latest scenario. Immediately upon receipt of your letter and verbal notes I called Mr. Wei and he offered 1530 for a meeting. I accepted. Immediately after that I called Mr. Lieu and arranged to postpone next Monday's meeting until 11:00 a.m. (I did not mention the day over the phone—only the hour.)

At 1530 I went (on foot) to the CPR Embassy. I was received at the gate by Wei and Tsao and escorted into the living room. The Ambassador arrived almost immediately. I said I had received this morning two verbal notes for them. First I read them in French and Wei translated for the Ambassador. Then I dictated them in English to Tsao who wrote them down in English.

The Ambassador said that he would transmit them at once by swift safe means to Peking.

Re the appointment with Dr. Kissinger, he would have to get Peking's views and would let me know.

Jasmine tea, lichee nuts and for the first time dried apricots. Further discussion of languages. Ambassador said Chinese were teaching Mandarin (Kuo Yu) in all schools as linguistic quarrels and difficulties had been an obstacle to unity for two millenia. Short language lesson for me—when I went to China I would learn easily, etc.

Near the end, the Ambassador said that he would see Dr. Kissinger on Monday at 0900. If there was any difficulty about this, Mr. Wei would call me beforehand.

I said I knew how busy the Ambassador was and was grateful for his seeing me so promptly. He said that my visits were in the interests of both our countries and therefore he was always glad to see me. I said that I did not wish to delay them and after one more cup of tea (the 4th) and two more lichee nuts, I was escorted to the door by all three.

Again I felt the reluctance to let me go. It seemed to me that for them to talk to an American was like talking to someone from another planet. (I feel a little bit that way about them myself). Meeting could not have been more cordial. It lasted 35 minutes.

Faithfully,

VERNON A. WALTERS

Major General, USA

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. See Document 15 for the text of the two oral messages.

17. Memorandum of Conversation, Paris, August 16, 1971, 9:05-10:45 a.m. 17. Memorandum of Conversation, Paris, August 16, 1971, 9:05-10:45 a.m.1

Paris, August 16, 1971, 9:05-10:45 a.m.

MEMORANDUM
OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Huang Chen, PRC Ambassador to France

Tsao Kuei Sheng, First Secretary of PRC Embassy

Wei Tung, Secretary to the PRC Ambassador

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Major General Vernon Walters, Defense Attache, U.S. Embassy, Paris

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

August 19, 1971

PLACE: PRC Embassy, Paris

DATE & TIME: Monday, August 16, 1971

9:05 a.m.-10:45 a.m.

Ambassador Huang: You arrived last night?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

Ambassador Huang: You had a good rest?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. I have come to France secretly eleven times byfive different methods. I am going to write a detective story when I am through.

Ambassador Huang: You have very intelligent methods. I transmitted your message and I will now let Mr. Tsao read in English a response in order to save time.

Mr. Tsao: (Reading): An oral message of August 16: “During the interim visit talks will still be held between Prime Minister Chou En-lai and Dr. Kissinger in Peking. The special plane will enter Shanghai and then fly to Peking after a Chinese navigator boards the plane. As to specific details concerning the visits, we would like Dr. Kissinger first to give his views for consideration.” Is that all right [the English]?

Dr. Kissinger: That's very clear. That is a message?

Mr. Tsao: An oral message.

Ambassador Huang: There is a second point I would like to speak about, concerning the negotiations between Huang Hua and the New York Times' Mr. Szulc.

Dr. Kissinger: We don't have complete diplomatic relations with the New York Times, so we are very grateful. (Ambassador Huang laughs.)

Ambassador Huang: I would like to tell the Doctor about this conversation. In his off the record conversation with New York Times' correspondent Mr. Szulc, Ambassador Huang Hua did not give a direct reply when asked whether the Warsaw Talks would continue in the future, but only said that neither side has declared that the Warsaw Talks have ended. These words are in accord with the tacit understanding reached by the two sides at the talks in Peking. It is the understanding of the Chinese government that the Warsaw Talks now exist in name only and that neither side has an interest to reopen the Warsaw channel. However, bureaucratic documents may sometimes still be transmitted through it.

Dr. Kissinger: That is exactly our understanding. That is correct. We were told by Mr. Szulc that your Ambassador had indicated perhaps that we should open the Warsaw Talks. But this clears it up completely. We are in complete agreement.

Ambassador Huang: Would you like some tea?

General Walters: It is the best tea in Paris.

Ambassador Huang: You are quite accustomed to Chinese tea?

Dr. Kissinger: I am not, but I like it very much. Mr. Ambassador I have actually a long list of items which I would like to discuss with you if I could.

Ambassador Huang: Our cook is trying to make some Chinese specialties for our honored guests.

Dr. Kissinger: I absolutely adore Chinese food.

Ambassador Huang: If next time you come in the afternoon, I'll give you more Chinese things to eat. Obviously the Chinese cooking here is not as good as in Peking.

Dr. Kissinger: I am sure. Should I start?

Ambassador Huang: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger: I wanted, in line with my conversation with Prime Minister Chou En-lai, to inform you about some new developments in our relations with the Soviet Union. You can be sure that we will be meticulous about keeping you informed. The Prime Minister will remember that I spoke to him about negotiations going on at that time with the Soviet Union, concerning attempts to try to lessen the dangers of accidental nuclear war. It now seems probable that within the next two weeks we will complete/initial a draft text of an agreement on this question.

The Peoples Republic of China is the first country we are informing of this. We will talk to other countries and our allies, including France, later this week. I would like to give you, Mr. Ambassador, for the government of the Peoples Republic of China the general provisions of this agreement. They are as follows: — Each side, that is to say the Soviet Union and the U.S., will improve its organizational and technical procedures to guard against the accidental or unauthorized use of nuclear arms under its control.

— Second, each party will notify the other immediately in the event of an accidental or unauthorized incident regarding accidental detonation of nuclear weapons which could risk the outbreak of nuclear war.

— The parties will notify each other immediately in the event of detecting unidentified objects if such occurrences could create the risk of nuclear war between the two countries.

— Each party will notify the other in advance of any missile launches which will extend beyond its national territory in the direction of the other party.

— In other situations involving unexplained nuclear incidents each party will act so as to lessen the chance of misinterpretation by the other party.

These are the principal provisions, and I want to add a few additional items of information for the Prime Minister and for the Government.

The Soviet Union is attempting to get us to agree to make the agreement applicable to other countries also. For example, they have asked to include a clause inviting other countries to participate in the agreement. Secondly, they have asked us to include a clause in which we and the Soviet Union have an obligation to report about events in other countries similar to events occurring between the two countries which must be reported in this agreement. In other words, we have to report about you and the French.

We have refused both of these proposals. We cannot prevent the Soviet Union's making unilateral declarations to that effect, but we shall under no circumstances associate ourselves with it. We will make agreements with the Soviet Union only on subjects of direct concern to our two countries, i.e., the Soviet Union and ourselves.

As I told your Prime Minister, we are prepared to sign a similar agreement, on a bilateral basis, with the Peoples Republic of China, but we shall not propose it publicly, and we shall leave the initiative to the Prime Minister.

Ambassador Huang: Shall we eat a little?

(There was then a short break for tea and Chinese specialties, during which there was some light banter about Chinese food and linguistic abilities. )

Dr. Kissinger: I have a few other things to talk about. The reason I go so fast is because I have another meeting later about which you might hear later. (Ambassador Huang laughs.) I think the Ambassador is better informed about my activities than anyone else, certainly better than our Ambassador.

As I told the Prime Minister when I was in Peking, there is a possibility, a probability, that there will be an agreement between the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, France, and the United States about access procedures for Berlin. This is a highly technical negotiation which has no direct implications for the Peoples Republic of China, but if you want I will, through General Walters, let you know the general provisions. This leads to a final point—I would be glad to answer any questions now if you wish on Berlin.

Ambassador Huang: I have listened with great attention to what Dr. Kissinger has said and will transmit it to our Government.

Dr. Kissinger: This leads me to another point which I've already discussed with Prime Minister Chou En-lai when I was in Peking. As you remember, Prime Minister Chou-En-lai said that the Peoples Republic of China would welcome a meeting between the Soviet and American leaders and asked my views on that subject. I told Prime Minister Chou that, prior to my coming to Peking, we had told the Soviet leaders that after we made some specific progress in negotiations we would be disposed to have a meeting with them. I said that we had told this to the Soviets before going to Peking, and I told Prime Minister Chou when I was there.

I am certain that they will now propose a meeting to us. I want to inform you that we will not have a meeting with the Soviet leaders before we have a meeting with the Chinese leaders. I have already informed you about that. We may announce the meeting before going to Peking, but that meeting will not take place before a meeting with the Chinese leaders. If we announce the meeting, we will give you a week's advance warning before the public announcement. It is not yet certain, but it is very possible.

Now let me make a general observation. Since my visit to Peking it is the obvious Soviet strategy to give the impression that they can outmaneuver the Peoples Republic of China by seeming to come much closer to us because they can offer us much more. We understand this strategy. We made a fundamental decision before we visited Peking to put our relations with the Peoples Republic of China on a new basis. We are not affected by these maneuvers. I am prepared to discuss our relations with the Soviet Union fully and openly with the Prime Minister when I am in Peking, and in the meantime I will inform him through you. (Ambassador Huang nods.)

Ambassador Huang: That means that during your next visit to Peking you will discuss this with Prime Minister Chou and keep informing him through me in the meantime?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. That is we will make sure that you will confront no surprises. On any actions that we take that we believe affects your interest, we will want to know your views. I have a whole list of other technical points if the Ambassador has patience.

Ambassador Huang: I will be happy to listen to you.

Dr. Kissinger: This is in order to keep you informed on all matters we believe of interest to the Peoples Republic of China. That is why it takes so long.

After my visit to Peking the Japanese Government suggested either a visit by the President to Japan or a visit by the Emperor to the United States. (Ambassador Huang smiles.) We have avoided these invitations by proposing that the President greet the Emperor in Alaska when the Emperor is on his way to Europe, for one hour. So the President will meet the Emperor from 10:00 to 11:00 at night on September 26 at Anchorage, Alaska at the airport. (Mr. Tsao laughs.) The Emperor was stopping there anyway to refuel his plane. He is not making a special trip.

Prior to my visit to Peking we had invited the Prime Minister of India to visit the United States on November 9. She has now accepted this, perhaps because she has a slightly guilty conscience. The invitation was extended in April. (Ambassador Huang asks for the meaning of guilty conscience and Dr. Kissinger explains.) She wants to prove her nonalignment. She accepted it after the treaty with the Soviet Union. She will receive a correct reception.

I wanted to let the Prime Minister and the Government of the Peoples Republic of China know our general policy with respect to the Subcontinent. (Ambassador Huang asks questions of his interpreter during much of this conversation to make sure that he understands what Dr. Kissinger is saying.)

We face a very difficult situation. The Government of India has a real problem with refugees, but also wants to use this opportunity to humiliate Pakistan. We are prepared to help with the problem of refugees. We will not participate and will strongly discourage any attempt to humiliate Pakistan. We face a very difficult domestic situation in the United States. Indian propaganda is extremely skillful and the opposition party in the United States, which controls Congress, is completely on the side of Indian propaganda. They make it next to impossible to continue military supplies to Pakistan, for example. We are therefore adopting the following strategy. We are attempting to separate the issue of relief of the suffering in East Pakistan and the refugees from the issue of the political future of East Pakistan in which there is no support in the United States. In other words India attempts to get us involved in the political future of East Pakistan. We take the position that this is for Pakistan and not for us.

We are appointing this week a senior official to coordinate the movement of food and other emergency relief into East Pakistan. And we will also make him responsible for consulting with the Government of Pakistan to develop a program to make it possible for a maximum number of refugees to return home so as to deprive India of any pretext for intervention.

I tell you informally that our impression is that the Government of Pakistan is honorable but not imaginative. Anything that other friends of Pakistan can do to encourage it to be imaginative so as to make it possible for the return of the refugees to a maximum extent, will help our general strategy of removing the pretext for India to intervene, to take military action.

Ambassador Huang: To create a Bangla Desh?

Dr. Kissinger: That's not what we are recommending.

Ambassador Huang: I hadn't finished. For in order to create a Bangla Desh India is obviously interfering in the internal affairs of Pakistan and is carrying out subversive actions.

Dr. Kissinger: We agree with that. We are trying to make it more difficult for India to do this. We have told India that if it starts military action we will cut off all economic aid. This is why it is important that Pakistan not start a war.

Ambassador Huang: Dr. Kissinger also knows what has happened recently on the India/Pakistan border. Indian artillery has fired continually on Pakistan territory and Pakistan has protested.

Dr. Kissinger: We are aware of this.

Ambassador Huang: The friends of Pakistan here in Paris say that the Pakistan Government is doing all that it can to repatriate refugees.

Dr. Kissinger: With all honesty, Mr. Ambassador, the Pakistan government is not very imaginative in psychology and in its political strategy. They do ten little things instead of one big thing. And they do ten little things over ten weeks instead of all at once. (Ambassador Huang laughs.)

Ambassador Huang: Pakistan's friends in Paris say that India has greatly exaggerated the number of refugees.

Dr. Kissinger: We don't know because they don't permit foreign observers in these areas. We will attempt to find means to start our economic assistance to Pakistan again, and the man we are appointing, Mr. Williams, is going this week to Pakistan to see with the Pakistan government how we can recommence this aid. We give economic assistance together with other countries, and up to now the other countries won't give and we are searching for ways to start it up again.

We are prevented by our Congress from giving military assistance but we understand it if other friends of Pakistan will give them the equipment they need. But we will do what we can in the economic field and we will have a large program to supply food and other material to prevent chaos in East Pakistan. And we will do nothing to embarrass the Government of Pakistan by any public statements. We leave it to the Government of the Peoples Republic of China, but any views that it may have on this subject will be taken very seriously by us.

I have only two more matters. I am afraid Mr. Tsao has a long telegram to write. (Ambassador Huang laughs.)

Ambassador Huang: We will make a very detailed report.

Dr. Kissinger: The first has to do with my trip. I must be in the United States during the week of October 25, because President Tito of Yugoslavia will visit Washington during that week beginning October 25. I would therefore like to propose, subject to the approval of the Government of the Peoples Republic of China, that I pay my interim visit during the week of October 18 for three to four days, say four days. Starting the 18th, 19th or 20th, whichever is more convenient. I understand that the Prime Minister said the second half of October. Whichever is more convenient to the Peoples Republic of China.

Ambassador Huang: I will transmit this to the Prime Minister.

Dr. Kissinger: After we have your reply we will make specific proposals about the agenda, etc. It would also be helpful if we could have the proposal of the Prime Minister about when we should announce this visit.

I will arrive in one of the airplanes of the President and come either from Hawaii or Alaska—I have not yet decided. So you will let me know about the date and your proposal for an announcement? And how we should make it?

Finally, I would like to propose to the Government of the Peoples Republic of China a possible date for the President's visit to the Peoples Republic of China. I have two dates. The first is for about a week starting February 21, 1972. The second possibility is for the same period starting March 16, 1972. We leave it to the Government of the Peoples Republic of China to tell us the date.

Ambassador Huang: Do you have a preference between these two dates?

Dr. Kissinger: A slight preference for February but it is not decisive. Today I really have an enormous amount of business to do with you.

Ambassador Huang: I am prepared to listen as long as you want, as long as this does not compromise your next visit.

Dr. Kissinger: I think that the Ambassador knows that my next visit is already compromised. (Ambassador Huang laughs.) When I was in Peking, Ambassador Huang Hua was very kind to me. I have a note here welcoming him to the North American continent. It also says how he can get in touch with me if I can be useful to him. I wonder if you could transmit it for me?

Ambassador Huang: I will transmit it as soon as possible.

Dr. Kissinger: One other thought for your consideration. It is conceivable—I can't imagine it now—that there may be an emergency in which communications to Paris are difficult, and if in those circumstances, the Government of the Peoples Republic of China wants to be in touch with us rapidly or we with it in a crisis, my letter suggests how this can be done. We understand that this is only for emergencies and that this is the principal channel, the one here. As far as I am concerned you can use any of the telephone numbers there. The safest is the White House number because they always are in contact with me. That is designed for jealous wives who can always find their husbands. On your side I leave it to you.

Ambassador Huang: We will tell you later.

Dr. Kissinger: When I was in Peking, the Prime Minister asked me how much Lend Lease aid we gave in World War II. It is for his scholarly pursuits. (Ambassador Huang laughs.) The total amount is $48.4 billion. The program technically ended in March 1948. Twenty-five per cent of this went to the Soviet Union. That's all I have.

Ambassador Huang: That includes military equipment?

Dr. Kissinger: I will have to check. This was before inflation. I want to tell you one other thing. I am taking General Walters home for a week's vacation. He will return August 25.

General Walters: I will be available after that for any information you want to transmit.

Dr. Kissinger: Does that create any problems for you?

Ambassador Huang: I will transmit all that Dr. Kissinger has said to Prime Minister Chou En-lai and if I have anything I will transmit it after August 25.

General Walters: Thank you Mr. Ambassador.

Dr. Kissinger: Is it possible in protocol to send my personal regards to the Prime Minister who impressed me very much?

Ambassador Huang: I will transmit them.

Dr. Kissinger: I look forward to seeing him again.

Ambassador Huang: Now you are compromising your next meeting.

(Dr. Kissinger then explained the various telephone numbers and the White House switchboard. )

Dr. Kissinger: The White House always answers. During the day it is better to call me direct. The second number in the letter is covered from 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. The White House number is twenty-four hours a day. The first number is always in contact with me no matter when. It is better to contact me with the first number.

General Walters: They can always find him.

Dr. Kissinger: Sometimes it is very embarrassing.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Lord on August 19. All brackets in the source text. The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy.

18. Letter From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Chinese Ambassador to Canada (Huang Hua), Paris, August 16, 1971 18. Letter From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Chinese Ambassador to Canada (Huang Hua), Paris, August 16, 19711

Paris, August 16, 1971

8/16/71

Dear Mr. Ambassador:

Welcome to the North American continent. It is clear from news reports that you have already received warm greetings in your new post, and I would like to add my own.

I will always retain vivid memories of my forty-nine hours in Peking and the graceful hospitality with which my colleagues and I were received.

Please feel free to call upon me whenever you believe I can be of assistance, whether it be to clarify events or provide you with government publications (unclassified, of course!).

I thought it might be useful for you to have my telephone numbers at which you could reach me quickly if some urgent matter required it. The White House switchboard always knows my whereabouts and its number is Area Code 202, 456-1414; my direct office number is 456-2235. Alternatively, you could also contact Winston Lord of my staff whom you met in Peking, either via the White House switchboard or at his home, 363-8221.

Best regards,

His Excellency

The Honorable Huang Hua

The Ambassador of the People's Republic of China

Ottawa

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. No classification marking. A handwritten note reads: “8/16/71-handed by HAK to Amb. Huang Chen in Paris for transmittal to Huang Hua.” Published from a copy that indicates Kissinger initialed the original.

19. Memorandum of Conversation, Paris, September 13, 1971, 8:45-10:40 a.m. 19. Memorandum of Conversation, Paris, September 13, 1971, 8:45-10:40 a.m.1

Paris, September 13, 1971, 8:45-10:40 a.m.

MEMORANDUM
OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Huang Chen, PRC Ambassador to France

Tsao Kuei Sheng, First Secretary of PRC Embassy

Wei Tung, Secretary to the PRC Ambassador

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Major General Vernon Walters, Defense Attache, U.S. Embassy, Paris

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

PLACE: PRC Embassy, Paris

DATE & TIME: Monday, September 13, 1971

8:45 a.m. - 10:40 a.m.

Ambassador Huang: The traffic is terrible.

Dr. Kissinger: We took what we thought was a shortcut, and there turned out to be a traffic jam.

General Walters: There were many Americans in the quarter, and we wanted to avoid them. (Chinese laughter)

Dr. Kissinger: Since my trip to China I am very well known in America.

Ambassador Huang: In the whole world.

Dr. Kissinger: I must tell the Ambassador a story. The other day the manager of a nightclub singer asked me if I could help her client sing in the nightclubs of China. I said, “just as soon as they establish some.” (Chinese laughter)

Ambassador Huang: That was a good answer. Would you like some tea? You made a long trip yesterday. I see you are in good health.

Dr. Kissinger: I had a little vacation on the West Coast.

Ambassador Huang (to General Walters): You went to the United States?

General Walters: Last time, yes.

Dr. Kissinger: Mr. Lord was also with me on the West Coast.

Ambassador Huang: If Dr. Kissinger agrees, I'll transmit a message. This is in response to your questions of August 16 and September 1. In order to gain time I will have Mr. Tsao read the message. (Mr. Tsao then read an oral note as follows, full text also attached at Tab A):

“The Chinese Government agrees that Dr. Kissinger's four day interim visit to China should take place beginning October 20.

According to its customary practice, the Chinese side would issue a press release only upon Dr. Kissinger's arrival in China and not in advance. But if the U.S. side deems it necessary to make the visit known beforehand, the Chinese side proposes that the two sides issue on October 14 their respective press releases of the same content in the following wording:

'The Government of the People's Republic of China and the Government of the United States of America have agreed that Dr. Kissinger will visit Peking in the latter part of October for talks with the Chinese Government to make concrete arrangements for President Nixon's visit to China.'

As for the U.S. proposal regarding the time of President Nixon's visit to China, it may be discussed and decided upon during Dr. Kissinger's interim visit.”

Dr. Kissinger: May I raise two questions? One concerns the following. If the announcement is made on the 14th and if we arrive on the 20th, then it is necessary on the 14th to announce the date of my arrival, because there would only be a week in between and I would have to leave in four days (after the announcement). The date (in the Chinese draft) only says the latter part of October.

Ambassador Huang: The 20th would be toward the end of October.

Dr. Kissinger: If we announce on the 14th … I assume when you say the 20th, that means I have to arrive there on that date.

Ambassador Huang: That's right.

Dr. Kissinger: That means I must leave Washington the 17th or 18th, because I lose a day going West. If we make an announcement on the 14th and I disappear three days later, it will look very odd if we don't announce it (the date of arrival in Peking).

Ambassador Huang: You're saying that if one announces October 14, it is better to specify that you arrive on the 20th.

Dr. Kissinger: I have to check. My instinct tells me that we would prefer to make an announcement a few days earlier. It is easier for us frankly to make the announcement a few days earlier. I must get together a different group than last time and must arrange for our airplane because we used the Pakistani airplane last time. But I will give you an answer within 48 hours.

The second problem we have, Mr. Ambassador, this is minor, that is … (at this point light refreshments were served). You have an unfair advantage. I love Chinese food. After this I will agree to anything.

Ambassador Huang: Pas trop de zéle!

Dr. Kissinger: For us a movement of the President is a matter of great complication. We would like to know whether the two dates we gave you are generally acceptable or whether while I am in China another date completely different will be proposed.

Ambassador Huang: That I can't answer. I believe that in talking directly with the Prime Minister you can settle all these questions.

Dr. Kissinger: Perhaps you can tell the Prime Minister we will hold both dates, but it will be very difficult to have another.

Ambassador Huang: I'll certainly tell him.

(There was then some light conversation while Chinese delicacies, wine and tea were being consumed. The talk revolved around food and hospitality, concerning both of which Dr. Kissinger praised China. The Ambassador said that Americans were noted for their hospitality too. He said each country had its good qualities, although not all of them necessarily had good food. Note was also made that spaghetti was brought back to Italy from China by Marco Polo. Dr. Kissinger said that when Prime Minister Chou En-lai returned the President's visit, he hoped the Ambassador would come also. The Ambassador noted that when he was Vice Minister he accompanied the Prime Minister to fourteen countries in Asia and Africa. Dr. Kissinger also remarked that concerning Japanese food he gets embarrassed to ask what it is sometimes, because he is not sure that he could then eat it.)

Ambassador Huang: I think the problems can be easily solved with the Prime Minister when you are in Peking.

I have another thing to say.

Dr. Kissinger: I noticed you have another piece of paper.

Ambassador Huang: You raised the question last time, concerning your proposal about another channel. It seems to us for the moment that there is no need to use the Ottawa channel. If it is necessary to be further considered, then this question may be discussed under certain circumstances during Dr. Kissinger's visit.

Dr. Kissinger: This was only for emergency. For normal business we want to use this channel. Our suggestion was only for unusual circumstances when it is difficult to use Paris. We can discuss that when I am in Peking.

There are a number of things that I would like to cover concerning my visit.

We will give you an answer on the announcement of the visit and the text within a few days.

I have always been very honest and meticulous with the Prime Minister and therefore I want to inform you of what may happen. As I told you last time, we are constantly receiving Soviet approaches now about this or that negotiation, and we have always informed you immediately. We do not inform them of our conversations with you. And the Prime Minister should know that they do not know from our sources that I see you and what I discuss with you. One reason is that no American sources know I am talking to you except the President. (Ambassador Huang laughs.)

As I told the Prime Minister and as I told you on August 16, the Soviet Union has made several proposals to us about a possible visit to the Soviet Union. We have told them that we would not visit the Soviet Union until after we have visited the People's Republic of China. However, we expect that Foreign Minister Gromyko, who is arriving in the United States on September 19, will bring a formal invitation. Since we have already delayed our answer for three months, it would be difficult to delay an answer again because they have met all our conditions regarding outstanding negotiations. And to be quite honest with you, the reason we had proposed September 21 or September 22 for the announcement was so that whatever we and you announced would not appear as a reaction to the visit of the Foreign Minister.

Gromyko comes to the United Nations, not to the United States, but it is customary on each visit to the United States that he visit the President. (There followed some discussion in Chinese among the Chinese.)

Ambassador Huang: That means you propose to announce the visit on the 21st?

Dr. Kissinger: You remember, on September 1, General Walters proposed that we announce my visit to China on September 21. We chose that date—we didn't know then—because it has been normal for Gromyko to come to the United Nations at that time. He is not coming at our invitation; it is normal. It is also normal when he comes to the UN that he visits the President. Frankly, we therefore wanted to announce my visit to China before we talked to Gromyko. We didn't wish to say this to you because we didn't wish to embarrass or exercise pressure on you. Since then we have been told of his visit. He arrives September 19. He will probably see the President on September 29, which is the latest possible date. It is not a visit to America. It is a visit to the United Nations.

Ambassador Huang: If in your view we announce you're going to China on the 21st, what date do you expect to go to China?

Dr. Kissinger: The one we discussed, October 20.

General Walters: He was explaining only why we proposed the 21st (for the announcement).

Dr. Kissinger: The arrival date is no problem for me. Or the 22nd for the announcement.

Ambassador Huang: We will await your answer.

Dr. Kissinger: You can report to the Prime Minister that the arrival date of October 20 is acceptable. The announcement text I want to check in Washington and it is probably acceptable, but I wanted you to know of the other problem.

Ambassador Huang: On the question of the date of the announcement you will let us know through General Walters.

Dr. Kissinger: And if you have any different views, you will let us know.

Ambassador Huang: We will let you know.

Dr. Kissinger: I just wanted to make sure you knew why, and if anything important happens between Gromyko and the President which bears on the question of the President's visit to Moscow, I'll let you know as soon as possible. But it will be in no case before the President's visit to China.

In fact, if we visited every country that invites us before we visit China, we will spend all our time traveling. (Ambassador Huang laughs.)

May I raise some practical questions with regard to my visit to China?

Ambassador Huang: I am ready to hear and to transmit them.

Dr. Kissinger: My crew and my pilots will be the same as those accompanying the President when he goes to China. This means that there will be about eighteen to twenty members in the crew of the plane. Of those, four will be guards, four will be communicators, four will be pilots and navigators, and the rest will be stewards. We will give you a list of their names and their passport numbers within a week. There are many technical questions connected with this plane that I don't understand.

(Ambassador Huang laughs.)

General Walters: You have an aeronautical engineer here.

Dr. Kissinger: I have asked our technical people to write them down. I will give them to you and perhaps you can give them (the answers) to General Walters. It has to do with what type of fuel, etc. (Dr. Kissinger hands list at Tab B to Ambassador Huang.)

General Walters: I think you have an aeronautical engineer here.

Ambassador Huang: No.

Dr. Kissinger: We will arrive from Hawaii to Shanghai, with one stop at Wake Island, just to get fuel. We plan to arrive on the 20th in daylight hours so that we can go on to Peking in daylight hours, because the pilot would like to know the approach to the Peking airport.

Ambassador Huang: That is no problem.

Dr. Kissinger: We wanted to let you know. In my own party it will be up to ten people, and I have a list of the types of people we will take along. I would like to explain it to you.

I told the Prime Minister that China has suffered the visits of many barbarians, but never the advance party for a President. This will be a test of your historical experience. (Ambassador Huang laughs.)

My party will be composed of two types of people, subject to your approval. A group of substantive people similar to ones I had on my previous visit, with only one or two secretaries in addition. Secondly, I would like to bring three or four technical people who can make preliminary preparations for the President's visit.

Ambassador Huang: I must absent myself for a few minutes. I have something to do right now. (The Ambassador left the room for about two minutes during which there was some small talk.)

Dr. Kissinger: These technical people are comprised of the following. First there is a press man from the White House—not a journalist.

Ambassador Huang: He belongs to Mr. Ziegler.

Dr. Kissinger: I have the uneasy feeling that you know more about the White House than I do. You certainly know more about General Walters than I do. (Ambassador Huang laughs.)

Second, a representative from White House Communications Agency about communications.

Third, one representative of the U.S. Secret Service who is responsible for the personal security of the President.

General Walters: He has nothing to do with secret service.

Dr. Kissinger: I have called to their urgent attention the Prime Minister's comment that the security of the President in China is your responsibility. They have promised me that they will be less in evidence in the People's Republic of China than they are in the United States.

(Chinese laughter)

The fourth man is a specimen who exists, to the best of my knowledge, in no other country. I will explain about him. It is a particular form of decadence. (Ambassador Huang laughs.) He is responsible for all the technical arrangements for a Presidential visit. It is a job that is done by protocol in all other countries. I have asked them to write down the problems that they want to discuss, and frankly they are not worth my time or the Prime Minister's time. For example, how many cars should be in a motorcade, where the baggage is to be stored, etc. (Ambassador Huang laughs.) Unless this fascinates the Prime Minister I propose we let the advance man handle this.

I will bring a junior member from each of these departments. This is for two reasons. One, he can have only very preliminary discussions, so both sides know what is in the other's mind without any possibility of deadlock or misunderstanding. Two, while this sort of problem bores me, if they are in my party I can control them entirely, but if they come completely alone it is more difficult (Ambassador Huang laughs).

To be honest, I am not sure that they know all the fine points of sovereignty. I guarantee that they will learn that when I am along. (He hands over the list at Tab C.) These are the types of points they will discuss.

General Walters: That is, the advance man.

Dr. Kissinger: This will not be to make a final decision, but to have a very preliminary discussion. They won't want a final decision there when I come. (Mr. Tsao reads the list quickly.)

Ambassador Huang: We will transmit this to Peking.

Dr. Kissinger: I repeat this is only for a very exploratory conversation. Before the President's visit this can be worked out in greater detail, but this would help our planning to have some preliminary ideas. If you don't want them, we can have them come separately later. My personal recommendation is that the discussions will be better controlled if I am there. Here is a list of the members of the party. (He hands over the list at Tab D.) I have already said it orally.

I think Mr. Tsao will be busy on his telegram. (Chinese laughter)

We have one additional problem about this which I will talk to you about frankly. Contrary to my previous visit, I must on this trip involve some members of the regular bureaucracy. (Chinese laughter) We have not used the opportunity to go through the process of cleaning them out. We still have many members of the old bureaucracy. In other words, we have not reduced our bureaucracy in the way the Prime Minister explained to me he had reduced his.

I would like therefore to propose to the Prime Minister the following procedure. We should have two types of meetings. One of the entire group … I am discussing procedures when I am there.

First of all, none of the technical people will attend any meetings with me. The technical people should speak to their colleagues.

Among the other group I propose two types of meetings. One, when all the members of my group, less the technicians, will be present. At those meetings the Chinese side can explain its general position along the lines that the Prime Minister explained, for example, to Mr. Reston of the New York Times. Your general philosophy, general views.

There should be another type of meeting at which on our side there would only be Mr. Lord and one secretary, at which we could work out with precision some of the understandings of our two sides and some of the details of the conversations of the President's visit. I will leave it to your subtlety to arrange these meetings so that they will appear to take place naturally. (Ambassador Huang smiles.) While I have these discussions with the Prime Minister, we can let the other members of the group discuss cultural exchange and trade and technical issues.

I have every confidence that you can manage this very well.

Now as for what I would like to discuss with the Prime Minister. First, the approximate length and itinerary of the President's visit. We are thinking of up to seven days, and, as I discussed with the Prime Minister in Peking, perhaps two other places. But you are the host and we will wait for your proposal. I don't need the answers until I get there.

Secondly, in our official party for the President, we will bring very few people—the President, myself, the Secretary of State, one or two aides for each, and technical people. We propose that when the President is in the People's Republic, the meetings are split up, like during my visit, on the two levels. We propose also that these be split into two parts similar to my visit. That is to say, the Secretary of State can have separate conversations with your acting Foreign Minister. But that too we can make definite when I am in Peking.

I just want to give the Prime Minister a chance to prepare himself so I am not surprising him. Also the Prime Minister and I should discuss the conduct of these meetings (during the President's visit), the approximate schedule, and which side should raise which question.

As a former professor, I am given to pedantry.

Ambassador Huang: You have thought of everything.

Dr. Kissinger: As for the agenda, I think that the Prime Minister and I should cover some of the same topics we discussed previously in more detail. Of course, this is always subject to your counter proposals. Of those topics I believe that the issue of Taiwan, the Soviet Union, Japan, and Indochina should be discussed in detail only in the smaller group.

Also, the Prime Minister and I should discuss some of the concrete results that should emerge from this visit, from the President's visit. We believe that these discussions can have a historical significance and therefore should not fail for lack of preparation or pressure of time while we are there. Therefore it is important to prepare them as carefully as possible. In addition to some results which we cannot announce but which we will nevertheless carry out, there is some, I believe, we could announce as a result of the President's visit.

For example, the Prime Minister proposed to me that there could be periodic visits of a senior American representative to Peking. We would be prepared to agree to this, and in addition we are prepared to recommend periodic visits of senior Chinese officials.

We will be prepared to extend an invitation to the Prime Minister to visit Washington as a return visit to the President's visit to Peking. All of this is to be announced after the President's visit, not after mine. It is just to be discussed during mine.

Third, we are prepared to make any agreement with the People's Republic of China that we have already made with the Soviet Union. For example the problem of war by accident, of unintended war, or the improvement of communications for emergency. We are aware of the Prime Minister's view that the People's Republic of China does not want to be lassoed by the existing nuclear powers, and we will make no such proposal.

We are prepared to discuss cultural and scientific exchange, for example, the exchange of medical personnel, academic exchange, weather information, surveys of earth resources. We will also be prepared to discuss the establishment of civil air links between our two countries.

This is in addition to whatever I have already discussed with the Prime Minister. And of course any topic which the Chinese side wishes to raise with us.

One more word on the technical side, and then I have two or three substantive matters. This has to do with the number of press people the President will have to bring with him. I have told our people that it should be a minimum number. Their definition of minimum is between 100 and 150 people. (Ambassador Huang laughs.) Or two divisions.

Ambassador Huang: A company.

Dr. Kissinger: I think you and he (General Walters) have a plot among Generals.

General Walters: It is necessary to have Generals for peace.

Dr. Kissinger: He (General Walters) tells me you want him to study the subway of Peking.

Perhaps for my visit, Mr. Ambassador, your side could consider what would be the minimum and maximum number of press people. (This was not translated.) I will bring no journalists at all.

Ambassador Huang: It will be necessary to have an extra plane for the journalists.

Dr. Kissinger: For the President's visit, yes. This is usually true.

Ambassador Huang: For the journalists only. Even big airplanes?

General Walters: It will be necessary to charter a plane for them.

Dr. Kissinger: I must tell you, Mr. Ambassador, their manners are bad even by American standards, and I don't know what you will think of them by Chinese standards. (Chinese laughter) If you tell me when I come to China—I don't need to know in advance—what you consider the minimum and maximum number, then we will be guided by your views.

Ambassador Huang: You can discuss this with the Prime Minister.

Dr. Kissinger: I only want to give in advance the type of things I will be discussing with him. All I can tell you is that Mr. Reston is one of our humblest journalists. I tell you when I read his interview with the Prime Minister I couldn't tell who the Prime Minister was. I am not referring to the Prime Minister—Mr. Reston behaved as if he were head of a sovereign country. (Ambassador Huang laughs.) We have no complaint at all about what the Prime Minister said. I was commenting on the long speeches that Mr. Reston made to the Prime Minister which was not characteristic of a journalist. We thought the Prime Minister's answers were very understanding and not at all surprising.

I want to let the Prime Minister know a number of relatively minor things. The Ambassador of Romania saw me at the request of his President. He expressed concern about some of the pressures that were being put on Romania. I want the Prime Minister to know what I replied.

One, the U.S. has a major interest in the independence and autonomous policy of Romania.

Two, the U.S. will do nothing directly or indirectly that amounts to collusion that would enable another great power to infringe on the independence and autonomous policy of Romania.

Three, the U.S. will make clear that pressures for military action are not consistent with relaxation of tension.

Four, the President ordinarily never receives Ambassadors, but he will see the Romanian Ambassador and will repeat these statements to him personally. And we will announce the visit of the Romanian Ambassador but not the content of the conversation.

Two other pieces of information. One, with respect to Pakistan. We will announce during October certain relief for debts which Pakistan owes, to the extent of $75 million.

Ambassador Huang: What do you mean by relief?

Dr. Kissinger: Pakistan has declared a moratorium on its international debts which ends in October. We will work out a rescheduling, the practical consequence of which will be that Pakistan will benefit to the extent of $75 million. I frankly don't understand the details myself.

Secondly, our calculations are that for relief in East Pakistan there will be needed between $250 and $300 million. And we will pay 75 percent of that, up to $250 million.

Ambassador Huang: In what form?

Dr. Kissinger: In the form of food, counterpart funds, and direct appropriations. Counterpart funds are Pakistani money which we control.

General Walters: Pakistan rupees which belong to America.

Dr. Kissinger: I wanted to reaffirm to the Prime Minister what I said to him with respect to Taiwan when I was there. Because the press is very active in its speculation at this time.

Finally, the Japanese press has announced that I am visiting Japan in the very near future. It is not true. There is no such plan.

I think I've given enough to Mr. Tsao to keep him busy.

Ambassador Huang: He will do it with pleasure.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File—China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Lord, who sent it to Kissinger under a covering memorandum. All ellipses in the source text. The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy. Attached but not published are Tabs B-C. Tab A is published in its entirety as Document 20.

20. Message From the Government of the People's Republic of China to the Government of the United States, Beijing, September 13, 1971 20. Message From the Government of the People's Republic of China to the Government of the United States, Beijing, September 13, 19711

Beijing, September 13, 1971

Text of Chinese Oral Note

Presented September 13, 1971

The Chinese Government agrees that Dr. Kissinger's four day interim visit to China should take place beginning October 20.

According to its customary practice, the Chinese side would issue a press release only upon Dr. Kissinger's arrival in China and not in advance. But if the U.S. side deems it necessary to make the visit known beforehand, the Chinese side proposes that the two sides issue on October 14 their respective press releases of the same content in the following wording:

“The Government of the People's Republic of China and the Government of the United States of America have agreed that Dr. Kissinger will visit Peking in the latter part of October for talks with the Chinese Government to make concrete arrangements for President Nixon's visit to China.”

As for the U.S. proposal regarding the time of President Nixon's visit to China, it may be discussed and decided upon during Dr. Kissinger's interim visit.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only.

21. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, August 31, 1971 21. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, August 31, 19711

Washington, August 31, 1971

August 31, 1971

Dear Dick:

Pursuant to our phone conversation, attached at Tab A you will find the oral note which you will wish to read to the Chinese Ambassador in Paris. At Tab B is an additive statement for you to also give orally to the Chinese Ambassador when you complete reading the oral note. This is designed to give him unofficially and not for our files the flavor of our reasoning for the dates mentioned in the oral note.

At Tab C is our preferred version of the announcement which you are to hand to the Chinese Ambassador. You will note that the dates are left open both with respect to the President's visit and Kissinger's preliminary visit, pending receipt of the Chinese reply to our earlier inquiry. If this reply is not received prior to your meeting with the Chinese Ambassador you should make it clear to him why the dates are blank.

Best regards,

Alexander M. Haig, Jr.

Brigadier General, U.S. Army Deputy

Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Major General Vernon A. Walters

Senior Military Attache

American Embassy

Paris

[Tab A]

ORAL NOTE

The Accidental War Agreement between the United States and the U.S.S.R. will be signed in Washington on September 30, 1971. This fact is still secret. Provisions will be those outlined by Dr. Kissinger to Ambassador Huang Chen on August 16, 1971.

We propose a joint announcement of the President's and Dr. Kissinger s visits to China. The announcement should be made at 9:00 AM or 10:00 AM, September 20, 21 or 22, Washington time, with preference for September 20.

Dr. Kissinger will pass through Paris on September 11 and can settle these matters then with Ambassador Huang Chen.

[Tab B]

In passing this oral note, Walters should add orally:

That the dates for the announcement were selected because of State visits the following week. The President will be in Anchorage on September 26, following which there will be State visits the 28th and 29th in Washington. The Accidental War Agreement will be signed on September 30th. We want to get this announcement made before the Accidental War Agreement.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Published from a copy that indicates Haig signed the original. At Tab A is an oral note for Huang. At Tab B is a statement Walters was to deliver orally after he read Huang the first message. Attached but not published at Tab C is an announcement concerning proposed dates for Kissinger's and Nixon's upcoming visits to China.

22. Memorandum From the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Paris, September 1, 1971 22. Memorandum From the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Paris, September 1, 19711

Paris, September 1, 1971

MEMORANDUM

TO GENERAL HAIG

Paris

1 September 1971

Call on Chinese Ambassador:

From: V.A. WALTERS

Following your call on the evening (Paris time) of Aug 31st. I called the Chinese Embassy and made arrangements to see the Ambassador on the morning of 1 Sept. I spoke to Tsao.

At 0730 on September I met courier Middleton at Orly. His plane arrived a half hour early. Took him into the office and took cognizance of the contents of the envelope he brought me from you. At 11 a.m. Paris time I called alone at the Chinese residence in Neuilly and was received as usual by Wei and Tsao and very shortly afterwards we were joined by the Ambassador.

The meeting was cordial as always but it seemed to me that I detected a sort of embarrassment on their part at the fact that they had not yet had an answer to the questions asked by Dr. Kissinger when he saw them on 16 Aug. They did not say flatly that they had not had an answer but this was clear to me and I did not press them in order not to increase their embarassment.

I then read the Oral note, first in English for Tsao and then in French for Wei, both of whom took careful note of it. Following that I added the additional oral message contained in your tab B. They also took careful note of this and as instructed I then handed them the text of the proposed announcement and added that our preferred date was the 21st as instructed verbally by you, as well as the rest of your telephone instructions. They seemed a little confused at these dates but I explained them to their satisfaction, mentioning that the Anchorage trip was due to the passage there of the Emperor of Japan as related by Dr. Kissinger the last time he saw Ambassador Huang Chen. This brought dawn and comprehension.

The Ambassador then said that he would see Dr. Kissinger on the morning of the 11th subject of course to Peking's authorization. He also asked whther it was our desire to make the announcement concerning the President's visit and Dr. Kissinger's visit at the same time, and I replied that it what I understood from the text of the announcement which we were submitting to them. He understood fully why there were blank dates in our proposed text.

That was about all there was in substance, but there was as much usual chit chat as on other occasions. The Ambassador said that hoped that the Emperor of Japan would not return to the deeds of early in his reign, such as attacking China and Pearl Harbor. I said that the Emperor was now the symbol of the Nation and the Ambassador said that real power was in Sato's hands. The Ambassador then said that it was very interesting that the channel for messages between the two governments passed through the hands of soldiers (himself and me) For the first time in history Mankind had the means to destroy itself. China was dedicated to peaceful coexistence and would do everything to bring this about. I replied that when the Chinese got to know America better they would find that this was true of us too. For many years we had had the monopoly of an absolute weapon and had never chosen to use it. He nodded. He then asked whether I had enjoyed my vacation in the U.S. I replied that vacation was a grandiose word as I had been in Washington from Monday to Friday and had spent Saturday and Sunday at my brothers returning to Paris on the following Monday. Thus my vacation had lasted two days.

I said however that I had no complaints to make as my work was most interesting. He leaned forward, tapped me on the knee and said “it is most important for all of mankind.”

Ambassador Huang Chen then asked me whether my Soviet Colleagues had ever asked me about Sino American relations. I answered truthfully that they never had. He then asked whether the Soviets knew about Dr. Kissinger's trips in secrecy to Paris. I replied that I did not know for sure, but that experience with the Russians had convinced me that they were very intelligent but were not all 2 meters tall. He roared with laughter and slapped me on the back.

He then asked me what I did for exercise other than bicyling, (another demonstration of biographic expertise) and I replied that I skied in the winter and swam in the summer when I had time. Unlike many Americans I walked a great deal. I said that in my country with 220 million people there were about 100 million cars and this was not conducive to much walking (He seemed staggered at the figures and asked me to repeat them) however we still did quite well in the Olympic Games. I then noted that a Chinese jumper had recently set a world mark and he said that this man had done even better more recently. He then said that recently he had raced an elderly Frenchman who though more than 80 years of age could still race. I asked who had won and he said that he had taken his opponent's age into account and the race had ended in a tie. I then said that I could see why he had been made an Ambassador. He looked pleased at this and said that we were both soldiers but he was a beginner at diplomacy. I said this was true of me too. (No thunderbolts from heaven struck the Chinese Embassy during this exchange). I then told him the story about the man who asked what was the difference between the military and the diplomats and another man had replied “None. They both do nothing, but the military do it very early in the morning in complete discipline and the diplomats do it late in the afternoon in utter confusion.” He laughed and said it must surely have been a politician who said that.

All of this was is the usual room in the Chinese Embassy, accompanied by Jasmine Tea, preserved apples and rice wine (I had only one glass and it tastes nearly as bad as Vodka). There were two new elements, excellent Chinese Ravioli and some small shrimp cakes, which like Lichee nuts I eat only in the service of my country. Only Dr. K apparently rates incense. There was none for me.

There was more of this but I will not bore you with the detail. My stay with them lasted about 45 minutes. I went there on foot and as far as I could tell (which is not far) I was unobserved. I was ushered to the door by all three as usual.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly.

23. Memorandum of Conversation, Paris, September 3, 1971, 11 a.m. 23. Memorandum of Conversation, Paris, September 3, 1971, 11 a.m.1

Paris, September 3, 1971, 11 a.m.

On September 3, 1971 in pursuance of instructions received during the night, I called at the Chinese Embassy in Paris at 1100. As usual I was received at the gate by Wei, (dressed for the first time in Mao uniform with Red Mao badge with profile in gold of the great one), and at the entrance to the building by Tsao. I was led into the living room and after about two minutes Ambassador Huang Chen joined us. On the table there was the inevitable jasmine tea, preserved apples and Lichee nuts.

I then delivered my message regarding the forthcoming negotiations between the Soviet Union and ourselves in an effort to reach an agreement to prevent incidents at sea. I said this was desirable because of the proximity of Soviet ships to ours. The Ambassador grinned and said he hoped that there would be no collisions. I said that I understood that this was the purpose of the forthcoming negotiations. He then asked at what level the negotiations would be held and I replied that I did not know (which was not true) but my personal guess was that it would be at Asst Secretary of the Navy level.

The Ambassador then abruptly brought up the population problem, saying that Khruschev had once said that a Czechoslovakia (17 million) was born every year in China. The Chinese felt this could be a problem and were endeavoring by education, not coercion to reduce their birth rate. This was difficult to do in a country where large families had always been considered desirable. Still their efforts had borne fruit and the population increase was down to about 10 million a year.

Amb. Huang Chen then pressed more tea and preserved apples on me, and asked whether I had seen the French television show on Chinese anaesthesia by acupuncture (needles). I said that I had and he added that this was a great Chinese dicovery that would be of benefit to all humanity. About two years ago they had discovered that it was possible to anaesthetize in this way thus avoiding the shock of anaesthesia by conventional means that was often dangerous to patients with heart trouble. This technique was now widely practiced throughout China, at least in the great cities like Shanghai and Canton. The Chinese had made another great discovery recently and this was the cure of polio victims through acupuncture. We had found a vaccine but they had discovered a cure which enables victims to walk again. What a difference this would have made to President Franklin Roosevelt who had had great prestige throughout the world. He then said that James Reston had written very objectively about his stay in China. I asked “about everything?” He grinned and said “At least about his medical treatment.” He then said that the Chinese were quite prepared to exchange these techniques for others developed by the United States and other countries for the benefit of mankind.

They were grateful for the news I brought, though not effusively so. This time there was no trace of the embarrassment that I had noted on my last call on them. This time I again noted strongly the desire to keep me as long as possible. The atmosphere could not have been more cordial. The Ambassador said I would have a chance to see all this when I went to China. He said that he had already transmitted to Peking the messages I had previously given him and as soon as he had an answer he would be in touch with me. They took careful notes while I was delivering the message about the negotiations, but took no notes during the subsequent chit chat.

After 4 cups of Jasmine tea, three slices of preserved apples and no lichee nuts. I was most cordially escorted by all to the door.

V.A. WALTERS

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. A handwritten notation reads: “Secret/Sensitive.” The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy.

24. Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, September 13, 1971 24. Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, September 13, 19711

Washington, September 13, 1971

FROM:GENERAL HAIG

VIA - SSO CHANNELS (BY ONE TIME PAD)

FOR: GENERAL WALTERS

MESSAGE TO BE DELIVERED TO MAJOR GENERAL WALTERS, U.S. MILITARY ATTACHE, AT OPENING OF BUSINESS, TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 14. TEXT OF MESSAGE TO BE CODED.

Please contact Chinese Ambassador to Paris on September 14 if possible or not later than September 15 and deliver orally repeat orally the following message. Please confirm when message has been delivered:

Quote: The President agrees that Mr. Kissinger's interim visit to China should take place for four days starting October 20. He also agrees to the text of the announcement proposed by the Chinese side.

The date of the announcement is however inconvenient. The reasons are as follows: 1. The date proposed by the Chinese Government may make the announcement appear as a reaction to the visit in the United States by the Soviet Foreign Minister as already explained by Mr. Kissinger.

2. Since the visit is public certain preparations in logistics, scheduling and organizing the group for the visit have to be made which cannot be started until after the announcement.

The President would, therefore, appreciate it if the Government of the People's Republic of China would agree to the announcement on September 22, 23, or October 4 in that order of preference. (The date would be Washington time and the hour 10:00 a.m.) Unquote.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. A notation on the message reads: “9/13/71.”

25. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, September 23, 1971, 5 p.m. 25. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, September 23, 1971, 5 p.m.1

Paris, September 23, 1971, 5 p.m.

MEMORANDUM

FOR RECORD:

September 23, 1971

Very late at night on September 22, 1971 (close to midnight), I received a phone call at home from Tsao saying that they wished to see me at 1700 on the following day. By mutual agreement, we keep phone conversations to a minimum.

On September 23 at 5:00 p.m., I went alone and on foot to the Chinese Embassy and was as usual met at the open garden gate by Wei and at the entrance to the building by Tsao and the two of them ushered me into the red living room. Within a minute, the Ambassador joined us.

Unlike other occasions when they had a message for me, no portfolio was visible and small talk lasted much longer than when getting down to business on previous occasions.

Despite the press speculation on Chinese events which originated in Paris and the denial issued by the Chinese Embassy there that Mao was ill or dying, I did not bring up current events in China and neither did they.

The Ambassador said that there was a large Chinese colony in the United States, many had gone there during the great railroad building period in the middle of the Nineteenth Century. I said that they were one of the most law-abiding communities in the United States. Very rarely was one involved in criminal matters. He said that the Chinese were and are a very hard-working people. I agreed saying that very many of the Chinese who had come to the United States poor were now well-to-do. He said that many had gone also to British Guiana and Trinidad. I said I knew this because my mother was born in Trinidad. There the Prime Minister was black and the leader of the opposition was Indian, but the governor appointed by the British was Chinese. He got a chuckle out of that. He then said that the Prime Minister of Guiana was also of Chinese extraction. I said I was sure the Governor of Trinidad was Sir Robert Ho Tung, but I did not know that Mr. Burnham was also.

He then said that China ever since the Opium War in 1840 had been a European colony and exploited as such. I noted that this was no longer true and he grinned. He then said somewhat irrelevantly that this was the reason why the Chinese People were so peace-loving and anxious to see peace established everywhere.

He then said that he understood some French, a few words of English and some Russian but spoke it badly. I said I did, too, and we then spoke banalities in Russian. It was true in both cases. We both spoke it badly but this prevented me from having an inferiority complex. He then laughed aloud and said that no one would ever believe that the Chinese Ambassador to Paris and the American Defense Attache to France were talking together in Russian, but then no one had to know. He complimented me and poured my fifth cup of tea himself (first time). Then we got down to business. (All of the foregoing lasted considerably longer than indicated by this memorandum.)

He motioned to Tsao who reached under the sofa on which he was sitting and pulled out a black portfolio from which he extracted a single sheet of paper. He then started to read it to me in English. The Ambassador said that this was a waste of time and to hand it to me so I could copy it. This I then proceeded to do and read it back to Tsao to make sure there were no mistakes. There were three but we corrected them. While I was writing, I could feel them watching closely to see if there were any change of facial expression when I got to the tougher phrases. I made sure there was none.

When I was through, the Ambassador said that I must surely have used up the small strategic reserve he had given me on the previous occasions (an allusion to the preserved apples and dates). No General should ever be without reserves; Napoleon had said that God was on the side of the biggest battalions so I should have more. With that he produced a two-pound box of preserved apples made by the Peking City #1 preserved fruit factory (Peking Guo Fu). As the box of dates was all in Chinese, it was beyond my linguistic powers. He then explained to me that the dates had to be cooked inside the cellophane in a double-boiler. I did my best to appear enthralled and grateful.

The Ambassador then asked if I had been travelling recently. I said that on the long Labor Day Weekend of September 6th, I had gone to see the Chateaux of the Loire. He then asked whether I was busy in my duties as Defense Attache and I replied that the French vacation season was now over and my duties were at their normal level. All the while there was something faintly apologetic in his manner as though he feared perhaps that I might be offended by the tone of the note. This was largely a feeling on my part based on a considerable number of meetings with him. He asked how I had come and I said that I had left my car with the Diplomatic plates some distance away and had come on foot checking insofar as possible to see whether I was followed and if I had been I had not noticed it. He nodded approvingly and again said that he enjoyed talking to me. He put his arm on my shoulder and said good-bye. When he had more he would get in touch with me. I was escorted out in reverse order to arrival. They were as cordial or perhaps a touch more than on previous occasions.

VERNON A. WALTERS
Major General, USA

1. In view of the fact that the U. S. Government will, around September 23, put forward to the United Nations General Assembly its draft resolutions designed to create"Two Chinas” which the Chinese Government firmly opposes, the Chinese side cannot agree to the issuance of the press releases on the interim visit at the said time. The Chinese side agrees that the two sides issue their respective press releases on the interim visit at 2200 on October 5 (Peking Time) in the text agreed upon by the two sides.

2. The agenda and arrangements for the talks during the interim visit can be discussed and decided upon after Dr. Kissinger's arrival. The purpose of the talks to be held during President Nixon's visit to China was already officially announced on July 16, namely, “to seek the normalizations of relations between the two countries and also to exchange views on questions of concern to the two sides”. It goes without saying that the talks should concentrate on the principal issues without diversion of attention to side issues.

3. The Chinese side will give a separate reply in regard to personnel arrangements and services for the special plane and other matters.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. No classification marking. The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy.

26. Memorandum From the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, September 24, 1971 26. Memorandum From the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, September 24, 19711

Washington, September 24 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR:

DR. KISSINGER

FROM: V.A. WALTERS

September 24, 1971

I mentioned briefly to you in Paris my concerns regarding a possibility which cannot be totally dismissed. Namely that the Government of the Chinese Peoples' Republic are genuinely world revolutionaries and anxious to move the course of history in a direction in keeping with their ideology. The fact that they just did it to Prime Minister Sato adds to my belief that we should consider this contingency or at least not just dismiss it. Chou En-lai said quite bluntly that Sato could not come to Peking but after the Japanese revamp their government, then one of his successors could come. “He could even come in a special plane.” That last sentence rang a small warning bell in my mind.

I do not say the following will occur but I would hate to see us caught totally unprepared if it did. In the hypothesis that they really are revolutionaries and want to help the “Progressive Forces” elsewhere, would it not be a supreme coup for them at some point in our dealings with them (and it seems to me that it would have maximum effect if they were to do it after the President's trip to Peking), to break off the talks and issue a statement that they had tried to be reasonable but it was impossible to do business and especially make peace with “That Fascist Nixon” and announce that they would be happy to do business with the United States as soon as the American people elected a peace loving President from among the progressive forces in America. Five years ago I would have said that this would have been very counterproductive and irritated the American People. I am no longer sure.

I fear that it might be a powerful weapon for the President's enemies, especially in the press.

This is really none of my business but I feel I would be derelict in my duty if I did not mention it to you. It may never happen, but if God forbid it does, I would not want us to be caught utterly unprepared.

I quote from Sun Tzu, “Subduing the enemy's army without actually fighting is the acme of skill.” I recall Jean Sainteny's book on Ho Chi Minh where he describes a warm friendly dinner with Pham Van Dong at the Tour D'Argent in Paris where the Vietnamese sat gazing out over the Pressed Duck and the Cathedral of Notre Dame and finally he turned to Sainteny and said, “I who have never been in France before now understand why all of my countrymen who know your country can never forget it.” Yet adds Sainteny, “At Fontainebleau a few weeks later it was He who was the toughest negotiator and He who in the end took the initiative of the rupture that was to be so heavy in consequences.”

I know this will not make me popular but I just do not want to see us surprised or caught off balance. I know others have been thinking of it, but it has weighed on my mind. I hope like everyone else that they will not choose to exercise this capability … … … . but they could.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Secret; Eyes Only. Ellipsis in the source text. Walters was in Washington, September 24-September 28.

27. Message From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, September 28, 1971 27. Message From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, September 28, 19711

Washington, September 28, 1971

Instructions for General Walters

1. On September 29, General Walters should hand over the attached oral message to the Chinese.

With respect to the first paragraph of this message, he should make the following informal comment:

“The presence of advance personnel on this trip is important to enable technical planning to begin and to guarantee its responsiveness to political objectives.”

General Walters should then tell the Chinese that he has been informed that he will receive by October 1 information for the Chinese concerning Foreign Minister Gromyko's conversation with the President on September 29. He will be prepared to pass this information to the Chinese on October 2.

General Walters should also inform the Chinese that he returned to Washington from September 24 to September 28 for consultations with Dr. Kissinger.

2. On October 2, General Walters should give the Chinese the following information orally:

“The talks between the President and Foreign Minister Gromyko covered the following subjects: general US-Soviet relations, SALT, Berlin and other European issues, the Middle East, and South Asia. Foreign Minister Gromyko invited Dr. Kissinger to tea on September 30 during which some of the same ground was covered.

“Dr. Kissinger will be prepared to give Prime Minister Chou En-lai a full rundown of these discussions.

“The only item that requires immediate attention by the Chinese side is that Foreign Minister Gromyko conveyed a formal invitation from the Soviet leaders to President Nixon to visit the Soviet Union. The United States Government will keep the Government of the People's Republic of China informed about its reaction to this invitation. As previously affirmed to the Chinese side, the United States will under no circumstances agree to a Presidential visit to the Soviet Union that would take place before the President's visit to the People's Republic of China.”

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A handwritten note reads “HK Handed to Walters 9/28/71.” Not published is the oral message to the Chinese.

28. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, September 28, 1971, 5 p.m. 28. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, September 28, 1971, 5 p.m.1

Paris, September 28, 1971, 5 p.m.

30 Sep '71

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD:

I returned to Paris at 0730, 28 September 1971. My attempt to contact the Chinese by phone in the morning failed because, incredible as it may seem, there was no answer, either at the Embassy or Residence. Around noon I finally reached Wei Tung and he suggested I come at 5 p.m. This I did following my usual procedures. I was given the usual welcome in the usual sequence and the overstuffed red sofa scenario was also true to form.

Knowing their liking for beating around the bush, before getting down to turkey I mentioned that I had just arrived from the States. The Ambassador wanted to know how long it took, what kind of plane. He said he had boarded a 747 when the Chinese Ambassador to Ottawa had left Paris, but had not flown on it.

Then he asked about supersonic planes and I gave him a status report on the U.S. SST. He then asked how long it would take the Concorde to fly from Shanghai to Europe and I said 8 or 9 hours and added that I understood that the Chinese might buy 3 of the Concordes. He said they would probably buy more than that (!) but tapped me on the knee and said, “but for the domestic Chinese routes we would buy American aircraft.” I said that this, of course, would be just until they could build their own. He said, “Exactly, you understand well.” He then said that the Chinese had been building military jets when the technical assistance was withdrawn and they (presumably the Russians) thought China would stop, but it had not stopped.

Then I delivered the note re the release of the announcement on Dr. Kissinger's interim visit and the subject of the discussions. This was translated first into French and Wei translated it into Chinese. Then Tsao copied it word for word and I proofread it with him.

This note was very cordially received and no noses appeared out of joint. The Ambassador then asked rather pointedly if my side comment on the China lobby and the bureaucracy was mine or Dr. Kissinger's. I answered that it was an American reality and Dr. Kissinger had asked me in a general way to point it out to Ambassador Huang as I delivered the oral note.

Then Ambassador Huang abruptly asked me if it was true that the French were not cooperating with us on the drug problem. I said that this was not true; they were cooperating, but much money was involved and therefore it was tough to do away with this traffic. He then said he had heard that in Saigon drugs were cheap and plentiful and many of our soldiers used them. I said that drugs were plentiful and cheap and some soldiers used them. Many was not the right word in the context. Examination of soldiers leaving Vietnam—and nearly two-thirds of the soldiers who had been there when President Nixon became President had left—showed that some four percent had used them. This was still far too many but less than one would have guessed from reading the newspapers. He then asked whether I felt punishment for drug merchants should be severe. I said that it was my personal view that drug peddlers should be executed. He nodded vigorous agreement.

Ambassador Huang then said that he had been very busy with Pai Hsiang Kuo, the Chinese Minister of Foreign Trade. The French had been putting out the red carpet for him. It was the first time a Chinese Minister had visited Western Europe.

I commented that Tsao had much copying to do and he said that Tsao was very able and in addition to English and French also spoke Vietnamese and Cambodian. I discreetly refrained from asking where he had learned them.

I then produced a large box of American chocolates and said that he had provided me with reserves and I would be shamed if I did not reciprocate. He asked if they were chocolates and I said they were, but—modest ones. He then poured me my fifth cup of jasmine tea with his own hands.

I then told him that on October 2 I would have further information for him about Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko's call on the President and Dr. Kissinger's non-jasmine tea with Gromyko. He then invited me with pats on the arm to a Chinese lunch on Oct 2. My heart sank at the thought of what I would have to eat, but I composed myself and tried to look grateful.

I was escorted out in accord with the usual ceremony. I noted that the Ambassador wore a very small Mao badge but that neither Tsao nor Wei wore one (both in shirt and tie). But Chairman Mao still smiled down on us at the entrance. No mention was made of current Chinese affairs.

VERNON A. WALTERS
Major General

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Walters on September 30. The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy.

29. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 2, 1971 29. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 2, 19711

Paris, October 2, 1971

4 October 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD:

As agreed at our meeting on September 29, 1971, I proceeded on 2 October to the Chinese Embassy Residence in Neuilly and was met as usual by Wei and Tsao and ushered into the living room where we were joined almost immediately by Ambassador Huang. He looked at me quizzically and said, “Shall we talk or do business first?” I said that I was his guest and would do as he wished. He said that in China they always acceded to the guest's wishes. I then said that Americans were generally direct and I would do business first. He was obviously anxious to know what I had to say. I then read the oral note to him contained in my written instructions regarding the President and Dr. Kissinger's talks with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko as well as the fact that Dr. Kissinger would be prepared to give Prime Minister Chou En-lai a rundown on these. I then informed him concerning the Soviet invitation to the President. He nodded without comment and asked to make sure that this visit would not take place before the President's visit to China. I assured him that this was the case, as Dr. Kissinger had told him previously. He seemed pleased.

Food was then brought in. First, stuffed pastries, stuffed round patties, fried shrimp and, finally, soup. Large quantities of all of these were heaped on my plate at regular intervals. All of this was washed down with a perfumed red wine and a colorless liquid that must have been related to 110 octane gas. Inasmuch as the smell of shrimp alone nauseates me, I had to drown it in soy sauce. He noted approvingly that I could eat with chopsticks. Each sip of the colorless liquid gave me the impression that the lining of my throat had been removed but then, unfortunately, the fishiness of the shrimp proved that this was not the case. I was very cautious with the strong beverage, raising it many times to my lips but drinking very little, both to avoid getting drunk and to save my alimentary tract. There was long chit chat about Chinese cooking at those times when I could speak.

Ambassador Huang told me he was from Peking and had been on the long March to Yenan. He had known Chairman Mao for forty years. In return I confided to him that when I had read him our oral note, it was the first time in my life I had told a non-American the contents of a Top Secret paper. He slapped me on the back and said that they too would keep it top secret. He then said that he was a soldier who had fought for his country for many years but he had come to the conclusion that we must coexist together peacefully despite the differences in our social systems. The American people and the Chinese people were both great peoples each seeking their happiness in their own way.

The Ambassador then asked what I thought of the Soviet invitation that Gromyko would certainly convey to the President. I said that I was not a diplomat but that it was ironic that they came in with it after the Chinese invitation. He then said that the Soviets were pragmatic and selfish. They did things only when they thought they were in their own self interest, but the Russian people were a good and great people who had warm fraternal sentiments towards the Chinese people. (I did not disabuse him.)

He then said that the visit of Chinese Foreign Trade Minister Pai was going well. Trade and cultural relations with France were growing. He commented, however, that Mr. Pompidou had not been as well briefed on China as he should. The French President had overestimated China's population by a hundred million. It was only 750 million, not 850 as Mr. Pompidou had said.

He then came back to plane, travel time and commented that it only took 7 hours to the U.S. but 22 hours to Peking. He added wryly that it was six hours shorter via Moscow but then you had to go to Moscow.

The Ambassador then said that he had had 1700 people to the Oct 1 reception at the Chinese Embassy the day before. He had invited them in two sets—1730 to 1930 and 1930 to 2130.

I then told him that with Dr. Kissinger there would be Winston Lord (he remembered him), a middle level State Dept official, and two secretaries. I hoped to have these names and passports for him later. He then commented that I was not going with Dr. Kissinger. He hoped I would go with the President or after that. I thanked him.

I explained that in our country for things like these visits we needed time for preparations and had to work under the searchlight of the press. He nodded, I felt, compassionately. I then asked if I should interpret the Chinese view as agreement with the lists I had presented. He said he would let me know.

He then asked me whether the U.S. would announce an invitation from Gromyko and, if so, when. I said that I presumed it would eventually be announced but I really did not know when. He then said he was sure all such details would be worked out between Dr. Kissinger and the Prime Minister during the former's visit to China.

Ambassador Huang then commented that Mr. Nixon was a courageous man. It had taken courage to open the dialogue with China. I agreed and said that I personally had had first hand knowledge of the President's courage. I had been with him in the car in Caracas in 1957 when the car had been attacked by demonstrators and was left without police protection. Mr. Nixon had told the Secret Service agent who wanted to use his pistol, “Put that back in your pocket. When they drag me out of the car, then if I tell you, but only if I tell you can you use it.” Then I cited an incident in Rome last year when the President had stopped his car and gotten out to take a petition from a man who had nearly fallen under the car, even though this man might have had hostile intent. The Italian crowd had seen the President's gesture and cheered. He nodded approvingly and said that this courage on the President's part did not surprise him. (I told both stories in more detail than is recorded here.)

Ambassador Huang then asked me when I expected to leave Paris. I said that I had been due to leave Paris some time ago but now probably would remain for some time. He said that he hoped so as I had helped open a door that had been shut for many years. Whenever I left, he hoped relations between our countries would have been normalized as he wished to give a dinner for me, a real dinner, what we had just had was just a “tea.” I thanked him saying that I would fast for ten days before the dinner. He liked this.

I was seen out in the usual sequence with a squeeze of the arm and a number of friendly taps from the Ambassador. He spoke more frankly on political matters at this meeting than any other I can recollect. He promised to communicate further with me when he received additional messages.

The lunch and talk lasted almost two hours. It was my eleventh meeting with them.

VERNON A. WALTERS
Major General, USA

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Walters on October 4. The lunchtime meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. The precise time of the conversation is not indicated on the memorandum.

30. Instructions for the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, October 8, 1971 30. Instructions for the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, October 8, 19711

Washington, October 8, 1971

Instructions for General Walters

1. General Walters should read the text of the attached announcement (Tab A) to be made jointly in the US and USSR on October 12, 1971. After reading it he should tell the Chinese that they are the first country to be notified of this announcement and that a few countries allied with the US will be notified shortly before the announcement. We would appreciate discretion. General Walters should add that Dr. Kissinger stresses again the reaffirmation of the principles governing the U.S. conduct of relations with the Soviet Union and the fact that he will discuss this subject fully when he is in Peking.

2. General Walters should then hand over the attached lists (Tab B) of (1) the personnel in Dr. Kissinger's official party, some of whose names they have already received, and (2) the aircraft crew which has slight modifications as noted. He should point out the following: — In addition to Dr. Kissinger's two personal secret service agents, who were with him in Peking last time and who will perform the same functions as they did on his last visit to Peking, there is one additional member in Dr. Kissinger's party, Commander Jonathan T. Howe, U.S. Navy, who is a member of Dr. Kissinger's personal staff. General Walters should explain that in this way Dr. Kissinger will be able to have Mr. Lord with him for private meetings with Prime Minister Chou En-lai, Mr. Holdridge with the State Department representative in any concurrent meetings on subsidiary questions, and Commander Howe with the other personnel for discussions of technical subjects.

— Messrs. Redman and Hughes, whose names were on the aircraft crew list already provided, will also be taking part in technical discussions and thus are now listed in Dr. Kissinger's party.

3. Dr. Kissinger believes it would be desirable if the following sequence could be used with regard to the questions concerning technical arrangements for the President's visit: — First, the Prime Minister and Dr. Kissinger could privately reach understandings on the major technical questions, such as Dr. Kissinger mentioned to Ambassador Huang on September 13 (e.g. length and itinerary of President's visit; composition of party; schedule of meetings; press arrangements).

— Second, there could then be a plenary session involving the technical personnel on both sides at which the Prime Minister and Dr. Kissinger could formally lay out views on the agreed upon basis.

— Third, the technical personnel could then conduct their separate discussions within the broad framework agreed to at the plenary session.

4. General Walters should then make the following remarks, saying that we hope they will help the host country in its planning: — The U.S. side will rely on the Chinese side for interpreters.

— The U.S. side would appreciate it if a room could be set aside for typing and other office work.

— The U.S. side would appreciate knowing whether the Chinese side envisages the need for any formal public statements during the course of this visit.

— While invitations to any social functions are, of course, entirely up to the Chinese, there is no requirement for Messrs. Redman, Elbourne or the three secret service personnel to be invited to whatever functions may be planned for Dr. Kissinger.

— The U.S. side would hope that Dr. Kissinger's official party could be housed together or in close proximity. It would be helpful to have Mr. Cuff, a stenographer from the aircraft crew, housed with the party also, in case he is needed to help with clerical duties. The rest of the aircraft crew would preferably be housed not too far from the airport.

4. General Walters should give the Chinese Dr. Kissinger's proposed itinerary (local times). (Tab C)

5. General Walters should state that the U.S. plans to release the names and the itinerary on October 14 at 1000 Washington time.

6. General Walters should give the Chinese a copy of Dr. Kissinger's October 5 press briefing. (Tab D)

[Tab A]

The leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union in their exchanges during the past year have agreed that a meeting between them would be desirable once sufficient progress had been made in negotiations at lower levels. In light-of the recent advances in bilateral and multilateral negotiations involving the two countries, it has been agreed that such a meeting will take place in Moscow in the latter part of May 1972.

President Nixon and the Soviet leaders will review all major issues with a view towards further improving their bilateral relations and enhancing the prospects for world peace.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. Top Secret; Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the instructions. Although a handwritten notation on the document reads “10/9/71,” Walter's memorandum for the record indicates that he received these instructions while in Washington on October 8. See Document 31. Attached at Tab A is the joint announcement. Tabs B, C, and D are attached but not published.

31. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 9, 1971, 10 p.m. 31. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 9, 1971, 10 p.m.1

Paris, October 9, 1971, 10 p.m.

Memorandum for Record: Date 10 October 1971

On my return to Paris on the morning of October 9th. I went to my Office and there received, shortly after my arrival a telephone call from Tsao saying that because of unexpected circumstances they could not keep the appointment he had made with my secretary of 1000 hours on that day. He would call me back later to let me know what time they could see me. he did so and set the appointment at 2200 of that same date.

At that time I went to the Chinese Embassy residence in Neuilly, not far from my own home. It was dark and in honor of the fact I was received at the outer gate by both Tsao and Wei. Escorted into the living room where the Ambassador joined us a minute or two later.

Ambassador Huang enquired solicitously about how I felt after the return trip, jet lag, etc. He then directed Tsao to read to me the note which is attached as appendix A. At the end of this I said that many of the questions asked me were answered in the communication that I was about to give them. The Ambassador then directed Tsao to hand me the three typewritten pages which are attached as Appendix B. These cover the arrival at Shanghai, facts concerning Hungjao airport, radio channels and frequencies etc.

I then handed to them the list (latest version) of the crew of the aircraft, the list of Dr. Kissinger's party, I told them about the secret service agents and Cmdr. Howe and conveyed all of the points in the instructions given to me in Washington on October 8th. I then added as instructed that despite many requests Dr. Kissinger was not taking any press with him. They seemed pleased. I also expressed Dr. Kissinger's wish if possible to have tea with John Service who was in China. They expressed surprise that he would still be there at the time of Dr. Kissinger's visit but promised to convey this fact to Peking.

I then handed them the verbatim of Dr. Kissinger's press conference and they seemed to be expecting it.

Ambassador Huang said that he would transmit all this to Peking as soon as possible. I commented that their desire to have the aircraft in Shanghai between 8 and 9 a.m. on October 20th would require rescheduling on our side. He then said that if they did not hear to the contrary from me they would presume that we were acceding to their request in respect to arrival time.

I had however as a first order of business handed them the announcement (or rather let them copy it) concerning the Soviet invitation to President Nixon. They made no comment and maintained appropriate oriental inscrutability when I mentioned that China was the first to know and reaffirmed Dr. Kissinger's statements to the Prime Minister.

They said that housing as requested by us, interpreters etc. presented no problem for them and they would do as we wish.

I was then informed that they had prepared dinner for me. I said that I had already eaten but that did me no good. On the other hand the Ambassador explained that he had already eaten and would not eat. The Red perfumed wine was on hand but fortunately the “white lightening” was not. While we ate I was told that electrical current in Peking was 220 volts (for typewriters). I told them I would check to see whether the list of Dr. Kissinger's party was in protocol sequence or not. I told them I would check to see whether we could comply with their arrival time request and also ascertain when Dr. Kissinger and party would leave China. They said everything could be worked out with the Prime Minister.

There was a good deal of soft soap directed at me. How much they regretted I was not going, that I had made and was making “historic contribution to normalization of relations between U.S. and China.” The Ambassador then said that to hide nothing from me, he had been made aware last April of the approaches I had made to the Chinese Military Attache. He had been informed at once, but “the time was not ripe and he had not received the necessary instructions” so that nothing had worked out then. Meantime little stuffed patties of all sorts, mixed with preserved apples and dried dates were shoveled incessantly onto my plate all washed down by a large number of random cups of jasmine tea and perfumed red wine.

The Ambassador then said that after the normalization of relations between china and the U.S. the Chinese might well open an airline directly over the route traversed by Dr. Kissinger with “their Concordes”. He then said that whenever I came to China he hope I would visit him and a further helping of soft soap was ladled onto me.

I then said I knew he was busy and took my leave with the reverse ceremony to the arrival. The Ambassador and Wei were wearing small Mao badges. Tsao was wearing none. Mao's great picture still smiles down from the entrance hall.

ORAL NOTE

Handed to General Walters

October 9, 1971

The Chinese side agrees to the name list of the U.S. flight crew and would like to be provided with the name list of Dr. Kissinger's party in protocol order (including name, sex, designation and passport number). Entry visas will be issued upon arrival in Shanghai.

The Chinese side would like to know the time of arrival scheduled for Dr. Kissinger's special plane in Shanghai and that of his departure at the conclusion of the visit. It is preferable that the arrival in Shanghai be between 0800 and 0900 on October 20th.

The U.S. flight crew is requested to wear civilian attire and not to carry weapons openly.

Banks in China normally do not accept U.S. dollars but can exchange them for foreign guests as an expediency.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. No classification marking. Drafted by Walters on October 10. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. Attached as Appendix A is the Chinese oral note. Appendix B is attached but not published.

32. Letter From the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Paris, October 13, 1971 32. Letter From the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Paris, October 13, 19711

Paris, October 13, 1971

13 October 1971

Dear Al:

Herewith the latest scenario:

On October 1 I called Wei at the Chinese Embassy and said I had some answers for them. He said that if it was urgent that I see them it could be at 2300 that evening. If it were not, they would prefer 1100 on October 13 and I agreed.

I went to the Embassy at the appointed time, was received and led into the living room with the usual rites. I gave them the plane's number, call sign, said it would be coming from Guam and would contact Shanghai Air Traffic Control two hours before take off and would remain in contact during flight. I also mentioned the car for the communications and they said that this was already laid on.

The Ambassador then said, “You can tell Dr. Kissinger that there will be no problems on his trip. I believe all technical details have now been exchanged except that we would like to know if the list you gave us is in protocol order.” I said I would try and find out as soon as possible for him. I believed that was the last answer I might owe them. He agreed that this was the case.

The Ambassador then said that the announcement of President Nixon's visit to Moscow had not aroused as much press comment as his visit to China and I agreed. He then said he felt that the Chinese invitation had provoked the Soviets into extending theirs and I said that this might well be. He said that this was typical of the Soviets who were very pragmatic.

He then asked me who in the U.S. Government knew that he and I were the Channels for communication between Peking and Washington. I said that as far as I knew, The President, Dr. Kissinger and a few people on Dr. Kissinger's immediate personal staff and my secretary, Miss Ouellette. He said that this was true on the Chinese side also; only very few people knew in his Embassy and in Peking. Most people seemed to suspect that the contact was maintained through the Chinese Embassy in Ottawa. He felt we had both done well to keep it a secret. He did not believe even the French knew.

He then said he had heard that Honolulu was a beautiful place. Perhaps after relations between our countries were normalized he could go home via Honolulu. “In one of your Concordes?” I asked, and he laughed, “perhaps”. He then expressed amazement at the U.S. decision not to build an SST. I said that in my personal belief we would have to at some time in the future. He replied that with our technological competence it should not take us long. I said that the decision would still delay us if we changed our minds. He again expressed satisfaction at our relationship and my discretion and repeated that we were both soldiers, etc.

All during this time I was being practically force fed jasmine tea, preserved apples and lichee nuts which I discover to my distress I am beginning to like. He also threatened me with a real Chinese meal soon. He then said that my previous reserves must have been used up and gave me lichee nuts, dates and two boxes of preserved apples, one of which was for Dr. Kissinger. I promised to deliver it soon.

I had given him a large bottle of Bourbon on my last visit and will give him a large box of Schrafft's chocolates at our next meeting.

This was the most cordial meeting of all with food, slaps on the back, etc. I left according to the usual ceremonial in an aura of good will and in accordance with the usual tribal rites. Only the Ambassador wore a Mao badge.

VERNON A. WALTERS
Major General, USA

P.S. I had written out the message for the Chinese that I had to convey in French. They asked me to translate it into English as that was the language in which they would transmit it. This may be of interest in connection with the matter I mentioned to you regarding their communications.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. No classification marking.

33. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 14, 1971, 6 p.m. 33. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 14, 1971, 6 p.m.1

Paris, October 14, 1971, 6 p.m.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD:

MEETING WITH THE CHINESE ON OCTOBER 14th 1971

I had called Wei on the morning of the 14th of October to tell him that I had the list in protocolary order. After consultation he asked me to go to the usual location at the Chinese Embassy residence at 6.p.m. I agreed and went there at that time.

I was received by Tsao alone. He explained that the Ambassador and Wei were unavoidably detained by important matters. I said that I understood and what I had was purely a technical answer. I then gave them the list of Dr. Kissinger's party in protocolary order which I had received from Washington. He took note of it and said he thought it fulfilled all of their requirements.

Fortified by Jasmine tea and preserved apples we then passed on to more trivial matters. He told me that inasmuch as we were alone he would like me to know how happy he was to have this opportunity to know me and to become friends. He had graduated from St. John's university in China which had been run by Americans and was happy to resume contact with them. He said frankly that if and when diplomatic relations were resumed between China and the U.S. He hoped that he would be assigned to the U.S. I told him that from the point of language he was certainly fully qualified. He said that he tried hard to keep abreast of U.S. matters. Each week he read the Christian Science Monitor and the Economist as he felt that they were the two best sources of information. He was less kind to Time, Newsweek but surprisingly had a relatively kind word for U.S. News and World Report saying that their interviews were often very informative. He said that he found the New York Times and Washington Post full of news but less dispassionate that the Christian Science Monitor and the Economist.

He then told me that he was something of a foreign expert, particularly as he had been born in Shanghai and had contact with foreigners for a long time. He said that he also spoke Russian, Japanese and German. We spoke and his Japanese and Russian are as bad as mine and his German is much worse. To console him I said that he also spoke really difficult languages like Vietnamese and Cambodian. He nodded appreciatively.

He then apologized again for the fact that the Ambassador was not there, and I added that inasmuch as what I had to transmit was purely technical and not substantive I had not expected the Ambassador to be present. Again he nodded appreciatively. I had got him off the face hook. He said that enjoyed talking to me. I was open and frank and very different from what he had expected. He hoped that we would continue to be in touch. I too said how much I enjoyed the talks with him (In which I do most of the talking. They want it that way and I am not averse to setting the record stright in a very low key about the U.S.).

With profuse expressions of mutual esteem, I took my leave.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. No classification marking.

34. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 15, 1971, 11 a.m. 34. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 15, 1971, 11 a.m.1

Paris, October 15, 1971, 11 a.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION:

MEETING WITH CHINESE ON OCTOBER 15th 1971

Late at night on October 14th I had a call from Tsao saying that they would like to see me the next morning. I agreed and they set 1100 as the appropriate time. At that time I went there and was received as always by them in the usual sequence and with the usual rites. Amb. Huang was not present.

They then read me a message indicating that they wished to know data concerning the transmitter we would use while Dr. Kissinger's aircraft was on the ground in Peking. They read me the following message.

The Chinese side agrees to the use of a communicator/engineer for purposes of direct communication with Washington during Dr. Kissinger's visit to Peking. The transmitter will be used every two hours on even days. The Chinese side would like to know the power, call sign, frequencies and method of operation and type of radio transmission.

I said that I would pass this on to Washington and would try an get the answers before 18 October as they had requested.

We then passed on to Chit chat. They asked me about the role of U.S. Military in politics. I pointed out that we had none, had to resign to run for office, could not make political statements or attend any political meeting in Uniform. We could vote but a law prohibited any military person from being Secretary of Defense or of the Army Navy and Airforce. They looked at me in bewilderment and asked me to repeat this to make sure that they had heard right. I repeated. They then said what about General Eisenhower. I assured them that he had resigned from his five stars before he ran for President and they wanted to know why. I said that this was the way the U.S. operated.

We then spoke about the racial question in the United States. I pointed out that we had a Japanese, a Chinese, a Black and a Spanish Speaking Senator. That the Chief of Personnel of the U.S. Army in Europe was a black Major General, that the Ambassador to Sweden was black, so was the Under Secretary of Transportation. That Senator Brooke was elected in a state that had only 5% of blacks among its population. All of this was done somewhat less abruptly than recorded here, adding that there were still injustices but we were aware of them and trying to correct them. They appeared surprised at the foregoing and some statistics concerning the income of black families in the U.S. I then mentioned that the Chinese ethnic community was perhaps the most law abiding in the United States. Wei laughed and said that they had plenty of crime in China (!!!) I felt it better not to ask whether it was political… They then asked about intermarriage with Vietnamese. I said that there had been some but perhaps less than in Japan.

Both said that a great effort to learn English was afoot in China, they realized that they needed this to communicate with the world. Tsao added that Chairman Mao was personally studying English. He could not really speak if but could understood it to some degree. Tsao added that Edgar Snow had met Ambassador Huang in Yenan.

Tsao and Wei chuckled over the fact that nearly everyone thought that the contacts between the U.S. and China were being handled in Ottawa. Wei said that he had read in the paper that many journalists were watching the Chinese and American Embassies there to see if they could detect how the connection was made. They said that it was well to be discreet in the delicate stage of Chinese American relations. They knew that the opening of the dialogue with China kad not been easy for Mr. Nixon because of internal opposition in the United States. I said that Mr. Nixon was a courageous man who would not be deterred from doing what he thought was right by opposition. They nodded agreement.

I said that returning to the question of the role of the U.S. Military in U.S. Politics. I must tell them a story of a conversation I had had with one of my Russian colleagues. He had told me that I did not really live in a democracy and when I asked him why he had replied “You are an officer in the Army but you cannot hold political office, whereas I am an officer in the Soviet Navy but I can be a member of the Supreme Soviet”. To which I had replied “But I still have an advantage over you, I can join the opposition and you cannot.” Both Tsao and Wei threw back their heads and roared with laughter.

Both shovelled out soft soap to me. How frank I was, how much they enjoyed talking to me etc. By this time the jasmine tea was almost coming out of my ears, and one more preserved apple and I would start growing blossoms. Great cordiality and many apologies for the absence of the Ambassador.

They then asked me what I had thoght about China before I had met them. I said that I had met few (relatively) Chinese before them but that those I had met had lived up to their reputation as a cultured, industrious, hard working people, who had given the world some of its greatest discoveries. I added “You gave us some good things like the compass and printing and some bad things like gunpowder and rockets.” They laughed and obviously enjoyed the exchange. They expressed the hope that I would visit China. I said it was important that as people we get to know one another. One always dislikes what is unknown. They agreed rather solemnly.

With further expressions of mutual goodwill and esteem I made my way out in accordance with the usual ceremonial.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. No classification marking. Ellipses in the source text. Drafted by Walters on October 15.

35. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 16, 1971, 11:30 a.m. 35. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 16, 1971, 11:30 a.m.1

Paris, October 16, 1971, 11:30 a.m.

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD

MEETING WITH CHINESE ON SATURDAY OCT. 16 1971

On the evening of Oct 15, 1971 Commander Howe called, me to give me the information concerning the operation of Dr. Kissinger's communications while he is in Peking, which the Chinese had requested. I called Tsao and he said to come on the morning of the 16th at 11.30. This I did and was received as usual at the gate by Wei and at the entrance to the building by Tsao. The Ambassador was not present.

We started with Jasmine Tea and this time in addition to the preserved apples and dates, there were dried prunes which I would not feed to my cat. I gave them the information concerning our transmitter, its power, call sign, frequencies, primary and secondary, hours of operation, method of operation, in short all of the information which they had requested from us concerning, its operation. They received all of this and then said that they had a communication for me. They then read me the following. (In French) 1. The Chinese side will place at the disposal of the American side cars to insure the liaison with the radio transmitter in the aircraft.

2. The Chinese side does not contemplate the issuance of any public statement to the press during Dr. Kissinger's visit to Peking for the time being.

Tsao then said that he thought that we had exchanged all of the technical infoformation that was necessary for the trip. I said that I knew of nothing else that was required for the time being,

He then apologized for the Ambassadors absence and expressed the Ambassadors high regard for me, which I reciprocated saying that Paris was such an important Embassy that I knew the Chinese had sent one of their very best men here. I then said that I would be absent on a French Army trip for three days next week, but that they could call my secretary if anything came up and she would know how to reach me in a matter of minutes. They then said that the Chinese Attaches to France were also going on the trip and cautioned me that they knew nothing about my contacts with the Ambassador and Tsao and Wei. I assured them that I would make no reference with regard to this when talking to the Attaches. We then talked about the United States and they asked many questions about our income tax system. I explained roughly how it worked. They asked how much I paid, what it represented as a proportion of my income. I answered them and they seemed surprised at the progressive rate of our tax. They added that in China there was no income tax I said that ours was tough but that I had quite enough to live comfortably after paying it.

They then asked me many questions about the credit card system. I showed them my American Express card and explained how it worked, what the consequences were for someone who lost his credit rating etc.

I then gave them a box of Schraffts candy, saying that they had given me much Chinese candy and soy sauce as well and I could not fail to reciprocate without losing face, as face was important in the West also. They seemed amused.

Following this I then gave Tsao a copy of the World Almanac which contained much information about the United States, salaries, tax, production etc. I added “don't send it to Peking, they already have it.” He roared with laughter and said that in that case he would keep it for himself.

All of this washed down with about a quart of Jasmine tea, my cup being filled every time it appeared to be only 95 full. I departed with the usual tribal and protocolary rites.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, July 1971-Oct 20, 1971. No classification marking. Drafted by Walters on October 16.

36. Memoranda of Conversation, Beijing, October 20, 1971, 4:30-4:40 p.m. and 4:40-7:10 p.m. 36. Memoranda of Conversation, Beijing, October 20, 1971, 4:30-4:40 p.m. and 4:40-7:10 p.m.1

Beijing, October 20, 1971, 4:30-4:40 p.m. and 4:40-7:10 p.m.

Wednesday. October 20, 1971 - Informal Conversation Prior to Formal Meeting, The Great Hall of the People, Peking—4:30 p.m. - 4:40 p.m.

HK: We have one slight problem, Mr. Prime Minister; we haven't eaten for an hour.

Chou: So you are in good spirits.

Kissinger: Yes we are.

Chou: They want to take pictures first.

Kissinger: This is Mr. Jenkins from the State Department.

Chou: I heard you speak very good Chinese.

Jenkins: I was able to converse formerly, but I am out of practice.

Kissinger: And, of course, you remember Mr. Lord.

Chou: Oh yes. How is your health?

Lord: Very good, thank you.

Kissinger: You remember Mr. Holdridge. And this is General Hughes, the Military Aide to the President. And this is Mr. Chapin who is the Special Assistant to the President. And this is Commander Howe who is on my staff. And these two ladies are Miss Matthews and Miss Pineau. Mr. Ready and Mr. McCleod.

Chou: In charge of documents.

Kissinger: Yes.

Chou: I believe you know all the others on our side, but you are not so familiar with our Acting Foreign Minister, Chi P'eng Fei.

Kissinger: I had the pleasure of riding in with him from the airport.

Chou: And that is the Deputy Security Minister.

HK: You are placing him next to the right person (Mr. Lord).

Chou: This is Mr. Chi Ch'ao-Chu.

HK: I have a message for him from Dean ______ of Harvard.

Chou: I have a lot of schoolmates probably in Harvard. In the United States, which is first, Harvard or Yale? Maybe Yale isn't so well-known?

Kissinger: You are absolutely right, Mr. Prime Minister.

Chou: In the … in 1910 when I was in middle school, I knew more about Yale than Harvard. At that time more people were praising Yale than Harvard. “I don't know the reason.”

Kissinger: Because Harvard people are so retiring. Mr. Lord is from Yale.

Chou: He is younger. And also the time when I became familiar with Yale was in my younger days. In my middle years I became familiar with Harvard. There are other similar universities in the United States, one which the (?) schoolmates went to. But I believe there is one of you from the University of Emory. In what state is that?

Jenkins: Atlanta, Georgia.

Kissinger: You people are..

Chou: I heard you later on attended another university. Was that you or someone else?

Jenkins: Duke University. We spoke of Harvard as being the Emory of the North.

Chou: So you divide into the North and South? That was 100 years ago.

Kissinger: I would like to see the file the Prime Minister has on each of us. I am sure I would find many things I had forgotten.

Chou: But to be honest, we haven't done much research on that. But you are a newcomer and therefore we wanted to know something about you. I believe you were also in Tientsin.

Jenkins: Yes, I was in Peking for two years and Tientsin for one.

Chou: And you still remember the date of the liberation of Tientsin?

Jenkins: January 15, 1949.

Chou: Mr. Chang Wen-chin was in Tientsin at the same time; he probably didn't meet you. Have any of you others been in China before?

Kissinger: Mr. Holdridge.

Chou: So, if you like we can begin to work. You are an earnest worker.

Kissinger: Not like the Prime Minister who, I understand, works most of the night.

Chou: But I rest some during the day.

[ATTACHMENT]

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Chou En-lai, People's Republic of China

Yeh Chien-ying, Vice Chairman, Military Affairs Commission, Chinese Communist Party, PRC

Chi P'eng-fei, Acting PRC Foreign Minister

Chang Wen-chin, Director, Western Europe and American Department, PRC Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Hsuing Hsiang-hui, Secretary to the Prime Minister

HAN Hsu, Acting Director of Protocol, MFA

Chien Ta-yung, Deputy to Chang Wen-chin

Ma Jan-hui, Deputy Director, Chinese National Aviation Corp.

Chang Jui-ai, Director, Peking Bureau, CNAC

Chien Ch'u, Director, Information Department, MFA

Wang Hai-jung, Deputy Chief of Protocol, PRC

Tang Wen-sheng and Chi Chao-chu, Chinese Interpreters Chinese Notetakers

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Dwight Chapin, Deputy Assistant to the President

John H. Holdridge, Senior Staff Member, NSC

Jonathan Howe, Senior Staff Member, NSC

Brigadier General James D. Hughes, Military Aide to the President

Alfred Jenkins, State Department

Winston Lord, Senior Staff Member,NSC

PLACE: Great Hall of the People, Peking

DATE & TIME: October 20, 1971, 4:40 - 7:10 p.m.

GENERAL SUBJECTS: Opening Statement, Agenda, and President's Visit

PM Chou: I hear that you would like to meet Mr. Service.

Dr. Kissinger: Informally sometime.

PM Chou: He will be back on the 22nd. I saw him together with some other American friends. I have not yet seen him individually.

Dr. Kissinger: I read the conversation you had with that group a few weeks ago.

PM Chou: You have very quick news.

Dr. Kissinger: I hope that the Prime Minister realizes that I am being held personally responsible for everything he says.

PM Chou: [laughs] Today we are meeting in an official meeting here. First of all, I would like to say on behalf of myself and the Chinese government that we welcome Dr. Kissinger, the special envoy of the President to come on this interim visit. We also welcome the other colleagues of your party. Our relations with the United States have been cut off for such a long time. The previous visit of Dr. Kissinger has made an unofficial beginning and, to say the least, it shook the world a bit. And so we should say that Dr. Kissinger has made some achievements in this field, and therefore we also are confident that this present official visit made by Dr. Kissinger to make preparations for the visit of the President will be a success.

And, according to custom, we ask you to speak first. I would also like to hear what you have to say out of your big book. I also have written a few papers; last time I had no prepared papers.

Dr. Kissinger: I felt very ashamed of myself.

PM Chou: Because that was your first visit. No call for that. You had to have something to go by.

Dr. Kissinger: The Prime Minister was more coherent without notes than I was with notes.

PM Chou: That's not… I hope you don't praise me too highly. So, shall we begin?

Dr. Kissinger: Mr. Prime Minister, I will make a few general observations to start off our discussion. First, President Nixon has asked me to convey his personal greetings to Chairman Mao and yourself and the whole Chinese government.

PM Chou: I thank you and him. I thank President Nixon very much.

Dr. Kissinger: He looks forward very warmly to meeting with the Chairman and the Prime Minister and he believes the visit can be a historic occasion. The purpose of this interim visit is to prepare for the occasion when the President can have personal conversations with the Prime Minister. And we have three broad categories of issues to discuss: Major substantive issues, similar to those discussed in July but perhaps in greater detail; second, some secondary but important issues which we have communicated through our established channels; and technical arrangements for the visit of the President which is the primary responsibility of my colleagues Mr. Chapin and General Hughes, and their colleagues.

With respect to the substantive questions, we have two problems: one, with the content of the positions our two countries will take, and secondly, the manner in which these issues are negotiated and in which they will be expressed.

We have prepared some suggestions of what might conceivably be said, but as I told the Prime Minister last time, we can agree to more than we can say.

Let me make a few observations to express the attitude with which we will be approaching the meetings between our leaders. The President has asked me to reaffirm in the strongest terms his personal commitment to the improvement of relations between our countries for the sake of our two peoples and for the sake of the peoples of the world. We have received much unasked-for advice from other countries, especially one other country in recent months, pointing out the physical limitations of China's power, and therefore, the limitations of concentrating attention on China. Our policy is not based on such considerations. It is produced by profound convictions and not by an attempt to create a power combination.

We are, of course, aware that our two countries represent different philosophical views. We recognize also, as the Prime Minister so eloquently pointed out to a visiting journalist, that the People's Republic does not trade in principles, and neither do we. Nevertheless, we believe that the People's Republic and the United States have many congruent interests. It is no accident that our two countries have such a long history of friendship. We believe that peace in Asia and peace in the world requires your full participation. We will not participate in arrangements that affect your interest without involving you. We do not accept the proposition that one country can speak for all socialist countries.

PM Chou: Not to mention the fact that there are various kinds of socialism.

Dr. Kissinger: That is correct. We believe there is really but one issue that divides us which is in itself the product of history. If we can take account of each other's concerns on this problem, if we can agree on both a general direction and a process of resolution, as I think we can, then there will remain no fundamental obstacle to our relations. This is the attitude that determines President Nixon's actions.

Mr. Prime Minister, when we met in July, you said that the announcement of President's Nixon's visit to China would shake the world. The world has been shaken. Our two countries have set in motion new currents and for many nations a whole new set of considerations arises when they conduct foreign policy. We have started a revolution in world affairs, but as you, Mr. Prime Minister, know better than we, it is the essence of any revolution that for a while the old coexists with the new.

PM Chou: Sometimes the new arises from the old. They coexist but the new comes out of the embryo of the old.

Dr. Kissinger: I agree.

PM Chou: Have you read Mr. Heath's speech?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: So you have many news contacts by now.

Dr. Kissinger: I don't come here any more without reading every speech that's been written. You are not going to catch me a second time, Mr. Prime Minister. Many nations have greeted the July 15 announcement with great professions of enthusiasm. However, I will not be telling the Prime Minister anything he doesn't already know if I say that not every country that expressed positive views really felt them.

PM Chou: But in this aspect I believe that on your side you know more about this than we do.

Dr. Kissinger: About views of other countries?

PM Chou: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger: In America, the impact of the announcement of July has been profound and on the whole positive. Most of the people have greeted the prospect of better relations with China very warmly, and some even enthusiastically. At the same time, I do not wish to minimize some of the domestic problems we have had. As the Prime Minister pointed out to Mr. Reston, and as Mr. Reston sometimes had difficulty in acknowledging, President Nixon has demonstrated great courage in taking this initiative. Since the July 15 announcement, we have discovered and I may say I especially in my personal correspondence, that the radical right equals the radical left in their expression of violence, if not in the excellence of their grammar.

PM Chou: [laughs] There is a phrase that the Chairman often uses: Left in form, but right in essence.

Dr. Kissinger: They are often not easy to distinguish in that extreme form.

PM Chou: Sometimes in form it's a little bit different.

Dr. Kissinger: These groups have mounted campaigns against the President's acceptance of your invitation. And I am telling the Prime Minister no secrets when I point out that even within the bureaucracy some of the established forms continue. We expected these reactions.

PM Chou: Also such things like that in China.

Dr. Kissinger: I would assume that bureaucracies have certain similar characteristics in every country.

PM Chou: We talked a lot about that last time. Your two colleagues will remember that. They took a lot of notes on that. And I see that Mr. Jenkins is smiling, so we think bureaucracy cannot only be found in the State Department; it can also be found in the Foreign Ministry.

Dr. Kissinger: My secret dream is to do to the State Department what the Prime Minister did to his office—reduce it to three.

PM Chou: That was my small office—there are only two. But I cannot do that to the whole Foreign Ministry, nor to the State Council. You can ask our Acting Foreign Minister about that. As you just mentioned, the philosophy and world views of our two countries are quite different obviously, but it seems on these matters we have the same language. I think your two colleagues can bear witness to that.

Dr. Kissinger: I have been threatening them with the Prime Minister's methods ever since we have returned from China.

PM Chou: That would be imposing our will on them.

Dr. Kissinger: You have become an excellent method of discipline in my organization.

PM Chou: But the whole world admires you for being able to keep such a big secret. Some people have compared it to the secrecy that was kept toward the end of the Second World War about the explosion of the atom bomb.

Dr. Kissinger: But this was much more constructive.

At any rate, we expected these reactions, and we are determined to master them, and to continue the course which we started last July. I believe we have made a constructive beginning in recent months, and I want to take this opportunity to express to the Prime Minister the great appreciation we all feel for the meticulous manner in which the People's Republic has carried out every understanding that was arrived at last July. I said to the Prime Minister in our last session that we should take each other as men of honor, and this has been your conduct since last July. We have tried to act in the same way.

Now, looking at the future, Mr. Prime Minister, as we look toward the President's visit, I think we must sort out those questions which can be solved immediately, those which can be agreed in principle but take time to implement, and those that must be left to longer processes. You can be sure that whatever we agreed to will be carried out scrupulously. I do not say this as a pretext for avoiding fundamental issues, but rather to guarantee the success of their resolution.

Let me now turn to what we can accomplish here in the next four days, both substantively and technically. The major issues, of course, are those we discussed last time, on which we understand and recognize that the most important for you is the issue of Taiwan. In addition, we discussed Indochina, relations with other countries such as the Soviet Union and Japan, South Asia, especially the India-Pakistan dispute which we believe is taking very ominous turns, Korea, and some issues on arms control.

We are prepared to go into each of these subjects in some detail, including putting progress that can be made on them into specific time frames. We could shape an agenda for the President's visit, reach mutual understandings on what we might agree to say and do, and perhaps begin shaping the outlines of a communique.

In addition, there are a number of issues, each of which we recognize as subsidiary but the total of which we believe would be important to symbolize the new approach in our relationship. These include such matters as how we could maintain contact prior to the establishment of formal diplomatic relations, along the lines of some ideas that the Prime Minister mentioned to me in July. There are many in America and around the world who are hoping for nothing so much as the failure of the policy the Prime Minister and we inaugurated in July, and some progress on some of these issues, including these exchanges, would be helpful to symbolize the direction we all want to go, not as a substitute for fundamental agreements but to give impetus to them.

Now I come to my final point which concerns the technical arrangements for the President's visit. Mr. Prime Minister, on the occasion of our last meeting I told you that China, despite its long experience in handling outsiders, has never undergone anything like the phenomenon of a visit by an American President.

PM Chou: We have had the experience of meeting one of the envoys of the President of the United States.

Dr. Kissinger: But he does not move with the apparatus which accompanies the President. I told the head of the foreign department of the Shanghai municipality that if he didn't watch our communications expert he would connect every telephone in Shanghai to the White House. There is a certain single-mindedness about the technical personnel that serve the President. This is the reason why they are so effective, but it is not always easy for foreigners who have to experience it.

When I was here last time I was ignorant about what is involved technically in Presidential visits, though I had been involved in many of them. I therefore asked our technical people to prepare a presentation. And when I saw the numbers involved, I was shocked and asked them to prepare what they would consider a minimum presentation. Even the minimum presentation still involved several battalions. I therefore asked them to prepare yet another one which is more in keeping with what we had in mind.

And since our technical people are extraordinarily suspicious of me—and as you see, they are flanking me on both sides to be sure I don't say anything wrong—I have asked them to prepare a book that outlines our requirements and gives you a breakdown of what we have done in other capitals that we have visited, so you can compare. This was prepared before, I must say Mr. Prime Minister, I read on my way here an essay of Chairman Mao on Bureaucracy; this was prepared before I read that essay. But this will explain to you exactly what our people have in mind and why, and it will also give you a comparison between the planning for this trip and what we have done in other capitals, and you will see that it is much less.

I think the technical people should discuss with our counterparts what their precise problems are, rather than have me express them to you, unless you have an overwhelming interest to have communications problems explained to you by me.

PM Chou: No need for me.

Dr. Kissinger: … because I don't understand them myself.

PM Chou: But perhaps in this aspect I have slightly a bit more knowledge than you. I have had so many experiences in negotiations in my lifetime.

Dr. Kissinger: But let me point out the basic categories of problems which they will want to discuss. The first is the President's itinerary, how many days he would stay and how many places you propose that he visit. And how long he would stay in each. We are thinking of about five days in the People's Republic, but we are flexible in listening to your suggestions.

The second problem is that of Presidential communications. Since in our form of government certain decisions can be taken only by the President, there is a requirement that the President has reliable, rapid, and secure communications at all times.

PM Chou: When the President goes abroad, the Vice President is not able to do his work for him?

Dr. Kissinger: No.

PM Chou: That's in the Constitution, is it?

Dr. Kissinger: No. The Constitution does not say anything about that. The Vice President can do the President's work only when he is incapacitated.

PM Chou: I remember when President Nixon was Vice President to President Eisenhower. But then President Eisenhower was incapacitated, I believe.

Dr. Kissinger: That is a difficult question. It is very dangerous for the Vice President to declare the President incapacitated, in case he recovers. And actually, Vice President Nixon was extremely circumspect at the time of President Eisenhower's heart attack and did not say he was incapacitated.

PM Chou: I have read some of the excerpts of a book that he wrote, The Six Crises, that he restrained himself.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. Our technical people propose that the easiest way to accomplish this is by an installation which would be operated by 12 people at the airport and which is connected to a satellite, but I will let them discuss it with your people. Of course, your people would have full access to any such installation, and could be in it at all times. We have included pictures and a description of it in this book, so that you can see what it is.

The third problem about which I have already warned the Prime Minister when we met is that of security for the President. I have to tell the Prime Minister that the Secret Service representative of the President, who is on this trip with me but who is not in this room, is barely talking to me because he believes I am not taking his duty seriously, and because I am assuring him that the safest place the President will ever visit is Peking.

PM Chou: I should thank you very much for your confidence in us, and this is truly something a sovereign country should be able to manage. The proof of this is the recent visit of the Emperor of Ethiopia, Haile Selassie.

Dr. Kissinger: We have no question about this. There is, however, one peculiarity in our law which is that the Secret Service has duties which even the President does not have the right to abrogate, because the law doesn't want to give the President the right to do away with his own protection. We have, in any event, reduced this, because our proposal for Secret Service is frankly below the minimum they consider adequate. Their function while they are here will be primarily liaison with your security people and not to carry out primary security functions themselves. And I suggest that perhaps Mr. Taylor talk to whoever your counterpart is here, and if there are any difficulties perhaps you would raise them with me.

[Chou nods]

Now, let me turn to another very difficult problem which is that of the press.

PM Chou: [laughs] Truly there are some conflicts between security, Secret Service and the press.

Dr. Kissinger: Not as many as between the press and the White House. The Prime Minister dealt with a representative of the sovereign country, the New York Times.

PM Chou: Recently I read Mr. Lippman also has issued an interview with another correspondent. Although he has already retired, he seems to have a lot of interest in this thing. He was not in China, though.

Dr. Kissinger: I was afraid the Prime Minister had had to deal with Walter Lippman and James Reston in one year; and that is a degree of invasion no country should be required to tolerate.

PM Chou: I am not afraid of that.

Dr. Kissinger: I have to tell the Prime Minister, Mr. Reston granted me an interview before I left. He doubted that I could perform my duties without his advice about how to treat the Prime Minister. [laughter] At any rate, Mr. Prime Minister, I had never considered the question of the press, and when we talked in July I mentioned the figure of 10, I believe. When I asked our Press Secretary what the absolute minimum was that was necessary for such a trip, he proposed a figure of 250. [laughter]

PM Chou: You mean Mr. Ziegler?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. That's because he has two thousand applications. After a week of acrimonious debate, he has now reduced the figure to 150, and isn't talking to me any more.

PM Chou: That's also a great disaster.

Dr. Kissinger: And you will find in this book in other countries, … because in Romania for example, we had 450, which is almost unbelievable. [laughter]

PM Chou: And what about during the visit to a country like Yugoslavia?

Dr. Kissinger: It's in the book. About 350, three companies. The Marshall will understand.

PM Chou: And what about London?

Dr. Kissinger: It's all in this book. [to Chapin] How many, about 500?

Mr. Chapin: Between 400 and 500.

Dr. Kissinger: Between 400 and 500. And finally the relatively easy point.

PM Chou: I suppose your Secret Service don't agree to have so many people of the press coming?

Dr. Kissinger: Unfortunately, yes.

PM Chou: They have to agree. Otherwise they would be cursed to death.

Dr. Kissinger: And then finally, as for the official party, you will also find a list here. We are thinking of 12 members of the official party and about 16 members of the unofficial party.

Now, let me tell you Mr. Prime Minister, we are here in order to prepare a serious visit for a historical occasion, and we will not let any of the technical issues interfere with what needs to be done. These proposals reflect the best judgment of our technical people, but we require the best judgment of your technical people, and if there is any problem about any of these topics, I would propose, Mr. Prime Minister, that you will mention it to me with the frankness with which you have always dealt with me, and we will resolve it in a satisfactory manner.

PM Chou: This [the book] is something you have officially handed over to me?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: Thank you.

Dr. Kissinger: And our relations in any event will not fail because of technical problems. I have more copies if you would like more than one. [laughter]

PM Chou: Two copies. I believe that General Marshall told me in Chungking before that the written plan of his landing in Normandy was up to four million or five million words. I asked him “how are you going to read it?” He said “I read only the outline.” [laughter] So I learned that secret from him. That is why the film that your President likes to see, “Patton”. [Kissinger: That was a year ago.] So I now understand the reason for that, because this General has broken through all these conventions.

Dr. Kissinger: Exactly. That was a year ago.

PM Chou: He broke through all the rigid conventions. One is rigid conventions; the other is scholasticism. I am sorry to say this before you two, but this is vocational work and I respect you in that because you are responsible people and to be faithful to your duties you have to stick by your principles. We understand that.

Dr. Kissinger: And you have to be kind to them because they are the only two members of the White House staff still speaking to me.

PM Chou: General Hughes has been with the President for a long time. I believe you were with him when he was Vice President?

General Hughes: That's correct the last four years of the Administration.

Dr. Kissinger: I hope you won't tell these people everything you know about me. It would be too hard to take. [laughter]

PM Chou: Mr. Chapin, you seem quite young.

Mr. Chapin: I am 30.

PM Chou: So I admire you greatly. In this aspect, we Chinese have still to catch up with you Americans because you dare to use young people. You are in charge… Your counterpart here will be in our protocol department and the youngest member responsible for it is Miss Wang who is older than you. That doesn't matter here. You know about that. But I don't ask the age of the two ladies accompanying you.

Dr. Kissinger: And Commander Howe is a submarine commander, and he works in the basement of the White House. [laughter] He keeps an eye on the technical personnel from my point of view, and he will attend all the technical meetings.

But to be serious about it, please tell us frankly what is possible for you and what problems exist. And whatever other problems there are, we will not have them about technical issues. These are all the issues I wanted to raise with the Prime Minister, and it remains for me only to say that all of us here and in the United States know that we are participating in an event of historical significance and we are doing it with enthusiasm and dedication, and every desire to start a new relationship between the United States and the People's Republic of China.

PM Chou: I thank you Dr. Kissinger for giving me a very frank and brief outline of the questions that you would like to discuss. And there is the possibility that future meetings of this scope, sitting like this, may be continued later on if necessary.

I would like to give a reply to your suggestion on the two or three general categories that you would suggest for our discussions. The main purpose of the interim visit is to further materialize the preparations for President Nixon's visit, and therefore, the questions are, first of all, divided into two main categories. The first is the political issues, that is how we should go about the consultations and discussions to seek the normalization of relations between our two countries and exchange of opinions on matters of common interest to us. The second category is the concrete discussion of the detailed technical preparations to be made for the visit of President Nixon. With regard to this part, I believe that the four categories Mr. Kissinger just now mentioned were mainly protocol, security, communications and the press. I would like to ask a question, that is, after we have read the book you have given to us, do you think the technical discussions should be held together or separately, that is the four different aspects.

Dr. Kissinger: I think they should be held together.

PM Chou: I believe according to the list there will be six on your side attending the technical discussions: General Hughes, Mr. Chapin, General Redman, Mr. Elbourne, Mr. Taylor and …

Dr. Kissinger: And Commander Howe, who represents my office.

PM Chou: That will be six representatives for your side?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: And also a stenographer?

Dr. Kissinger. Yes, Chief Cuff, someone from the airplane.

PM Chou: I would like to introduce the people on our side who will take part in the technical discussions: Mr. Yu Sang, Vice Minister of Public Security, (on tour of Great Hall), HAN Hsu, Acting Director of Protocol, and Liu Ch'eng-ching, General Director of the Bureau of Communications. The fifth aspect the press we have on our side, the Director of Information, Mr. Ch'en Ch'u. He is also on a tour of the Great Hall. He will be attending the banquet. And since you have now transferred your chief pilot from the hotel at the airport to our Guest House, if he is going to participate in the technical discussions we have on our side members of the CNAC (China National Airways Corporation): Ma Jen-hui and Chung Jui-ai. And the main interpreter will be Madame Chang. There are other interpreters assisting her.

And as for the second part of the discussions, that is the technical aspects; above is my reply. After they have finished reading your documents, they can begin their discussions, perhaps at a date no later than tomorrow afternoon because the two on your side are probably anxious to begin their work.

Dr. Kissinger: They are professionally anxious. Anxiety is their constant state.

PM Chou: We may also put forward our proposal.

Dr. Kissinger: Please.

PM Chou: We shall go back to the first part. That's the political discussion. There is no question that on the basis of the understanding we reached during the unofficial visit of yours we should continue to discuss the issues that are to be discussed and are to be resolved during the coming visit of President Nixon. With regard to the items and titles Your Excellency has now put forward we have the following understanding. Taiwan, that's the crucial issue with regard to the seeking of normalization between the two countries, between China and the U.S. which was in the announcement; that is the crucial question.

The second is that the most urgent issue to be resolved to relax tension in the Far East is the question of Indochina.

The third is an issue which both our sides have a certain responsibility and this responsibility, Mr. Jenkins, must be very familiar with that; and this responsibility links us to the present day. That is Korea. It was most unfortunate that in the Geneva Conference of 1954 agreement was not reached. That I spoke to you about last time. Because it's an American representative of the U.S. side and also a representative of the Chinese People's Volunteers meeting there also. On the North Korean side the main representative is the representative of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. On the southern side the main representative is the U.S. representative. So this issue involves our two sides and Your Excellency mentioned this just now.

The fourth issue is the issue of Japan which is an issue which has a far-reaching influence on the relaxation of tension in the Far East.

I heard that they asked you to stop over in Tokyo this time but you found it impossible to do so.

Dr. Kissinger: It's what the Japanese press reports.

PM Chou: We also saw it from the Japanese news reports. This is also an issue that needs to be discussed and is related to the relaxation of tension in the Far East.

The fifth issue which you also mentioned is the issue of the South Asian subcontinent.

The sixth issue is the point you would like to speak upon—that is relations between the Soviet Union and the United States. Of course, if you are going to speak on that I will have to speak on China and the Soviet Union. I did not mention it last time—only one small incident—but it is something mentioned very often since you left. The uniting together of various forces to commit aggression against China from four sides. Of course, Your Excellency answered very quickly and frankly last time that that was not possible, but there are others who have not given such a direct reply, so you will probably be interested in that and especially your friend from the State Department. We will discuss this, but we think this is not a main issue. The main issue is China and the United States. We are not opposed to any other relationships.

There was another matter in which we believe there is still room for improvement, another matter we are not fully satisfied with but which is a part of good intentions on the part of your President. That is you have proclaimed that the meeting between the leaders of the United States and the leaders of the Soviet Union will be after the meeting of the United States and China. Of course, this is something that is done by your President along the lines of tacit agreements between our two governments originally. The thing that we think there's still room for improvement is that we think it would be better for your President to go to the Soviet Union first. You will remember I mentioned that last time. Therefore, we don't fear things at all in that aspect.

Of course, besides these issues there are other issues of mutual interest that can also be discussed. I don't think there's any need to list all the titles to be discussed here. In discussing these issues probably we can divide ourselves into another two parties. One would be a restricted discussion between a few of us. That can also be divided into two categories. One of you and myself. That will be a discussion of matters of a restricted nature. The other would be your friend from the State Department and someone from our Foreign Ministry to discuss some general items. In this way we can do things simultaneously and then we can come back to a general meeting like this. Will that be all right?

Dr. Kissinger: Let me make this suggestion, Mr. Prime Minister. I think it may be the best use of our time if we proceed in the manner that the Prime Minister has suggested. But I would like to have one assistant with me when I talk with the Prime Minister and I would like perhaps to have one man watch Mr. Jenkins when he discusses with his colleagues in the Foreign Ministry. [Chou laughs]That would be Mr. Holdridge. In the end we come back together.

PM Chou: Mr. Holdridge with Mr. Jenkins?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. If agreeable with the Prime Minister, they could discuss the list of issues I called subsidiary but important and such topics that they should agree to, and the Prime Minister and I and one assistant on other topics and then we will come together.

PM Chou: We know there is also historical tradition in your foreign policy and it is impossible to cut it off all at once. I believe Mr. Jenkins will agree fully with my words.

Mr. Jenkins: Indeed.

PM Chou: But there is also the need to break with some of these conventions. On this matter President Nixon has spoken first when he met the press on the 6th of July in Kansas City.

The most interesting thing is that just before you came on this visit the Prime Minister and leader of the Conservative Party in Britain has made a speech in response to President Nixon's speech at the conclusion of the party's annual meeting. And it is the Prime Minister of the Conservative Party that has acknowledged the changes that have taken place in the world. On the contrary, it is he who recognized the necessity to adapt themselves to the new Europe. And the reaction at the meeting and outside the meeting was divided as was the reaction to the July 16 announcement, the July 15 announcement, according to your time. That reaction as you just now mentioned was also divided. Some of the Members of Parliament of the Conservative Party were in very low spirits attending that meeting. But when they heard the speech of Prime Minister Heath they stood up and hailed him, that there was such a man to stand up and say such words after Churchill.

Although he didn't like to do so, Mr. Churchill ended the stage of the British Empire. That was not his subjective will. He said that to President Roosevelt. But objectively he ended the British Empire.

And twenty-six years afterwards there has appeared the Prime Minister of the Conservative Party who has actually recognized that the world has changed. Of course, he has also said some good words about the United States. He said that after the Second World War the U.S. acted with the generosity that other countries could not do which we discussed last time and I thank you for giving me the figures on lend lease.

Now the U.S. is saying that it is going to act with a new spirit and therefore Britain also has to embark on its new path. Therefore there were many in his party that hailed that speech. There are also some who booed his speech. Therefore it shows it is not easy to change a policy. Therefore I understand the reaction you just now mentioned, the reaction throughout the world and in the United States after the July 15 announcement was made public. And it's often the Conservative Party that dares to make the changes. In the U.S. there are also evidences of this. It was President Eisenhower who ended the Korean War. And it was also the ideas of Abraham Lincoln that were victorious during the Civil War in the United States. Isn't that so?

Dr. Kissinger: That's correct.

PM Chou: The same situation has now appeared in Britain. It's the Conservative Party which has expressed the desire to join the Common Market, and it's also the Conservative Party who is driving away the Soviet spies. They are willing to bear the result of the cancellation of Foreign Minister Home. The same situation will appear in Japan. Not with Sato. Not much help for him.

Dr. Kissinger: My former student, Nakasone?

PM Chou: You didn't say so last time. A new discovery for me. This is also in accordance with Chairman Mao's thoughts. And I think that though the positions; the stands of Chairman Mao and President Nixon vary greatly, I think it would be easier for them to understand and meet together. And it will be easier for their ideas to meet, for them to find common ground. I am afraid the interpreters cannot interpret accurately (referring to trouble Miss Tang had with the words “common ground”). Even though my English is poor, I take great interest in the interpretation.

Dr. Kissinger: I notice that.

PM Chou: You have brought stenographers with you this time, and if you have the wrong interpretation you will give the wrong interpretation to the President. We have also spoken a lot of the Soviet Union. We have been saying a lot about matters in the Soviet Union, Great Britain, and Japan. But there's something I am very satisfied with, and that is both your President and Prime Minister Heath have mentioned China as a potential power. We feel that is a little above our present standard. We are not an industralized nation. Of course, we are an element that is promoting change in the world. And this is a factor your President recognizes and Prime Minister Heath also recognizes. Of course, General DeGaulle had recognized that long before. The present Prime Minister of Japan, that is Mr. Sato, has recognized it now but it is too late. But there's someone in his party who recognizes it. But there is another who doesn't recognize it. It's always that way with things in the world.

Dr. Kissinger: Who is the other?

PM Chou: One of the five powers.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand.

PM Chou.: I would like to suggest that after having a bit more talk that we can begin having separate talks tomorrow.

Dr. Kissinger: That will be good and we will be prepared.

PM Chou: On our side the man who will hold discussions with Mr. Jenkins will be Mr. Hsuing Hsiang-hui, my assistant. And also Mr. Ch'ien who is the Department in charge of East and West European and also American affairs in the Foreign Ministry.

Dr. Kissinger: We will have Mr. Jenkins, Mr. Holdridge and one stenographer.

PM Chou: In our discussions you can take a few people and I will take a few people. Because Marshall Yeh is quite busy will ask him to take part in larger meetings only. He is also a negotiator. One of his jokes is that people don't ask for him during war time but when they want to negotiate. He was my assistant when we negotiated with General Marshall.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand he was very difficult [laughter] - but pleasant.

PM Chou: The same. That's mutual. So according to this arrangement how many days do you think you can stay?

Dr. Kissinger: I said to your assistant, Mr. Prime Minister, we had planned to leave on the morning of the 25th but we will leave whenever the discussions are concluded. We just wanted to leave enough time so that technical discussions and the outlines of a communique will be discussed while I am here since this will be my last opportunity to see the Prime Minister until the President arrives. But if the work is completed earlier and we all agree it's completed then of course we are very flexible about our departure. This was simply for our planning.

PM Chou: And we can take the initial date for departure as the morning of the 25th?

Dr. Kissinger: That is correct.

PM Chou: We still have four days after today. So we will do our best to make the days most efficient. Of course you will want to see Peking while you are here. It would not be nice if we did not let you see it. There are also a lot of friends in your party who have not been here before. As to what you would like to see you can put forward your wishes.

Dr. Kissinger: We will leave it to you because you know Peking better than we do.

PM Chou: We do not know your appetite, so it will be better for you to tell us your wishes because we are equals on this matter. We are equals. The interpreter added an element “on this matter.”

Dr. Kissinger: May I go back, Mr. Prime Minister? First, about the day of the President's visit. You are quite right that you did not ask us to set the Peking date before the Soviet date. Quite the opposite, in fact. But as I explained to you when we met we had to complete a certain amount of work with the Soviet Union before a summit made sense. If that work had been completed before my arrival in July, we would have arranged the visit to the Soviet Union before the visit to Peking. But when matters had developed in the direction that they had, we believed, at our own initiative and not at your request, that it would be inappropriate to set a date before rather than a date afterward. So we did this for reasons of what we considered proper and not as a favor to the People's Republic. (Chou nods.)

Secondly, incidentally, one of the topics we have to settle while I am here is the precise date of the President's visit. (Chou nods.) We don't have to announce it but we should have an idea because we are holding a number of dates on the President's calendar.

PM Chou: And according to the messages we received from you, you have two ideas.

Dr. Kissinger: We proposed two dates. One was February 21 and the other was March 16. We can find another date within those dates if those are inconvenient.

PM Chou: I believe that in your consideration the most important thing is to fix the date of your President's visit because he probably has a very crowded schedule.

Dr. Kissinger: It would be a great courtesy if we could because he has a crowded schedule and we have not filled it until your response.

PM Chou: For initial exchange of opinion I would like to say that we tend more to go for the first date toward the 21st of February.

Dr. Kissinger: That is slightly our preference.

PM Chou: You mentioned a five-day visit. We are also thinking of five-seven days. This is only an initial idea.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand.

PM Chou: At the end of our discussion this time we will be initially finalizing the date. Of course, you will have to go back and report to your President. And your colleagues can also begin on their operation. The date also has to do with the weather. But I think that the seasons are similar in our two countries.

Dr. Kissinger: The latest date in March would be the 21st if it were to be in March.

PM Chou: February probably would be better.

Dr. Kissinger: It's our preferred date, but it's only to give you the possibility.

PM Chou: The good thing is there's heating in. Peking, so you will not feel the weather indoors.

Dr. Kissinger: I have no worry about the physical arrangements.

PM Chou: But it's not as comfortable as yours. Industrially we are backward.

Dr. Kissinger: I don't know how many meals the President can eat.

PM Chou: We can do it according to his choice.

Dr. Kissinger: The second issue concerns the issue of Korea. This is the second time the Prime Minister has made a reference to 1954. And I would be very grateful if when we meet tomorrow or on some other occasion when we meet in a large group, the Prime Minister can explain exactly what he has in mind. I cannot accept in the frankness of which we are talking, his description of who the most important representative on the other side is in Panmunjon. I recognize that we are the only one represented there at this moment.

PM Chou: You are the main representative.

Dr. Kissinger: Now.

PM Chou: Of course, I am speaking in the present.

Dr. Kissinger: I was speaking in the context of peace.

PM Chou: I am speaking of the status quo. It's not favorable to the relaxation of tensions. The State Department is familiar with that.

Dr. Kissinger: I am also.

PM Chou: It's a very complicated matter and gives one a headache.

Dr. Kissinger: With respect to Indochina, I will speak to the Prime Minister tomorrow. I would like to say a word about Europe. I appreciate the analysis that the Prime Minister gave of the speech of Prime Minister Heath, and, of course, he will remember that the impetus for European unity came from the U.S. and the chief advocates for European unity were American and not European. I do not doubt that many of those who advocated European unity originally believed that it would be a continuation of the old arrangement, only Europe would carry a bigger share of the burden. But those who analyzed the problems more deeply always understood that the objective necessity of a united Europe would be a greater independence from the U.S. In a historical perspective this is not against the interests of the U.S. There is no historic law that says Europe must be governed from Washington.

Therefore, to the degree that Europe follows the policy that Prime Minister Heath outlined after a short transitional period I believe that the objective necessities in certain international questions are shown in policy. And therefore I must tell the Prime Minister that Prime Minister Heath, who is a good personal friend of the President and mine, did not make us at all unhappy with the speech. We think it's a healthy direction.

PM Chou: I haven't read the full text of his speech but it seems to me from the extract I saw he did not talk of a unified Europe in a short time. But what he was speaking of in the first step was an alliance of 10 powers of Western Europe, drawing into the Common Market.

Dr. Kissinger: That's correct.

PM Chou: That will result in grouping of powers as follows: the U.S., Soviet Union, Western Europe and Japan. He mentioned China for potential strength. This is basically similar with the general direction of your President. I caught that point but didn't pay much attention to the rest. It was difficult for him to say that in Britain.

Dr. Kissinger: Emotionally it was very difficult. Emotionally Britain is tied to us and not Europe.

PM Chou: That's so. Even after 26 years after World War Two.

Dr. Kissinger: When the English speak of Europe they mean the continent and not themselves.

PM Chou: At that time they meant the whole world.

Dr. Kissinger: I always thought it curious that in 1938 Chamberlain said why should we fight for a country so far away, in speaking of Czechoslovakia, after 200 years of fighting thousands of miles away in India.

PM Chou: It's because of that there was the Munich Conference.

Dr. Kissinger: Exactly.

PM Chou: That's the most shameful thing that the Conservative Party in Britain has done. The appearance of Chamberlain. Among the radicals in France there was Daladier. He joined the ranks of the anti-fascist forces.

Dr. Kissinger: After Munich and not before. He signed the Munich Agreement.

PM Chou: I was speaking about precisely that. He had formerly joined the people's front. Before the agreement. At that time he supported the civil war in Spain.

Dr. Kissinger: But in fairness one has to say that the only opposition in Britain was from the Conservatives and the Liberal Party was unanimously for it.

PM Chou: That's right.

Dr. Kissinger: For reasons of general pacifism. And sentimentality.

One final point I wanted to make about U.S.-Chinese relationships today, if the Prime Minister will permit me. As our policy evolves toward normalization of our relationship it is inevitable that some countries to which we were tied will become somewhat uncertain because some patterns are starting to disintegrate. Speaking for ourselves, I think as a general principle it is important we do not look at the normalization of our relationship as a means to drive a wedge between the People's Republic and their old friends. And it would be shortsighted if either side tried to use this normalization to end alliances of the other side. Because if this is done there's a danger that everyone will draw back and withdraw back into the rigidity we are all attempting to escape.

PM Chou: That's one side of the matter that you have mentioned. It cannot be taken absolutely. Since we are entering a new era then necessarily some relationships must be changed. Otherwise there would be no change and life would be as it was before. If we recognize that we are entering a new era we should recognize an old proverb: the helmsman who knows how to guide the boat will guide it well through the waves. Otherwise he will be submerged by the waves. A far-sighted man will know how to till the helm. For instance, Hangchow. The largest waves come from the river, and those who know how to guide the boat are able to guide the boat directly against the tide, and when they hit the peak they make a turn and ride in with the tide. That's a phenomenon of nature. There's also a phenomenon of social affairs. If all the old relations remained unchanged how can we say we are welcoming in a new era?

Dr. Kissinger: I did not include Taiwan in this.

PM Chou: That's clear. I thought you were trying to bring in subtly the question of Taiwan. I think others understand this.

Dr. Kissinger: I was talking of other relationships.

PM Chou: We understand that. Including your relations with the Soviet Union. We do not wish that because of your new policy you will become in conflict with the Soviet Union. We want relaxation of tensions.

Dr. Kissinger: The Soviet Union cannot be termed as an old friend.

PM Chou: They are not mentioned either.

Dr. Kissinger: I will not mention any particular country. Of course, when our countries are truly friendly and we have gone beyond this period of caution, changes will appear in all relationships. Until this point is reached we should not give those who are opposed to this new direction an opportunity to say it's only a trick to destroy existing relationships so that one can renew old hostilities from a new tactical position, an offensive tactic rather than an attempt to achieve reconciliation.

PM Chou: You mean it will be a new tactic?

Dr. Kissinger: An offensive tactic rather then an attempt at reconciliation.

PM Chou: Anyway the times are advancing. That's a very important thing. Those who can grasp the spirit of the times will be able to improve the world. Otherwise they will be submerged by the tides of the times as I just now mentioned.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on either memorandum. A handwritten notation reads “informal memcon.” There are also numerous handwritten notes written throughout the memoranda. Ellipses in the source texts. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People.

37. Chinese Premier Chou En-lai's Extemporaneous Toast, Beijing, October 20, 1971 37. Chinese Premier Chou En-lai's Extemporaneous Toast, Beijing, October 20, 19711

Beijing, October 20, 1971

(Translation)

Premier Chou En-lai's Extemporaneous Toast

October 20, 1971

Dr. Kissinger and friends,

I would like to take this opportunity to welcome President Nixon's special envoy Dr. Kissinger and the other American friends who have come to China for this interim visit. The purpose of Dr. Kissinger's present visit is to make preparations related to the political discussions and technical arrangements of President Nixon's visit.

A new chapter will now be opened in the history of the relations between China and the United States after they have been cut off for 22 years, and we should say that the credit for this should go to Chairman Mao Tsetung and President Nixon. Of course, there must be someone serving as a guide, and it was Dr. Kissinger who courageously made a secret visit to China, the so-called “land of mystery”. That was quite a remarkable thing. This is now Dr. Kissinger's second visit to a land that should no longer be considered a “mystery”. He has come as a friend, and has also brought with him some new friends.

As for me, although I have never been to the United States, I know quite a few American friends, and the United States is not unfamiliar to me. It is evident that the social systems of our two countries are different, and our respective world outlooks—Dr. Kissinger likes to use the word “Philosophy”—are totally different, yet this should not prevent us from finding common ground. The Sino-American talks have gone on for 16 years now, but no common ground has yet been found. Now President Nixon will personally come to Peking for discussions, and Dr. Kissinger is his advanceman. We hope these discussions will achieve positive results.

Our two peoples are great peoples. Although our two countries are separated by the vast Pacific Ocean, friendship links our two peoples together. After receiving the U.S. table tennis team this year, we received a number of other American friends. We hope that this new era will be approached in a new spirit.

I propose a toast to the friendship between the great American people and the great Chinese people and to the health of Dr. Kissinger and all our other friends!

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 visit. No classification marking. Published from a copy that indicates it was the English translation of the Chinese remarks.

38. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon, Washington, October 21, 1971 38. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon, Washington, October 21, 19711

Washington, October 21, 1971

October 21, 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR:

THE PRESIDENT

FROM:B/GEN. A. M. HAIG, JR.

SUBJECT:

Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in Peking

I have received two reports from Dr. Kissinger covering the flavor of his visit thus far. He stated that the discussions had been most constructive and that the reception of the group could not have been more cordial.

He reported in a later message today that he has raised the issue of your individual meetings with Chou and Mao. Chou, according to Henry, agreed reluctantly with respect to his own meeting with you. On the other hand, he refused to agree to such a private session with Mao despite repeated urgings by Dr. Kissinger. He did so on the ground that he, Chou, was always present at such meetings. Dr. Kissinger was unable apparently to change his view. Dr. Kissinger also recommends that there be at least two meetings with Mao—one at the earlier part of your visit and the other towards the end.

Dr. Kissinger stated that he delicately raised the issue of Mrs. Nixon's accompanying you. Chou replied that while they did not initially anticipate her participation in the visit, he now would be glad to take it up with Mao. Henry recommends that we not raise the issue again until he returns to Washington and discusses it with you further. His estimate is that it can be arranged, although the development of a crowd situation appears more difficult and at this juncture appears unlikely.

Dr. Kissinger reported that the mood in all contacts thus far has been good and constructive. The agenda is shaping up well and that, unless there is an unforeseen setback, the party should depart Peking with an agreed communique.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicates that the President saw it. A handwritten note from Nixon reads: “Al-OK with Henry-OK with Chou & Mao together-but RN to be alone-Henry not to be present-otherwise we differ from RN's style in other trips & raise the Rogers problem.”

39. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 21, 1971, 10:20 a.m.-12:15 p.m. 39. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 21, 1971, 10:20 a.m.-12:15 p.m.1

Beijing, October 21, 1971, 10:20 a.m.-12:15 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Mr. Hsiung Hsiang-hui, Secretary to the Prime Minister

Mr. Chen_________, Deputy Division Chief from the Western European and American Department

Madame__________, Interpreter

Madame Ma, Notetaker

Mr. Alfred LeS. Jenkins, Department of State

Mr. John H. Holdridge, Senior NSC Staff Member

DATE, TIME, PLACE:

Thursday, October 21, 1971, 10:20 a.m.- 12:15 p.m., Hupei Hall, Great Hall of the People, Peking

Jenkins: I think if it's agreeable to you that we might first take up a subject which Mr. Holdridge of the White House staff would like to discuss concerning the manner of continued communication and relations of that sort.

Hsiung: According to the procedure agreed upon by Prime Minister Chou and Dr. Kissinger yesterday, this morning we are going to exchange views within this group. I suppose that we don't know everyone present here. So I first will introduce those present here from the Chinese side: Chen____________ he is Deputy Division Chief from the Western European and American Department; Madame ____________ [interpreter; she said “I am a staff member from the Foreign Ministry"]; Madame Ma [notetaker] is also a staff member from the Foreign Ministry. If Mr. Jenkins please would you introduce people from your side present at this talk.

Jenkins: I would be glad to have that opportunity. Mr. Holdridge here is a senior member of the National Security Council staff at the White House and has long worked with Dr. Kissinger. He is a foreign service officer on loan to the White House and we are hoping some day to get him back. And here we have Miss Pineau who is one of Dr. Kissinger's secretaries at the White House, and has worked with him for some time, and whose father I have known for some time. And I have very much enjoyed getting to know her on this trip.

Hsiung: According to the Chinese practice, we would like to hear our guests speak first. And I am very glad to hear that Mr. Jenkins has mentioned just now that Mr. Holdridge is going to speak first. So we hope that during our talks today the United States side will raise their questions and make known their ideas first.

Jenkins: Thank you very much. We are happy to have that opportunity and I hope that as we do so you will please feel free to break in at any time with any comments you may have, or questions either as to procedure or substance.

Hsiung: Exchange views.

Jenkins: Yes.

Holdridge: I would like to bring up if I could the question of continuing contacts between our two countries of what we might call a semi-official nature. Prior to the time of full normalization of relations between our two countries, we of course believe it would be very useful to have contacts, so we can exchange ideas of mutual interest. I think you will recall that Dr. Kissinger and Prime Minister Chou discussed this last summer. Prime Minister Chou very kindly suggested that a trusted representative of the President or Dr. Kissinger might again come to Peking and remain here for several weeks, or go to other parts of China, and as the Prime Minister suggested, investigate and report back. We, of course, very much appreciate this offer of Prime Minister Chou. In addition, you will recall that there was a special contact which was worked out between Prime Minister Chou and Dr. Kissinger, and we are very grateful for the fact that this has been established and is working very well. However, it does occur to us that as our relationship grows and as our contact increases, and as the preparations for the President's visit next year are worked out, it might be very useful to have communications other than those just discussed. There may be many things of an administrative nature which we would like to take care of and which we would not like to burden our more high-level contacts with. So I would simply like to raise a number of possibilities, and would like to stress that these are simply possibilities which I would like to offer for your consideration. We have noticed, for example, that the People's Republic of China and the Government of Japan maintain liaison offices. We know this is in the context of trade, but would like to raise the possibility—on a reciprocal or on a unilateral basis—of establishing an office having diplomatic status, but not full diplomatic status, with the ability to communicate, use the diplomatic pouch, and use crypto systems.

Hsiung's Interpreter: [indicated confusion]

Holdridge: Cryptographic systems.

Hsiung: There is one point not quite true to the fact mentioned by Mr. Holdridge just now. There isn't any such contacts between the Chinese and Japanese governments and there isn't any liaison office.

Holdridge: I though that was in connection with trade.

Hsiung: What liaison office you mentioned is between the peoples, an unofficial trade office. We can explain this later. Not between the governments.

Holdridge: I don't want to belabor the point. Let me move on to another possibility.

Hsiung: You say you don't believe in this point?

Holdridge: No, I said I don't want to belabor this point.

Hsiung: I am not going to make any comments on suggestions you mention now. I have just clarified a point.

Holdridge: I appreciate that, and think it is probably more practical not to go into details. I just wanted to review some of the suggestions we had in mind.

Jenkins: May I make one brief comment on this before we leave it. As I understand, we don't have anything very definite in mind, but while we are not necessarily picturing anything of a materially different nature organizationally from the Japanese “Trade Office,” I believe to call it a trade office is not what we had in mind. “Trade Office” is more a special indicator than the precise format we had in mind. Isn't that right?

Holdridge: Yes.

Hsiung: Excuse me; I must make a break here. [Photographers enter.] The photographers are very aggressive. He wants to take a photo of me. Might we let him in?

Jenkins: Some time we might have a friendly competition as to which are more aggressive, American or Chinese photographers.

Hsiung: Do you have also this custom?

Jenkins: With a vengeance.

Hsiung: [Indicated he didn't understand.]

Holdridge: [Explained with Chinese expression chueh tui, meaning emphatically.]

Laughter

Hsiung: But they didn't know it in advance, so after they have learned if they want to put in.

Jenkins: This often happens in our circumstances too.

Hsiung: So we have to agree to it.

Jenkins: This I understand fully.

Hsiung: And, of course, as Dr. Kissinger also mentioned yesterday, some of the pictures can also be given to you.

Jenkins: That would be very gracious.

Hsiung: And he also mentioned the film material made last time can be given to you before you leave. If there is an opportunity we can show it to you first.

Jenkins: Very nice.

Hsiung: Very short one. Although it is short, but I believe you would like to get it.

Jenkins: We would prize it very much.

Hsiung: Because Dr. Kissinger mentioned it twice yesterday. Perhaps it is not well taken.

Jenkins: I am sure it is very good.

Hsiung: They [the photographers] want to continue. I am sure it won't be good by 70 percent.

Jenkins: I think they always take a great deal more footage than they end up using. At least that's the way our people do it.

Hsiung: I would like to add a few words on the suggestions which Mr. Holdridge mentioned just now, first suggestion. I am not going to give a reply on the suggestion itself which has been put forward, by Mr. Holdridge just now. I am just going to clarify a fact. That is, there isn't such a liaison office between the Chinese and Japanese governments. As to what is going to be done between the Chinese and United States governments, we can give further considerations; we can exchange views. I am not going to comment on your suggestion itself. Perhaps you understand it.

Holdridge: Let me proceed and offer another possibility if I may. I am sure Mr. Hsiung is aware in the Middle East, for example, of American interest sections inside friendly embassies, such as in the UAR, Algeria, and so on. [to Jenkins]: Isn't it at the Spanish Embassy …

Jenkins: Yes.

Holdridge: At the Spanish Embassy in Cairo as an example, and of course the countries such as the UAR can also be in the United States in Washington, D.C. in the same fashion.

Hsiung: They haven't restored the United States embassy in Cairo?

Holdridge: No, our representative is simply an American interest representative. He has the personal rank of Minister and is accorded diplomatic status, but we do not have formal representation in Cairo.

Jenkins: Actually, he operates from our regular embassy quarters there. He is not housed in the Spanish Embassy, but he is technically a section of the Spanish Embassy. But that's a matter of mutual convenience, and need not be a pattern for other cases. These patterns vary considerably.

Holdridge: So this is another possibility which we offer for the consideration of the People's Republic. We assume we would have to find a friendly embassy. Of course, we would also offer this on a reciprocal basis if that would be the preference of the People's Republic of China.

One third possibility comes to mind, and that is simple reverting to what Prime Minister Chou said, a senior representative of the President or Dr. Kissinger coming to Peking again. It might be helpful for a small group, perhaps from the American Consulate General in Hong Kong, to come in advance of the representatives's trip, be here before his arrival, during his stay here, and remain after. It would be helpful in administrative matters. Of course the people I am talking about need not come from Hong Kong; they can come from any other convenient place, or from Washington for that matter.

Now these are three possibilities which occur to us, and they certainly do not in any way supplant the suggestion which Prime Minister Chou raised with Dr. Kissinger last summer, which we are very grateful for. And we welcome any suggestions from the People's Republic of China or any suggestions that you might care to make.

Hsiung: This is one point, one question. Any other questions? Shall we link them together? Shall we hear your questions, all the points first?

Jenkins: Related to this subject or to our next subject?

Hsiung: If there is any addition to these points, we would like to hear about it.

Holdridge: That is all I have to talk about at this point concerning continuing contacts. What Mr. Jenkins has to discuss is rather unrelated.

Hsiung: Then Mr. Jenkins, please speak.

Jenkins: Yes. I think as our affairs progress in these prior visits—what your Prime Minister referred to last night as this interim visit to the President's visit—that we are hoping we can approach these matters between us sort of organismically, as a whole. I myself am particularly cognizant of this turning point, this really quite historical occasion. I was impressed, and I must say moved, yesterday and particularly last evening. I have presumed to inject a slight personal note into this because I have been associated with the lengthy Warsaw Talks pretty much since their inception, their beginning in 1955, and their preliminaries in 1954, and during that period it seem that we were, as someone put it, like ships passing in the night.

Hsiung: During the Warsaw Talks you frequently attended?

Jenkins: Yes, I was advisor to the Talks during the time that I was Deputy Chief of Mission at our American Embassy in Stockholm. I went to the talks 17 times then.

Hsiung: You are a very frequent traveler. But as it was mentioned in our Prime Minister's speech, although we carried on our talks 16 years, nothing has come out of it.

Jenkins: That's true. We were like ships passing in the night. But I maintained a bit of hope then, because the tradition of humor between the Chinese and American people, which I think is similar, would come out even during these trying times. Even when no substantive agreements could be reached, we would day “Ah, we have agreed on one point, the date of the next meeting.”

Hsiung: This I think is not a question of a sense of humor. It's a very serious question. And just now, Mr. Jenkins said you greet this as a turning point. How did you think prior to this turning point? How did you think of Sino-U.S. relations?

Jenkins: I think it was painful to both sides because we were cognizant of some misunderstandings and misconceptions perhaps, but primarily because of different circumstances in East Asia and in the world it may have been difficult for us to be other than ships passing in the night. Whereas now, fortunately, we are not like ships passing in the night, but people meeting in broad daylight and have had the openness and frankness which has been so abundantly demonstrated by your Prime Minister and Dr. Kissinger, and our President, and we find it a very refreshing thing that we seem to be meeting in daylight now.

Hsiung: If we take this ship as an analogy, then whether it sails at night or in the daylight, you will need a direction, an orientation. For without a fixed orientation then even if you sail in the daylight then you sail to the wrong course.

Jenkins: Mr. Hsiung is exactly right in that point, and I think this is an appropriate introduction to what I hope to take up now.

Hsiung: That's why I am not going to make any comments on Sino-U. S. talks which have lasted 16 years.

Holdridge: Pai tse-ti (without results).

Jenkins: Exactly. I think we have fully recognized that the People's Republic considers some of these questions which you have called 'subsidiary' as precisely that, and I want to emphasize we do not intend to use these issues as any sort of diversion from what we both consider to be the fundamental issues. I believe that our principals are facing some of the fundamental issues, and expect us concurrently to look at some of the things which will help make movement possible on these fundamental questions—which can help us, I know, and possibly you in the People's Republic, to convince those who would detract from our present course that acceptable movement is possible and can be mutually profitable.

Hsiung: What do you mean by condemning those who want to divert the attention of these questions?

Jenkins: You say condemning? I mean detracting. Last night Dr. Kissinger mentioned quite frankly that there are elements in our society which have questions, or more than questions, about the direction in which our present efforts are going. It isn't easy to cope with that. We believe that it can be done, but we believe that some agreement in these subsidiary issues to the fundamental issues, which are also to be faced, show we attach no conditions to progress in relations.

Holdridge: There have been some leading people in the United States who have criticized the turn of events, say this will harm U.S. relations with other countries, and these voices are quite powerful still. I am sure Mr. Hsiung is aware of some of the people who have spoken out. They are quite influential indeed.

Jenkins: And therefore if we can point to some particular movement on these substantive issues, for us at least it will be something of an insurance policy that can be applied to movement in some of the more fundamental questions. I have here quite a number of purely suggestive proposals, some of which may appeal to the People's Republic and we will offer them as possibilities for your consideration. They are not exclusive. We would certainly welcome any suggestions and observations from you and I would like to review a few of them orally, and then perhaps offer you some written material which you may like to study and refer to later. Due to the multi-faceted…

Hsiung's Interpreter: [indicated confusion]

Jenkins: multi-faceted

Interpreter: [indicated she understood] Perhaps it is your Georgia accent.

Jenkins: I have met that hazard before.

It is frankly difficult for us to picture just the best mechanics for approaching such matters as precise contacts in scientific, cultural, and sports areas. For us it would unquestionably be easier, simpler, and perhaps more reliable and managable if there were some type of government-to-government arrangement concerning them. However, if the People's Republic prefers to handle such matters on a non-governmental basis, through private organizations, people's organizations, that would be thoroughly acceptable to us. If there were to be a government-to-government agreement, I am sure that we could work together on the format for such. If, however, it is to be carried on through peoples' organizations on a private basis, we might simply prefer, both of us, to carry a reference to that effect in a joint communique. Unless there is some comment on this that you would care to make at this point, I could proceed to just mention briefly several illustrative possibilities along this line, and as I earlier said, I could give you some written possibilities which you might want to study in further detail and comment upon.

Hsiung: Yes, please proceed.

Jenkins: As an example, we have heard, particularly in recent times in the United States, of some rather remarkable techniques that you have derived in China concerning the treatment of severe burn victims and also for retaining severed limbs. There may also be areas of surgical practice in the United States which would interest Chinese specialists. If you should find any interest in this area, we are prepared to arrange invitations for Chinese visitors to leading hospitals and specialty surgical clinics in the United States. As I have said, we believe that we could learn from you in this area to the benefit of our people in these humanitarian endeavors, in the saving of life; and if this were to be done on a governmental level we would suggest that our National Institutes of Health would be willing to cooperate in this field. If it is done on a private basis perhaps the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences, which is not a governmental organization, might be of help.

Hsiung: National Institutes of Health. Is it one of the more than 60 administrations of the government? Is that right?

Jenkins: That's correct.

Holdridge: Part of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare.

Hsiung: [Does it have more than 60 subsidiary bodies?]

Holdridge: I believe so. You probably have more information on that than I do.

Hsiung: The Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences?

Jenkins: As a second, again purely illustrative idea which occurs to us, we have noted that your Premier has personally mentioned the Chinese concern for protection of the environment and the natural ecology of the planet. This is a very topical question today. I think particularly the youth of the world are very vocal on this subject, although all of us are having to take it with increasing seriousness. The United States is very cognizant of the fact that the highly industrialized countries have a particular responsibility in trying to do whatever they can to reduce pollution and unfavorable effects on the environment, because our planet has in a sense shrunken, so that in effect what any of us does affects the others.

Hsiung: I remember in one of his speeches, President Nixon made special emphasis on the question of pollution.

Jenkins: Yes, so on this subject, both of our leaderships in the two countries are openly expressing concern. Prime Minister Chou En-lai has spoken of this.

Hsiung: [laugh] The situation of pollution in Japan is no better than in the United States.

Holdridge: Worse.

Hsiung: Perhaps it is more serious.

Jenkins: It is much worse.

Hsiung: Many friends, the people of Japan, in Japan you can hardly find any fish in the lake now. And the Danube in Europe you can hardly find any fish now.

Jenkins: That's right.

Hsiung: It has also much to do with the social system.

Holdridge: Partly. It has also to do with size of the society, number of people, and degree of industry in certain areas.

Hsiung: I mean the social system. But we won't debate on this subject.

Jenkins: Even though we agree not to debate that question, I can say that we have witnessed that the Chinese have set a remarkable example for other nations in the recovery and recycling of a wide variety of waste materials, that is both industrial and, shall we say, societal wastes.

Hsiung: Yes, we make full use of the three kinds of waste materials, waste gas, waste water, and waste materials.

Jenkins: We have seen articles on this and have been very much impressed by them. Air pollution, water pollution, waste recovery and recycling and, just as importantly, sanitary engineering are areas of much interest to us. We believe that you can help us in these areas, and we would hope that that might also be mutual.

Hsiung: Sanitary engineering?

Jenkins: The management of societal wastes. We in recent times have had quite a rapid growth of interst in organic farming in the United States and we know that China has had long and successful experience in that type of farming.

Hsiung: Organic farming?

Jenkins: Non-chemical. If the People's Republic finds interest in this area of rapidly growing importance in the world we are prepared to provide to you summary information on the nature and the magnitude of environmental problems which we have encountered in the United States.

Hsiung: We would like to know if you know how much fertilizer, both organic and synthetic would you apply to each acre.

Holdridge: I am afraid we are not experts in that field. We would be very happy to find out for you.

Hsiung: Of course this is also secondary; I just mention it in passing.

Holdridge: A lot. We are using a great deal in places like Iowa to increase corn yield per acre of land. We have a great corn yield because of this.

Hsiung: What kind [of fertilizer]?

Holdridge: For the most part nitrogenous.

Jenkins: Chemical.

Jenkins: Yes. But one has to be very careful in using fertilizers. To increase the amount can kill crops unless some other measures are taken concommitantly.

We could, if you are interested, provide a collection of, I should think, several hundred technical reports of our office of saline water on studies related to development of water desalinization techniques. We could also furnish you, if you would like them, our latest information on air and water quality standards. [Hsiung indicates he doesn't understand.] I believe what's meant by that is safe levels of the standards of puity of air and water.

Hsiung: Purity of water?

Jenkins: Yes. Various means of helping each other in this field are possible. One thing which occurs to us is a Dr. Abel Wolman who is the Professor of Sanitary Engineering at Johns Hopkins University, would be prepared to visit China if you would like him, to learn from you and also lecture here on some of his studies, if you would wish that. That's just an illustrative suggestion, an example. One possible means of contact from our side in this whole area of interest would be our National Academy of Sciences.

Holdridge: That's non-governmental.

Hsiung: Where is the headquarters of this organization?

Jenkins: In Washington. Many of our organizations which are private but of nationwide interest have headquarters or offices in Washington.

Hsiung: Where do the (the National Academy of Sciences) get their funds?

Jenkins: I don't know. I can find out.

Hsiung: Just mention in passing. Don't bother.

Jenkins: There is another possibility which we don't need to spend much time on unless you like it, but it's a fascinating one, and that is the issue of efficient translating procedures from one language to another. We could give some suggestions on how we might be of help to each other in that area if you are interested.

Hsiung: You mean the oral or written translating?

Jenkins: I was thinking of written.

Holdridge: This means by machines, using computers.

Hsiung: The United States is a country of computers.

Holdridge: There is a project in Princeton aimed at the rapid translation from Chinese into English using this particular technique.

Hsiung: Is it effective?

Holdridge: I think so.

Jenkins: Within limits.

Hsiung: Everything has its limits. How is the accuracy?

Holdridge: Fair.

Jenkins: The whole effort is pretty much in the beginning stages but it does have sufficient promise for us to believe that to have further attention put to it would be very useful, and might be something of interest to you.

Hsiung: Have you solved the problem of translating English to French or Spanish by computers?

Jenkins: Again, not perfectly, but surprisingly well. I have read printouts of French and Russian translations into English and the sense is almost complete and rather accurate. The grammar sometimes, word order and construction, sometimes leaves a good bit to be desired. It at times sounds a bit childish, but the ideas are there.

I don't want to overdo this oral presentation, but there are two or three other things if I may continue a little longer. I don't know what you plan as to our schedule, as to whether we sould probably break and come back—whatever your pleasure is.

Hsiung: As I mentioned at the beginning, according to our Chinese practice, we like to have our guests to speak first. If we can't finish it in the morning we can find some other time, wither in the afternoon or some other time to continue it.

[BREAK: 11:35 - 11:45]

Jenkins: I have mentioned several areas in which China seems to form something of a vanguard …

Hsiung Interpreter: [indicates confusion]

Jenkins: leader. There is an area which I am sure is of considerable interest to both of our countries because of our long coastlines in which, if I am not being immodest, I think the United States has made considerable advance.

Hsiung: Your coastline is longer than ours because you have them on both sides.

Jenkins: Yes, but I think you catch more fish than we do.

Hsiung: Because of your pollution.

Jenkins: This area that I am speaking of is in marine science work. We believe that our work in that field is of high quality and certainly of very broad coverage. We are prepared to encourage the three major American west coast oceanographic institutions to host a delegation of Chinese oceanographers and marine scientists for disucssion of areas of common interest if this would appeal to you.

There are a number of other ideas in here which to me seem so attractive that I am loathe to skip over them, but in the interest of time I will perhaps go to only one more at the moment and. we can discuss other later if you wish. I mentioned earlier Prime Minister Chou's expressed interest in environmental problems. I recall also that Chairman Mao has written a poem about a particularly troublesome disease. We frankly know very little about your efforts in the field of control of schistosomiasis, but we have seen artilces which interest us, and we have done some study on the subject. One possibility for consideration would be some sort of cooperative research program in this field. We could provide samples of experimental drugs with full test data which we have obtained to date in this area of research.

Hsiung: Are there many cases of schistosomiasis in the United States?

Jenkins: No, it's almost non-existant. However, in our aid and other interests in some other countries in the world, I believe in South America and—I am not sure of this, but perhaps in Africa—we have been requested to give what help we can in this area, and we are interested in the problem. We have done some work in immunology and also in test procedures for identifying the presence of the disease.

I think perhaps I should stop here in reviewing specific suggestions. This will illustrate some of the suggestions we have been thinking about and perhaps I can pass to you some papers with a longer list of suggestions you may want to look over and comment on later. It seems that I have spent our time so far on scientific matters. We also have cultural, athletic, and journalistic suggestions here, and I would not slur these. I don't mean that we are emphasizing one area over another. It just happens that I got started talking about some of these rather fascinating subjects, and have not gotten to the others, but we can do so if you would wish.

Hsiung: Personally, I would like rather to listen to what you have got to say than to read them. Of course, if you would like to hand over these very thick pieces of long lists, I would also like to read it over. I would like to know if you have covered all the points you would like to raise.

Jenkins: I have not covered all the points in this paper, simply illustrative ones, and if you wish I can go on. I think these (pointing to the papers) present it quite well and it is up to you whether you would like to go over it orally now or like to look this over and return to them later. And if you have any questions or observations on your part, we would certainly like to receive them.

Hsiung: Of course, we have covered some secondary points, if we may quote what Dr. Kissinger used the term, subsidiary points. What I mean is, are there any other main points you want to make? Because this morning we have touched on questions of contacts between our two countries, and also cultural and scientific topics. Are there any other main points?

Jenkins: I believe not this morning. These were the main points on our mind. If there are any other points you would like to discuss we would be interested in knowing that, aid would perhaps return to these later. I believe that our principals plan to take up, of course, other issues when they meet.

Hsiung: Within this scope, are these the only two points which the United States side would like to put forward?

Jenkins: These are the two which Dr. Kissinger wished us to take up this morning. If there are other ideas you would like to discuss, we are prepared to discuss anything of interest to you.

Hsiung: What I mean is your side. Are there any other main points? Any points you would put forward later?

Jenkins: There are a number of things we could talk about. I don't know to what extent you wish to talk about possible increase in trade for instance. But we could possibly talk about that at a later time.

Hsiung: First of all, we would like to know the views of the United States side, see what points you would like to make.

Jenkins: As for this session, I think these are the two main points we had contemplated.

Hsiung: If so, then there are two approaches: one is we will read it over first, and then we can exchange views. Another approach is we will not read it over but we will ask you to cover all these points which are contained in these lists.

Jenkins: I am quite prepared to do whichever you wish. It is immaterial to us. I can continue talking if you wish, or it might be useful for you to get an overview and spend more time later on those topics which you wish to cover more fully.

Hsiung: Then we can consider how to carry on our talks in this session. Either we read it over first, and fix a time to make an exchange of views later, or we can meet again this afternoon and you will tell us all the points covered in this list.

Jenkins: It is perfectly agreeable to us to do it either way, however, I suggest if it's agreeable to you it might be useful for you to have this list and look it over, and we will return whenever you set a time.

Hsiung: Then our exchange of views this morning will soon finish. And of course, I believe that Mr. Holdridge and Mr. Jenkins you will know very well the whole process of Sino-American ambassadorial talks, and also the consistent stand of the Chinese side. That's why I am not going to make any comments on any of the possibilities you have raised just now. I will make more comments next time we have a session.

Jenkins: I understand. That's perfectly agreeable to us.

Hsiung: I think it would be better for me to make clear in advance that we believe you know very well the Chinese government's consistent fundamental stand. The Warsaw Talks have lasted for 16 years, and of course we can further make clear our views. Of course, if there is any other point you would like to put forward, we are ready to listen.

Jenkins: Thank you very much for your attention this morning. I think both sides have talked so often in the past that we both have understandings of each other's long held positions, but as our principals discussed, at this turning point the necessity is not only to base things on the realities of the past and present, but to learn from that in order to change the future ofor the better.

Hsiung: That's all for this morning.

Jenkins: Very well. If I may offer these three copies to you.

Hsiung: As for the program for this afternoon, our protocol office will exchange views with you and. ask your opinion about that.

Jenkins: That sounds very promising.

Hsiung: Take some visits to some places, or you may take a rest if you like.

Jenkins: Probably prudence would call for a little rest, but for my part, I have such an interest in this capital city that I would really like to see something of it.

Hsiung: In this regard, we respect your opinion.

Jenkins: That's very kind.

[The meeting ended at 12:15 p.m.]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. All brackets are in the source text. The meeting was held at Hupei Hall, the Great Hall of the People.

40. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 21, 1971, 10:30 a.m.-1:45 p.m. 40. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 21, 1971, 10:30 a.m.-1:45 p.m.1

Beijing, October 21, 1971, 10:30 a.m.-1:45 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Chou En-lai, People's Republic of China

Chi P'eng-fei, Acting PRC Foreign Minister

Chang Wen-chin, Director, Western Europe and American Department, PRC Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Wang Hai-jung, Deputy Chief of Protocol, PRC

Tang Wen-sheng and Chi Chao-chu, Chinese Interpreters and Notetakers

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Jonathan Howe, Senior Staff Member, NSC

Winston Lord, Senior Staff Member,NSC

PLACE: Great Hall of the People, Peking

DATE & TIME: October 21, 1971, 10:30 a.m. -1:45 p.m.

GENERAL SUBJECTS: President's Visit, Taiwan and Japan

PM Chou: Did you have a good rest? No phone calls for you?

Dr. Kissinger: No.

PM Chou: I heard you didn't want to receive any phone calls and wanted our Foreign Ministry to receive them for you and give you the message. Otherwise, you couldn't sleep.

Dr. Kissinger: I wish I had this in Washington.

PM Chou: Mr. Howe, did you have a rest?

Howe: Very comfortable.

PM Chou: The two gentlemen are very accustomed to Peking now. And Miss Matthews?

Matthews: Very nice, thank you.

PM Chou: It's very windy today and so not convenient for you to go to the Great Wall. We'll wait for a better day.

Dr. Kissinger: As the Prime Minister knows, I went to school in Boston and there the wind is always bad and never changes after it's bad. No southerly wind in Boston.

PM Chou: How about California?

Dr. Kissinger: That is always beautiful and warm.

PM Chou: Washington?

Dr. Kissinger: Washington is warmer than Boston. It rains but never snows.

PM Chou: No snow?

Dr. Kissinger: Almost never, but when it comes there's complete paralysis.

PM Chou: Sometimes I heard it snows in Washington but in New York there's more snow, and when there's snow every family is busy sweeping snow from the sidewalks.

Dr. Kissinger: That's true especially in the suburbs. The rate of heart attacks increases with the snow.

PM Chou: Snow is not good for the heart?

Dr. Kissinger: People shovel their driveways and forget their age.

PM Chou: They want to shovel away the snow rapidly. Let's begin our work. First, I will again ask Dr. Kissinger to start.

Dr. Kissinger: Mr. Prime Minister, we have two categories of problems which I thought we would discuss in this restricted meeting. One has to do with—which we can settle fairly quickly—certain arrangements for the President's visit, such as the number of meetings he should have with the Prime Minister and the Chairman, and how these meetings should be conducted. The second and most important purpose is to discuss a number of issues such as Taiwan, Soviet Relations, and Indochina and the UN which I did not want to share with colleagues not in my own office. And if there's time, I could also cover with the Prime Minister the situation in South Asia in this meeting, but it does not have to be. It can be covered in a larger meeting. It's easier in this meeting but not essential.

In what order would the Prime Minister like to discuss these issues? Would he like to discuss the technical ones first? They are fairly quick. Or would he like to discuss the substantive ones first?

PM Chou: Well, we can start with the technical questions because in the afternoon our technical personnel will meet, so it's good to lay a basis for it now.

Dr. Kissinger: The Prime Minister indicated to me yesterday, for tentative planning purposes, that of the two dates, February 21 is the easier. I want to say that if a date earlier in February is better for the Chinese side, we could consider February 14. We slightly prefer the 21st, but not enough to make any difference.

PM Chou: As I said yesterday, we have tentatively agreed that the visit may start on the 21st. And since you also prefer the date of 21st of February, and prefer it over the 14th of February, I think we may not change it.

Dr. Kissinger: All right.

PM Chou: Unless, of course, in the future either your side or our side has a particular reason for advancing the date or postponing it, in which case it must be agreed upon through liaison.

Dr. Kissinger: We should decide when we will announce the date because there will be great speculation when I return.

PM Chou: That's right. We can decide that towards the end of the visit.

Dr. Kissinger: No need to do it now.

PM Chou: Because for you, as you are advancing the date of the President's coming, you must announce the date, particularly for your technical personnel you must, because before the President's visit they will pay us another visit. So it's not possible to go in general terms.

Dr. Kissinger: Exactly. Did the Prime Minister actually read the whole book last night? If so, I must apologize.

PM Chou: I studied in the method used by General Marshall. (laughter)

Dr. Kissinger: For the conduct of the meetings when the President visits the People's Republic, we would like them conducted on the same basis as these meetings: that is, a general session; and then perhaps the President could have meetings with the Prime Minister and the Secretary of State could have meetings with whomever you designate, perhaps the Foreign Minister; and then after these sessions, they could meet in a general session.

PM Chou: That's right. As for the general session, would we include only the official members of the delegation or also the unofficial members? The official members are twelve. I suppose those taking part would be the official.

Dr. Kissinger: Not every member of the official group. For example, Rose Mary Woods, who is a secretary, would not attend official meetings. Mr. Chapin would not attend, and probably Mr. Haldeman and General Hughes would not attend. And if I have anything to do with it, the Press Secretary will not attend. This will be an easy way for the Prime Minister to determine my influence. (laughter) My philosophy is that what the Press Secretary doesn't know, he can't reveal to the press.

PM Chou: That is right. I agree to your principle. But whether it can be realized all depends on the President.

Dr. Kissinger: That is true.

PM Chou: It's indeed not easy to be an American President. He must look into everything.

Dr. Kissinger: If the Press Secretary attends, however, I will personally terrorize him to be sure there will be no leaks.

PM Chou: Before we arrive at a finalization of any arrangement it is better not to release it. That is our custom.

Dr. Kissinger: I can guarantee it. Nothing will be released to the press before or afterwards that we will not discuss with you.

PM Chou: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger: In the private meetings on our side it would be the President and myself, and maybe one aide, but maybe not. And it might be useful if on one occasion, for some limited period of time, the President could meet alone with the Prime Minister without aides, except interpreters, as there are many private views that they want to exchange. But for the major part of the substantive work in the private meetings, I will be with the President.

PM Chou: I would like to express an opinion on the question of the talks which the technical people might or might not discuss this afternoon. I would hope that the President would be able to meet with Chairman Mao at an earlier date during the visit, either with a large group or privately; that is, first for the Chairman to meet with the party, including the Secretary of State and others, and then for the Chairman to have a meeting restricted to the President and Dr. Kissinger, or only the President. That might be more conducive to settling questions. It is also more likely that Dr. Kissinger might take part in these since regardless the Chairman will want me to take part because in this way the questions could be discussed more directly and in a more deep-going way.

Dr. Kissinger: You recommend early in the visit? Maybe the first or second day?

PM Chou: Not the first day. There are a lot of formalities on the first day.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: But, for instance, if the visit is to take five days, it would be good if the meeting with the President takes place on the second or third day, but I haven't discussed this with the Chairman. Your plan says the fifth day.

Dr. Kissinger: It was done by technical people who don't understand. I am in charge of the meetings, but they put something down to fill the schedule. They have no authority to schedule meetings.

PM Chou: It's good to make it clear.

Dr. Kissinger: In fact, they shouldn't discuss it this afternoon. Let the Prime Minister and I discuss this. Just block out the times for substantive meetings and then the Prime Minister and I will decide who meets whom in that time period.

PM Chou: That is good.

Dr. Kissinger: I agree with the Prime Minister, if he proposes this, that the Chairman and President should meet very early in the President's visit.

PM Chou: At least during the middle of the visit. If the visit is five days, then the latest is the third day.

Dr. Kissinger: I agree.

PM Chou: If the President's visit can be seven days, then we will have more time.

Dr. Kissinger: We are flexible about the length. Not the technical people necessarily.

PM Chou: We will not discuss it with them. We will have to formalize this.

Dr. Kissinger: If you think it's better to have six or seven days, I am sure the President will agree.

PM Chou: That is good.

Dr. Kissinger: I believe, as the Prime Minister does, if the Chairman and President could meet early, say no later than the third day, then they could make fundamental decisions on where we should go.

PM Chou: That's right.

Dr. Kissinger: If I may make a technical suggestion about the meetings between the President and Chairman Mao from the psychology of the President; if I can speak in the frankness with which I always speak to you, it might be most effective if the President and Chairman could meet alone for half an hour to become acquainted, and then I will join them for the substantive discussion. This is entirely up to you. We can do it any way you think it's most effective. It's simply a suggestion based on how the President has conducted other meetings.

PM Chou: All right. I may repeat this suggestion to Chairman Mao because the Chairman is accustomed to having someone else around to ask specific matters, particularly myself. As for matters of principle, Chairman Mao has considered them over and over again already. That is why, as I said at the banquet last night, I hope we will turn a new page in the new era.

Dr. Kissinger: I was very moved last night, and we will attempt to move in the same spirit and in the same attitude. Another possibility is that—I don't know whether one or two meetings are envisaged between the Chairman and President—but before he leaves can he call on Chairman Mao to say goodbye?

PM Chou: But generally speaking Chairman Mao doesn't care for these protocol matters. My impression is that as far as I know the American President is more liberal with regard to protocol matters than other heads of state.

Dr. Kissinger: Absolutely.

PM Chou: For instance, President Roosevelt received Ambassadors and heads of state of other countries anywhere, not necessarily in Washington. We appreciate this practice very much and we will try to do this ourselves. Before we learned from the Soviet Union.

Dr. Kissinger: They are the most protocol-conscious people I know.

PM Chou: They inherited it from the Czarist days. During the time of Lenin that was not the case, nor during the early days of Stalin. It was after the Stalin era.

Dr. Kissinger: I have been struck with the ease of the relationship of the people in the People's Republic which I have not found in the Soviet Union.

PM Chou: They are extremely tense. At the beginning, after our liberation, we learned from the Soviet Union; also, a strange thing, we wanted to learn from the English. The man who was responsible for protocol matters after liberation had the old manners. He wanted a red carpet to go down right to the gateway. In a new era old conventions should be broken down. You can be certain that the meeting between the President and Chairman will not be one meeting.

Dr. Kissinger: For the meetings between the President and the Chairman you arrange them in a way that is most effective to you. It's such an historical occasion, and you know the principal parties. We should arrange them in the most effective way, and the way you suggested that you attend on your side and I on our side will be most acceptable. We accept your proposal.

PM Chou: That will be good.

Dr. Kissinger: I spend… not having had the benefit of clearing out my bureaucracy, I spend a great deal of time soothing the nerves of the bureaucracy.

PM Chou: One cannot blame you for that. You entered into state affairs not long ago.

Dr. Kissinger: Too short.

PM Chou: So you could not have the authority to change things so quickly. Although the U.S. is a young country, it has a history of almost 200 years.

Dr. Kissinger: [Referring to snacks being brought to the table] It's true I have not eaten in an hour.

Interpreter: The Prime Minister suggests you place it further from your sleeve so it doesn't get dirty.

Dr. Kissinger: If I could ask the Prime Minister on one matter—if those people who will not be meeting with Chairman Mao and the President could be separated from them in the most delicate way possible, it will help me tremendously. (laughter) If it's not possible I will take the full responsibility.

PM Chou: I will think about a way.

Dr. Kissinger: I said on the plane to our State Department man that our bureaucracy would like to try acupuncture on me to see how many needles they can put into me. (laughter) They will not do it as delicately as the Chinese doctors.

PM Chou: It will hurt.

Dr. Kissinger: We have not yet decided on the conduct of the meetings—we will bring our own interpreters, but in private meetings between the Chairman and the President we may want to rely on your interpreters in order to guarantee security.

PM Chou: That's right.

Dr. Kissinger: If agreeable.

PM Chou: Yes, and after we have prepared the notes of the private discussions we will give you a copy. They will be more accurate and also more secure.

Dr. Kissinger: We have not yet found an interpreter whom we can completely trust. On most things, but not on the most sensitive. I speak with great frankness.

PM Chou: You know a lot of your people are studying Chinese.

Dr. Kissinger: We have many who speak Chinese, but they also speak to newspapers. (laughter)

PM Chou: It's hard to blame them because that's the system in your country. They are bound to have some subsidiary occupations in your country. Any more technical matters?

Dr. Kissinger: On technical matters, then, is this outline roughly agreeable to you, Mr. Prime Minister? We meet in the afternoons, leaving out who meets with whom?

PM Chou: Yes, we agree to that arrangement.

Dr. Kissinger: Before we leave—we don't have to do it now—we will prepare an alternative for five days and an alternative for seven days.

PM Chou: Yes, you may make two alternatives.

Dr. Kissinger: On the visit to other cities, did I understand the Prime Minister correctly at dinner last night that he will accompany the President on these trips?

PM Chou: There's no question about that.

Dr. Kissinger: So in fact on the airplane there could be talks also?

PM Chou: Yes, certainly. I have accompanied heads of state and governments of many countries, and I have talked with them. They started with our American friend, General Marshall. While on the plane we talked endlessly.

Dr. Kissinger: Also, is the idea that the President will spend the night in towns he visits or return here?

PM Chou: It's up to you. If you find it necessary you can have the President come back and spend the night in Peking, but it's more comfortable (to spend the night away). It's up to you.

Dr. Kissinger: The problem is that more people will have to come in here, and I have tried to keep the invasion to a minimum. Not so much for security, but for communications.

PM Chou: If he stays overnight in another city it's strictly for rest, but restricted meetings can be held there. Hangchow is rather suitable for that. It is very quiet. There are villas there and winter equipment is good there.

Dr. Kissinger: If you do not object to the few additional people who will be necessary, I think we can agree to that.

PM Chou: It doesn't matter. There are now 351 in the party. It would be better not for all of them (to go).

Dr. Kissinger: No, no.

PM Chou: Some correspondents are bound to go, and we will look after it. There are plenty of things to do for them in Hangchow.

Dr. Kissinger: If you lose the correspondents in Manchuria, we will be grateful.

PM Chou: We will take care of them.

Dr. Kissinger: We regret that.

PM Chou: We will take care of them for sightseeing and eating and take care of themselves. One thing more difficult to satisfy—that is on the question of TV. Our receiving capabilities for TV are not good. For instance, we cannot get broadcasts in Hangchow from other places.

Dr. Kissinger: That is no problem for us. The problem our technical people have is whether you will permit them to install the ground station so that they can transmit back to Washington.

PM Chou: That is a matter for them to discuss this afternoon.

Dr. Kissinger: All right. We don't care what your own receiving capabilities are here in China. That is of no concern to us. And this will not affect our decisions where to go.

You will see on this list I didn't include myself in the traveling party because I didn't know whether the Prime Minister would go with us, and I thought I would have to stay behind to work on a communique or such matters, but if the Prime Minister goes, I will go also.

PM Chou: We will discuss this in the other cities together.

Dr. Kissinger: Then I will be in the traveling party.

PM Chou: That is good.

Dr. Kissinger: As far as the airplane is concerned, the President has never traveled in any plane other than his, and therefore we should leave that question open and let me discuss it personally with the President, because our technical people here have no authority to make this arrangement to travel in a Chinese plane.

PM Chou: Yes, you may discuss that.

Dr. Kissinger: I will discuss it with the President because I understood the Prime Minister yesterday that while in China we will travel in a Chinese plane.

PM Chou: That's correct.

Dr. Kissinger: One thing would make it easier, and that is if the Presidential plane, without the President, could come to the same city in case there's an emergency and a need for communications, because it has the best communications. That is, if the President travels in a Chinese plane, which I frankly will recommend.

PM Chou: You may not only come in a Boeing 707; you may also fly to China a slower plane in speed for landing. What is the length of the runway required? It's also possible to fly a plane that is like the Ilyushin.

Dr. Kissinger: I think that the Boeing can land at Hangchow. The President's plane requires 5000 feet.

PM Chou: Then it is a question of necessary facilities. The length of the runway in Hangchow might meet that requirement. There is a question of the facilities for landing, but we have at least three and a half months.

Dr. Kissinger: I will discuss it with the President, and we will decide it in a manner that most meets your needs.

PM Chou: We will try our best to satisfy your needs.

Dr. Kissinger: We have so many substantive problems, we will not have technical problems. That is our spirit and they will be solved in that attitude.

PM Chou: Right. Mutual trust and mutual respect. These two points.

Dr. Kissinger: This is all I have on technical matters. One other silly, technical matter which is that it would be helpful if before I leave here we could have a preliminary understanding of what should be in the communique and what not, so the visit is free of discussions that can be avoided.

PM Chou: It will be best for you to give your suggestions for our study. Because you are experienced in this field.

Dr. Kissinger: This is a new experience for all of us.

PM Chou: That is so.

Dr. Kissinger: It's rare to meet people who have been opponents for whom one has such personal regard.

PM Chou: Because all new things are created by man.

Dr. Kissinger: We have some suggestions, and at the stage of our discussions that the Prime Minister considers it appropriate, we will make them to the Prime Minister or whomever he designates. It's premature right now. After we have had some discussions.

PM Chou: Yes. It cannot be too late.

Dr. Kissinger: Can't? No. Whenever the Prime Minister is ready.

PM Chou: You have a draft there?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. But it would probably be better only after we have a general discussion and in a restricted meeting. I agree then we can discuss what should be in it and what should not.

PM Chou: That's right.

Dr. Kissinger: Perhaps we should then begin the substantive discussion, if the Prime Minister agrees.

PM Chou: Alright.

Dr. Kissinger: The first subject is the subject of the normalization of relations and Taiwan. I would like to sum up what is my recollection of what I told the Prime Minister when we met in July. I told the Prime Minister that we would withdraw the forces on Taiwan that are related to the war in Indochina within a short period after the war in Indochina. I said that we would reduce the other forces progressively over a somewhat longer period of time and faster if our relations improved.

PM Chou: At that time you didn't mention a final date.

Dr. Kissinger: That is correct. We understand the evolution we are aiming for. (Chou nods) I said that we are not advocating a two-China solution or a one China, one Taiwan solution.

PM Chou: Is it likely to realize a situation of one China and two governments as put forward by the State Department? I have thought a lot about it. That is why we directed our spearhead of criticism to the State Department and Mr. Bush. But we didn't direct our criticism at Mr. Rogers after he put forward this proposition in the name of your government. Only in our press. Only after Mr. Bush put it forward did we put forward a foreign ministry statement on 20 August.

Dr. Kissinger: We noted your statement and truly you used restraint, and I will say a word about it in a minute. You have showed great restraint in what is for both of us a very difficult situation. I will explain it in a minute.

I said that we wouldn't support or encourage the creation of an Independent Taiwan Movement. If you have any information that any American, official or unofficial, is encouraging such a movement, I understand that you will inform us and you have our promise that it will be stopped. We will oppose —

PM Chou: And the demonstration which took place in front of the UN Headquarters at the beginning of the UN General Assembly, was it premeditated by them or was it world-wide?

Dr. Kissinger: To the best of my knowledge it had no encouragement from the US government, and I am not aware of the fact that it was a world-wide plan. However, I will look into it when I get back, and I will inform the Prime Minister of the results of my investigation through our channel.

PM Chou: These demonstrations for so-called Taiwan independence started with the convening of the UN in New York, and there was a series of demonstrations in other places in the US and Japan and even extending to Taiwan, and they are continuing. And I can send some of the material we obtained about this for you.

Dr. Kissinger: If you will send me the material, I will start an investigation when I get back from here and send you the result of our investigation, but I can assure you we are giving no encouragement whatsoever to such a movement.

PM Chou: The CIA had no hand in it?

Dr. Kissinger: As I told the Prime Minister the last time, he vastly overestimates the competence of the CIA.

PM Chou: They have become the topic of discussion throughout the world. Whenever something happens in the world they are always thought of.

Dr. Kissinger: That is true, and it flatters them, but they don't deserve it.

PM Chou: According to the U.S. set-up, is the CIA under the NSC?

Dr. Kissinger: The CIA is technically under the White House. Technically, before they engage in the sort of operation the Prime Minister refers to, they have to make a request to a committee of which I am chairman and on which other agencies usually have a voice, but not inevitably. No such operations have been authorized. Nor has such an operation been proposed. I am being candid—this is not information we generally tell other governments.

I cannot absolutely exclude, again speaking totally frankly, that some office does something unauthorized sometimes. It's extremely improbably and after a period of months we would certainly find out. It's possible it could happen, but not on a large scale.

PM Chou: The Pentagon is not responsible for them?

Dr. Kissinger: The Pentagon has also an intelligence organization, but it also doesn't have authority to do these things. Again I would like to propose the following to the Prime Minister. If you have any information of any American engaging in those activities and you give me his name, I can promise you in the name of the President he will be removed. It's impossible for him to do it without being discovered by you and us. We are talking about unauthorized actions now.

PM Chou: This is a question which we may raise—it's a little complicated question, because it's a matter of your internal affairs but also an international problem.

Dr. Kissinger: You can raise it, and we will not consider it an intervention in our domestic affairs.

PM Chou: They have activities throughout the world. That is one question that people throughout the world are most unhappy about, and that's why they are not welcome. Because after the Second World War, the U.S. is taking a hand in all kinds of affairs throughout the world and this organization had a role to play.

Dr. Kissinger: The CIA?

PM Chou: Yes. Because they have a role and have a payroll, they must feed their stomachs. So as your President said, and also as Your Excellency said, after the Second World War you appeared to be very powerful both militarily and in the matter of economic aid. So the CIA thought they had the right to look into everything. The result of this is causing disharmony in the world. Now it is less than the espionage activities of the Soviet Union. We are freely exchanging views.

Dr. Kissinger: Oh, yes.

PM Chou: It is possible that activities in the China mainland are comparatively less but not perhaps nonexistent.

Dr. Kissinger: I am not sure it's in our interest to reassure you completely, but I will. First, you said, what will CIA agents do if they don't make revolution somewhere? Most write long, incomprehensible reports and don't make revolution.

PM Chou: You can preserve methods without this. We reserve our judgment on this.

Dr. Kissinger: They are mostly from Yale and they don't have the people.

PM Chou: He is from Yale [pointing to Winston Lord]?

Dr. Kissinger: Does he look like a revolutionary?

PM Chou: Those reports you referred to are intelligence. While you use the word revolution, we say subversion.

Dr. Kissinger: Or subversion. I understand. We are conscious of what is at stake in our relationship, and we will not let one organization carry out petty operations that could hinder this course, what you described yesterday evening in your toast. You must have noticed that since my visit in July a whole list of things which used to be routine, especially in the military, have been changed.

But we will review all those activities once again, and I want to repeat that we will not consider it an intervention in our affairs if you will point out those measures that affect you directly, either in respect to the Taiwan Independence Movement or other, and call them to our attention. It's not our policy to subvert the government of the People's Republic of China or its policy.

PM Chou: I just raised this question initially. When we discuss the question of Japan, I will raise it again. This is a matter which Taiwan also has complained of. Chiang Kai-shek and his son are very much worried about this.

Dr. Kissinger: Both the People's Republic and the Taiwan authorities have the same view on this matter.

PM Chou: That's right. For instance, we have set up the People's Republic for 22 years. We will not have some of our CIA people go to the U.S. to indulge in activities. Even if a delegation went to the U.S., we would be very careful that there is no misunderstanding because what we are seeking is friendship between the two peoples. Because to change the system of any particular country, that is the responsibility of that particular country and cannot be done by any foreign countries, and we persist in this.

For instance, we are spending such a great effort to help in Vietnam, but we never entered into Vietnamese affairs. Also in Cambodia. The Government of Cambodia is in Peking, but some members are in Cambodia itself. There are often internal disputes within their government, and sometimes when they ask for our mediation, we say we will not stick our hands into it. But the amount of articles we carry in our press concerning publications and reports regarding the Royal Union of the government of Cambodia is unprecedented in our press and world history. Norodom Sihanouk has already published 21 proclamations to his people, and we have published them in our press and we have published them in full without changing a word. If you say there's no freedom in our country, that is the greatest freedom. We respect them and do not disrespect their sovereignty because the head of state is in our country.

You may have some experts study this and see if any government dares to do this. How did the British behave towards DeGaulle during the Second World War? The former American Government gave support to the Kerensky government in exile and also supported the government in exile of the three Baltic states. At the same time you are now supporting the so-called government in Taiwan, but you have never given them such privileges in your press. You can refute me in one way. Your press is owned privately while ours is not. That's the question because there's a question of profit. But we devote a great amount of space to their publications.

Nevertheless there are some people who say Sihanouk is not free in China and is a prisoner and even worse. I really can find no example of a head of state invited abroad who has such extensive freedom. Sihanouk wants to visit Europe, and we now have a possibility of sending him with our special plane because we have now an exit via the countries in central Asia; as you went last time, Pakistan and Tehran.

Dr. Kissinger: Spectacularly beautiful.

PM Chou: We have established relations with all these countries. He will go all the way to Romania and Yugoslavia. Only Greece we have not established relations with. One thing we cannot do. After our special plane sends Sihanouk to Europe, we cannot guarantee his safety. Saboteurs may come. They may come from the side of the Lon Nol/Matak clique. If it does come from that clique then it will involve you. That is a very natural logic followed in the world. So we are always considering how to guarantee his safety. We can guarantee his safety in China itself. But if he is to go abroad we can guarantee his security on our plane.

Dr. Kissinger: Wouldn't the French Government guarantee his safety?

PM Chou: He doesn't want to go there because France does not recognize him.

Dr. Kissinger: Where is he going?

PM Chou: Where I said. Romania, Yugoslavia, Algeria, and probably the United Arab Republic of Egypt. Because activities of saboteurs can be carried out easily. It can happen within the U.S. They may even put a plastic bomb outside the plane to destroy the plane. When I went to the Bandung Conference in 1955 I almost lost my life.

At that time we chartered an Indian plane, the “Kashmir Princess” from Hong Kong. Because Prime Minister U Nu wanted me to go with him, I went to Burma. He asked Nehru and Nasser to go with him and I changed my route at the last minute while the others went via Hong Kong. The saboteurs thought I was on the “Kashmir Princess” and set a time bomb on the plane. Just as the “Kashmir Princess” was about to reach Bandung, it exploded in mid-air and crashed into the sea.

India, together with authorities in Hong Kong, investigated the bombing. We have evidence that the bomb was placed by a Chinese who was brought over to Hong Kong, and I convinced the Indian Commissioner to go directly with our people to Hong Kong and demand from the Hong Kong authorities that they arrest that man. But such news leaks out, and the Indian told his Embassy, and just as we got to Hong Kong that man flew to Taiwan. So such things are sometimes not the responsibility of that government, and some individuals may do it on their own.

As for international hijacking, we do not approve those activities. It's too unreasonable. Such adventurous acts are not a good practice, regardless of the motives behind it, whether it is revolutionary or of a saboteur nature. I say these not as superfluous words but to explain how people of the world think of the CIA. As for we ourselves, we are not very much excited by the CIA. Maybe indirectly. I didn't know Dr. Kissinger was the chairman of the committee.

Dr. Kissinger: Not for day-to-day things. Day-to-day things I don't know. I am only told of something that can have major foreign policy consequences. Not the sort of thing the Prime Minister described. I would not even hear about that.

PM Chou: They would seal you off. There are often some organizations that even though you are their chairman the more they seal you off. Chairman Mao has a thesis: those who hail you are not the ones who support you. He said it to Edgar Snow. There are three types of such persons. Those who support you and hail long life; they really support you; others support you maybe a little; and third, those who are double dealers and applaud you but under the table their feet kick you. Such people probably exist no matter the system.

Dr. Kissinger: I see many of those.

PM Chou: This will exist probably 10,000 years hence and even one million years hence, so long as human society exists. When humanity on earth disappears there may be people on other stars. This is a common phenomenon of society. One must be cool-headed and analyze things. And so you said that after the July 15 announcement, the majority supported it, and a minority were against it. I believe that. It's also true in China. There's no such thing as unanimous approval of agreement.

Dr. Kissinger: Only for those not worth making. (laughter)

PM Chou: Not really unanimity, but a carefree manner. This may be outside our discussion but this is a heart-to-heart discussion.

Dr. Kissinger: For friendship we must be frank and know how each feels. I appreciate how the Prime Minister feels and he can be certain it will be taken absolutely seriously. We will not let officials subvert the trend we have started.

PM Chou: We must be prepared in our minds. There will be some who will want to subvert it. Only when we have such a preparation can we do our things well.

I think your colleagues have never heard someone on the other side saying such things. So its only the second meeting, and I am saying what I want to you. You and Mr. Lord are familiar with this but not Miss Matthews and our new friend [referring to Jon Howe]. You probably thought the Chinese Communist Party has three heads and six arms. But, lo and behold, I am like you. Someone you can talk reason with and talk honestly. Back to Taiwan. I thought it was beneficial to say something about the CIA just then.

Dr. Kissinger: It's very important because in the relationship of our two countries much depends on confidence. There will be many ambiguous events and it is important to understand what we are really thinking.

A few more words about Taiwan. As I also said last time, we will not support, and indeed we will oppose, the establishment of Japanese military forces on Taiwan, military influence on Taiwan, and to the extent we have influence in Japan we will oppose an attempt by Japan to support the Taiwan Independence Movement.

We will support any peaceful resolution of the issues in the Taiwan Straits, and we will not be an obstacle to it.

We are prepared to move towards a normalization of relations with the People's Republic of China, and we understand what you have in mind.

All of this the President will reaffirm in restricted meetings to you, Mr. Prime Minister, and to Chairman Mao.

I would like to add a few other observations if I may. With the same frankness with which the Prime Minister has spoken to me, I have to tell him that for us this is, of course, a somewhat painful process. We have worked with the Government of Taiwan for many years and whatever the course of the history that produced this, it is not easy for us to make the changes which we have outlined to you. Also there are many elements in the U.S. who are violently opposed to the policy we are pursuing and who will be even more opposed to it as it begins to unwind.

We recognize that the People's Republic considers the subject of Taiwan an internal issue, and we will not challenge that. But to the degree that the People's Republic can on its own, in the exercise of its own sovereignty, declare its willingness to settle it by peaceful means, our actions will be easier. I am not speaking of undertaking to talk towards us as we asked in 1955, but something you do on your own. But whether you do or not, we will continue in the direction which I indicated.

Secondly, I want to say a few words about the discussion in the UN. There are many elements in our bureaucracy who are, of course, pursuing the traditional policies. And since we have not told them all the details of the discussions in July, it has not been possible to instill the discipline that will be the case as the years go on. We have carried out what I told the Prime Minister we would do when I was here in July. And we have tried to keep our rhetoric also at a lower level. I think the Prime Minister will have noticed that the President has not made a public statement on the subject.

Actually, if I can speak candidly to the Prime Minister, and this is not a matter in his control, it would be best for the policies which we discussed if the Albanian Resolution did not pass this year. In the latest public opinion poll, there are still 62% of the American people who are opposed to the expulsion of Taiwan from the UN. And if the transition—the work of the July 15 announcement was very severe, and if there's another shock now, the elements opposed to what we are doing will have a rallying point, and they will launch a sharp attack prematurely. I am talking very candidly to you, Mr. Prime Minister. So paradoxically, if the position that has been advanced in the UN should prevail for this year, it will make it easier to carry out the policies we described, and it will make it easier next year to moderate our policies in the UN.

But I want to assure the Prime Minister that we are not looking for a clever way out of what I told him in July. With respect to Taiwan, I think we understand that it's possible to do more than we can say. And that some things can be left to an historical evolution as long as we both understand the way it's going. And that, of course, everything is easier for us if the resolution is peaceful. I am sure the President will reaffirm everything that I have said.

PM Chou: The question of the UN I will discuss at some point later. Our central question of concern is Taiwan. The question of Taiwan is a question that was already solved after the Second World War, but then became a question outstanding. Because after the Second World War it was a matter of certainty that in the instruments of surrender and in the signing in 1945 Japan gave up all claims on Taiwan just as it gave up all claims to Manchuria. The difference with Manchuria is that Soviet troops had already entered into Manchuria, and Chinese troops followed immediately after. So there was no question of China's restoring sovereignty over Manchuria. Although at the beginning the majority of it was occupied by Chiang Kai-shek's troops, then the whole of Manchuria was lost and became no international problem. The so-called State of Manchukuo existed for 14 years under the military occupation of the Japanese.

The difference about Taiwan is that because of China's defeat in 1894, China was forced to cede Taiwan to Japan. That is similar to Sakhalin Island that was conceded to Japan after the war of 1905. And it was also like the question after the Prussian War of 1870 when Alsace-Lorraine was conceded to Germany. The First World War was concluded in 1918, and the Germans lost, and Alsace-Lorraine was restored to France, and no questions asked. But during the Second World War Nazi Germany occupied even greater areas of France. After the Allies won victory, all of France was restored.

So when one says that Taiwan was under Japan for a long period of time, it was only fifty years and if you compare to Alsace-Lorraine, it was two years less. It's clear. I have never been to Taiwan, but I have been to Salzburg in Alsace-Lorraine and it was clear that the inhabitants there spoke German. You noticed. So the vast majority of people on Taiwan spoke Fukien dialect. Some learned Japanese.

Dr. Kissinger: The Japanese claim is no problem for us.

PM Chou: But there does exist this adverse current in the world, and they say the status remains undetermined. That's entirely absurd.

Dr. Kissinger: That's not been said by any American spokesman since June.

PM Chou: That was trouble provoked by your State Department, and then you forbade them to say more. Britain now wants to raise the level of representation to Ambassador. I can tell you something here, but please don't make it public.

Dr. Kissinger: Nothing here will be made public and not outside the President. This goes only to the President.

PM Chou: I believe that. And I have even more confidence in the young. Old politicians sometimes have too many connections. The British Government says that the government of the United Kingdom acknowledges the position of the government of the People's Republic of China that Taiwan is a province of the People's Republic of China. That is clear and acknowledging the law. Not recognize but acknowledge. So for lawyers there might be a slight differentiation between acknowledge and recognize. That is a question of International Law.

What is more the British Government says as soon as it has declared this, the British Consulate in Taiwan will be withdrawn.

Third, the British Government said they will openly declare this and vote for the Albanian resolution. You know this. When your Deputy Secretary of State was visiting Europe, the British made its attitude very clear. So logically that should be sufficient.

Then there was a reservation that this was not to be made public. That is British diplomacy, that is the way the British Government said they themselves would not promote the theory that the status of Taiwan remains undetermined, but would not try to persuade any government. But when asked its position, the British Government says its position remains unchanged. So that is very interesting.

[At this point there is a short break.]

PM Chou: Sorry, I didn't think of everyone taking break.

Dr. Kissinger: We followed your lead.

PM Chou: So it's clear that if we are to proceed from expediency we can agree with this formula of the British Government, that they will not say unless asked. More people can support this, but we do not consider this acceptable. On this matter one should proceed with an earnest attitude on international problems.

Dr. Kissinger: What will you not accept?

PM Chou: That final reservation, which the British Government said, that its policy will not change. There will be a consequence to that. That state of affairs of being asked whether its position has changed may not occur. From the standpoint of the British Government it should not reserve that attitude, because the British Government is a signatory to the Cairo Declaration. At that time participating were the heads of government of the U.S., Britain, and China. Also the British were signatories to the Potsdam Declaration.

What about the historical facts? Afterwards the British Government sent someone to take over Taiwan and had a provincial governor established. At that time no difference of view was expressed by the allies. So after the Chinese people had overthrown the rule of the Chiang Kai-shek clique, President Truman declared that Taiwan had returned to the Chinese people, and the U.S. had no interest in territory there. There are documents stressing that. The decision of President Truman at that time was of no concern to the existence or not of Chiang Kai-shek.

Just because of the Korean War he suddenly decided to send in the Seventh Fleet to Taiwan and advisors, and from that time he declared the Taiwan and Taiwan Straits under American protection. He mentioned nuclear devices, that there were devices there.

And so later on in the San Francisco Peace Treaty with Japan he uses a very strange formulation to declare this. In it it was said that Japan renounces all claim to such and such territories, that is to say, Japan renounces claim to all such territories with the exception of the four principal islands of Japan—Honshu, Hokkaido, Shikoka, and Kyushu and that with the exception of these four principal islands, Japan would not claim any others. Japan renounces claim to the southern side of Sakhelin and the Kuriles and to the position of the Ryukyus, including Okinawa, remained open and also Taiwan and the Spratley islands. But it was not specified in the San Francisco Treaty to whom they belong. It was left to the countries. I don't know who drew that up.

Dr. Kissinger: Dulles, the Prime Minister's old acquaintance.

PM Chou: So afterwards individual treaties were made with Japan. At that time Chiang Kai-shek was only a small dynasty hanging on to Taiwan, with American protection, so what could he say? He could only act as he was told to do. He himself sits on Taiwan, but in the treaty with Japan it does not specify who Taiwan reverts to, only saying Japan gives up all claim. If I call him as a traitor, I have every reason to do that.

Dr. Kissinger: He claims, too, that there's only one China but that is the Island of Taiwan.

PM Chou: I am talking about in the Peace Treaty of Japan. I tell the way that it is in the Peace Treaty with Japan.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand.

PM Chou: When you made your agreement with Japan to revert Okinawa and the Ryukyus to the Japanese, Chiang Kai-shek asked why you were not returning them to China.

Taiwan is cursing us about the Ryukyus; not just about Okinawa. Because in history during the Ming and Ching dynasties the rulers of those islands and maybe even earlier… I will not go into the historical facts of that, but I am certain those islands sent gifts to the Chinese Emperor and were looked upon as tributary states. Maybe they were sent envoys to show concern for them. It merely shows relations between states. But in the factual empire days it was looked on as tributary states. Such things occurred in the Ottoman and Roman and Inca Empires in ancient days. All states that had relations with them were looked upon as belonging to them. If that's to be considered, then the world will be overturned and the world turned into chaos. The ownership of Taiwan and the Pescadores are not stated in the so-called Peace Treaty with Japan, and so it's null and void.

Chiang did not settle this problem. Later in order to seek protection from Dulles, he no longer mentioned that in his treaty. Particularly after the conclusion of the SEATO treaty and Dulles went to Taiwan and Chiang Kai-shek, he didn't dare to raise this question.

It's a ludicrous state of affairs because the situation in Taiwan remained undetermined and the government itself is undetermined. He claims to represent the whole of China, but he was overthrown by the Chinese people. The place he is sitting in now, the status of that island, remains undetermined. From this point of view it can be said his government is hanging in mid-air.

This is a question that must be made clear. We ask the British Government why they insist on that reservation, and the British Government said that during the Conservative Government it was stated in Parliament. But that is not the only reason because a party is capable of changing its policy. For the new to replace the old it is a natural phenomenon. Why is it then that the British Government insists on maintaining what it said 20 years ago? That is because in their minds they think there will certainly be a day when the movement for so-called Taiwan independence will rise up in accordance with the theory that the status remains undetermined. Of course, first of all Japan advocates that point of view and secondly, they have in mind the United States.

So what I would like to clarify with Dr. Kissinger today is that is it the stated policy of the United States Government that it still wants to maintain the point of view that the status of Taiwan remains undetermined or is it the U.S. Government policy that Taiwan is already returned to China and is a province of China? As to how the Chinese people will solve the question of the Taiwan regime, that is of secondary importance. I have told you that last time. I replied to you already that we will try to bring about a peaceful settlement, the last morning before you left.

Dr. Kissinger: I remember.

PM Chou: So what is your point of view on the theory of the undetermined status of Taiwan? (Pauses) Maybe it's difficult for you.

Dr. Kissinger: It is. (laughter)

PM Chou: I have discovered this.

Dr. Kissinger: I want to formulate my answer with some precision and I don't have the same clarity of mind as the Prime Minister.

Let me separate what we can say and what our policy is. We do not challenge the fact that all Chinese maintain that there's only one China and that Taiwan is part of that China. And therefore we do not maintain that the status in that respect is undetermined. How this can be expressed is a difficult matter, but we would certainly be prepared in a communique that might be issued to take note of the fact that all Chinese maintain that there is only one China. So that is the policy of this government.

PM Chou: That is the first point. Any second point?

Dr. Kissinger: That is the point of our policy. The second point is what can be said, and I think I have answered that also. I can also assure the Prime Minister that the phrase “undetermined” will not be repeated.

PM Chou: If in the international arena certain countries, for instance Japan, or some other countries, were to raise this either in the UN or some other public forum in the world, what would your attitude be when they say the status is “undetermined?”

Dr. Kissinger: Let me tell the Prime Minister that I have not discussed this particular question in detail with the President. So I can only give my impression. If I am wrong, I will give him the answer through our channel. I will never deliberately mislead him. (Chou nods)

Let me say two things. First we are not encouraging any government to maintain the position that the status is undetermined. The British Government's position is an independent position and not at our encouragement.

Secondly, if a government raises this issue without our encouragement, we would certainly not support it. And I think the Prime Minister will have noticed that in our UN statements, no matter how distasteful they may have been to him, we took great care, and if the bureaucracy had been more pliable greater care, but we took great care not to mention the independent state of Taiwan. I think I can say to him with some confidence that we will do nothing that will encourage the elaboration of a two-China or one-China, one-Taiwan policy, in whatever form it's presented. Our attempt will be to bring about a solution within a framework of one China and by peaceful means.

I will check this with the President and confirm it through our channel. The last sentence I can confirm now, i.e. I can confirm our policy of one China by peaceful means. But not the sentence on what tactical position we will take if another government raises whether the status of Taiwan is undetermined. I can confirm our position to bring about peaceful solution within the framework of one China. To “bring about” may be too active; “to encourage” is more correct. It's for the Chinese themselves to settle. It's not something we should actively push. We should try within the framework of one China. What tack we will take if another government raises the status as undetermined, I believe it will be that we will not support it, but I will check it with the President when I return.

PM Chou: Another question which is related to this question, that is when Taiwan, under the rule of the Chiang Kai-shek clique, is returned to the motherland—of course Taiwan was returned to the motherland, but because of the Chiang Kai-shek rule there is a problem—but should it be returned, then the U.S. treaty, which we have never recognized, will it be possible to have it null and void at that time?

Dr. Kissinger: When Taiwan and China become one again by peaceful means then the treaty would lapse. It is not a permanent feature of our foreign policy to be maintained under such circumstances.

PM Chou: From our side our position is that although we have all along considered that treaty to be null and void and do not recognize it, but still our requirement at the time of your withdrawal of all military from Taiwan and as you remove all military installations from there, would be to declare the treaty null and void.

Dr. Kissinger: We understand your position and we hope that by that time the evolution will have reached a point where formal action may be unnecessary.

PM Chou: Only then can there be establishment of diplomatic relations.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand the Prime Minister's point of view.

PM Chou: That is the present situation of Taiwan no longer exists, and all U.S. armed forces and military installations have been withdrawn from Taiwan, and the Taiwan Straits area. And the treaty which was to protect the Chiang Kai-shek clique will become abrogated. You say “lapsed.” When that time comes there will be no longer difficulties between China and the United States, and only then it is possible for diplomatic relations between China and the United States.

Otherwise it's not possible for us to go to Washington, to have two Chinese Ambassadors there. Your President and you may come here because there is only one United States here as far as we are concerned. But I cannot go to the United States because there's the so-called ambassador of Chiang Kai-shek there. The differences are clear. You would not allow the Chiang Kai-shek ping pong team to perform in front of the White House but it did perform there [Washington] and so while it is there our ping pong team could not go. There is this difference.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand.

PM Chou: But from our point of view what is even more urgent than the Taiwan question is your withdrawal from Indochina. We can discuss this this afternoon. I discussed other thing. For you too it's a most urgent matter.

Dr. Kissinger: Before we come to that I would like to answer one question.

PM Chou: That will be this afternoon.

Dr. Kissinger: The Prime Minister asked what our position would be once Taiwan has come back to the motherland. When Taiwan and China become one, we can abrogate that treaty. That's not a problem. Once there is formal unification, there's no reason for us to have a treaty with a province of China. We will present no obstacle in the way of such a political evolution. If the event that the Prime Minister mentioned in my last meeting should come about, either Chiang Kai-shek or his son should return to the mainland, we will not discourage it. To be very frank with the Prime Minister what we would like most and what we would encourage is a peaceful negotiation after which all the military relationships would be at an end.

PM Chou: Assistance or relationships?

Dr. Kissinger: After there is a political settlement between Taiwan and mainland China, yes. We will not insist on maintaining an American presence or military installations on Taiwan after unification of China by peaceful negotiations has been achieved. And in those conditions we will be prepared to abrogate formally. If there's no peaceful settlement, which is the second contingency, then it's easier for us to withdraw our military presence in stages, which I indicated to the Prime Minister than to abrogate the treaty.

PM Chou: I understand. But then Japan would go in.

Dr. Kissinger: We would not stand for that.

PM Chou: That is an important question.

Dr. Kissinger: We have a common interest there.

PM Chou: That is right. What they want to do is replace you.

Dr. Kissinger: Mr. Prime Minister, we have no interest in the military expansion of Japan.

PM Chou: That's right because they have threatened in the past not only China but all countries in the Pacific. We remember that clearly.

Dr. Kissinger: It would be a very shortsighted policy.

PM Chou: We think the Laird speech in that connection is not very appropriate.

Dr. Kissinger: It has been denied that he made it, but never repeated.

PM Chou: He said something like that when he returned to Washington.

Dr. Kissinger: Some friends have asked what I would do after I left this job, and I said I would run a school for unruly boys.

PM Chou: That's not an easy thing to run such a school. I would not like such a job. Some people don't listen to you even if they are claiming to be of the same party or claim to listen to you. While there's humanity in the world there will be such people.

Dr. Kissinger: Let me be more honest with you than I have been with any other foreign leader. I have to select those issues on which to enforce discipline. I am —

PM Chou: It's not possible to go out in all four directions. Then you will be like Don Quixote.

Dr. Kissinger: Therefore, we choose to enforce discipline only on those statements that have practical consequences. We cannot keep Laird from making statements. But we can keep him from drawing practical consequences.

PM Chou: That's why we made a point of writing a commentary about Laird. And that was not a government statement. Only a press commentary. We only made two comments on Cabinet members of your government since you left.

Dr. Kissinger: We noticed that.

PM Chou: That is formal commentaries. In the UN those who support us—

Dr. Kissinger: We understand.

PM Chou: Our only formal commentary was that on August 20.

Dr. Kissinger: Some of your less formal are more vehement.

PM Chou: No matter, you know that is “firing empty guns.” When we say “down with imperialism” it's for the people of the countries concerned. The same when we say “down with revisionism.” If the people of the Soviet Union don't rise up to overthrow their leaders, it's empty cannon. We fire one empty cannon at them and they fire back 100 at us. We would not say they are doing it a 100 times. It's not worth it.

So we must differentiate our comment. When it's actual policy we must be very prudent because in those matters what we say must count; it must be based on principle not just empty cannons. You cannot fire cannon at random, but if you were to then we would be happy no one would believe in those words. You understand this better than the Soviets.

What I ask now is that you affirm that you don't want Japanese armed forces to go into Taiwan and this must be affirmed only while your armed forces are in Taiwan. Isn't that so? You had already admitted in the time of President Truman that Taiwan was Chinese territory and you noted her ambitions toward it, and it was also President Truman who sent troops to Taiwan. The Republican Party is not responsible for that but since you are already there you must be responsible for the situation. Because after you went into Taiwan and with the conclusion of the treaty of 1954, this matter became not only a matter of internal Chinese affairs but of international affairs. We do not advocate using armed forces against you. These discussions began first in August 1955. Only now can we say that we are earnestly going into negotiations. When we say of the Japanese going into Taiwan, it includes the military aspects as well as the economic and political aspects. This is something not only we but Chiang Kai-shek is following closely too. Just some time ago the elder brother of Sato, Kishi, went to Taiwan where he was to attend the meeting of The Cooperating Committee of Taiwan, Japan and South Korea. Three pro-Japanese chieftains on Taiwan took part in this meeting.

Dr. Kissinger: Chieftains?

PM Chou: Main people. On the civil side is Chang Ch'un, the Secretary General of the Chiang Kai-shek clique; on the military side is Huang Chieh, the Minister of Defense of the Chiang forces. He still has influence on Chiang Kai-shek's troops. Chiang Kai-shek is very ill at ease about him. He was my captain at the Whampoa Academy when Chiang Kai-shek was head and he was military commissioner and was director of teaching. In his middle age he was quite able to fight. Chiang Kai-shek is quite fearful of him. But is in quite good health and not dying so Chiang Kai-shek is worried about him. The third man called Ku Cheng-kang is a subordinate of Hui Ting, a member of the Central Committee and also the President of the Japanese-Chinese Friendship Association.

After you left in the latter part of July, both Chang Ch'un and Ku Cheng-kang visited Japan. At this time Japan made some suggestions to them, that is to find a formula to solve the problem of the UN. But the formula cannot be agreed to by Chiang Kai-shek, that is to say that those three pro-Japanese elements would be willing to turn Taiwan into a subsidiary state of Japan. Towards the latter part of the war of aggression, shortly before the Pacific war, there was a time when President Roosevelt was paying attention to what to do with Southeast Asia, and those three men I mentioned all wavered. If you meet Mr. Service, he will tell you about these three men, and he will tell you the same thing. When I met some days ago more than 60 American friends, I did not mention these men but I saw that Mr. Service knew what I meant, this plot was being hatched by them. There were some young American friends who did not know about this.

So if such a state of affairs cropped up what would be your attitude?

Dr. Kissinger: The Prime Minister always produces dialectic answers in me because I am in the People's Republic of China. Maybe he is engaging in subtle teaching. The relatively easy part is the projection of a Japanese military presence to Taiwan. It's out of the question while there are American forces there. And if it happened while there are American forces there, it will require us to reconsider the American presence, In other words, we would oppose it. If it happens at a later stage —

PM Chou: So long as Chiang Kai-shek is still around he will not permit Japanese military forces to go in, but as you know, Chiang Kai-shek is already 85.

Dr. Kissinger: If it happened afterwards the problem would be more difficult, but in any event the U.S. would oppose Japanese forces on Taiwan. This I can say categorically.

PM Chou: Yes, this would not conform to the treaty.

Dr. Kissinger: It would not conform to the San Francisco Treaty and would raise a whole new spectre in the Pacific, but it would cause us to reconsider our whole policy in the Pacific if Japan started sending forces outside its territory.

Secondly, the problem of political and economic expansion of Japan, I have to be honest with the Prime Minister, is a more difficult problem because it's harder to measure. I can only say that it's not American policy to let Taiwan become a subsidiary state of Japan. (Chou nods)

PM Chou: It would be most disadvantageous to the attempts to relax tension in the Far East. In fact, it's impossible.

Dr. Kissinger: We understand that. But it's important we know that even before diplomatic relations we have a means of exchanging views and some visible signs of Sino-American relations, and we think that will affect the situation in Taiwan and also we believe in Japan.

PM Chou: Even now it's affecting to a certain degree Japan, for instance, the biggest Japanese steel manufacturer. It produces 30 million tons of steel in its own structure alone. Your President had said that in a year or two Japan may catch up with the U.S. in steel production. That is the biggest Japanese steel company. That steel company originally took part in the commission of Taiwan, Japan and South Korea. Now it openly declared that it will not go to Taiwan and on the contrary, accepted our proposition, that is to say, it declared it would give up its deal to have Taiwan as a colony.

So we can see changes are taking place. There are the conditions to make common efforts to prevent the reemergence of Japanese militarism. Those of you who are experienced about Japan since the 30's after the Mukden incident. At that time Britain was allied to Japan. So Britain came to understand Japan later.

Dr. Kissinger: We are not discussing Japan now, but I will make one comment. I think if we treat each other with confidence there are certain things we can do together, but there is a danger that if the Chinese side acts too impetuously with respect to Japan this will bring about a forging of ties with Japan within the U.S. and U.S. and Japan. One attack on us is that we have sacrificed Japan for China. So some restraint on the Chinese side is necessary.

PM Chou: We are most restrained with regard to Japan because even now a state of war has not past between China and Japan in 26 years. Sato expressed a desire to see China even before President Nixon, but we pay no attention.

Dr. Kissinger: This could have the possibility of influencing the successor to Sato.

PM Chou: That is possible. Let's not go too far off the topic. Who do you think will succeed him?

Dr. Kissinger: The Japanese are very unpredictable. I think Fukuda.

PM Chou: He was reared by Sato himself.

Dr. Kissinger: As I told the Prime Minister yesterday, not all Japanese leaders who want good relations with China are easy to get along with. I always thought that Nakasone was the most nationalistic.

PM Chou: He was your student, you must know about him.

Dr. Kissinger: I have known him since 1952.

PM Chou: In 1955 he came in the capacity as peace delegate to the conference. Years later he became the Director General of National Defense Ministry. After visiting the U.S. and talking with Laird, he put out his Fourth Defense Plan. We have quite a long experience with Japan.

We have said so much about Taiwan. When we conclude our discussion we can formalize that. The most difficult topic is how we will put it down in the communique.

Dr. Kissinger: That's right. It will require restraint and wisdom. I have more of the latter than the former.

PM Chou: Not necessarily. And your assistants have the ability to do that. Let us meet in the afternoon. You will go back now for lunch. We will meet at 4:00 or 4:30.

Dr. Kissinger: You decide.

PM Chou: 4:30. Once we start talking the talks go on very long.

Dr. Kissinger: But very usefully.

PM Chou: We have exchanged views without reservation.

Dr. Kissinger: That is the same for us.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. All brackets and ellipses are in the source text. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People.

41. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 21, 1971, 4:42-7:17 p.m. 41. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 21, 1971, 4:42-7:17 p.m.1

Beijing, October 21, 1971, 4:42-7:17 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Chou En-lai, People's Republic of China

Chang Wen-chin, Director, Western Europe and American Department, PRC Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Hsuing Hsiang-hui, Secretary to the Prime Minister

Wang Hai-jung, Deputy Chief of Protocol, PRC

Tang Wen-sheng and Chi Chao-chu, Chinese Interpreters Chinese Notetakers

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, Senior Staff Member,NSC

PLACE: Great Hall of the People, Peking

DATE & TIME: October 21, 1971, 4:42 - 7:17 p.m.

GENERAL SUBJECT: UN and Indochina

Dr. Kissinger: I wonder whether before we start this subject I could make two points to the Prime Minister.

PM Chou: Please.

Dr. Kissinger: One is, again, a minor technical point. It would be best, and I think the Prime Minister agrees, if the technical people met as a group. This way Commander Howe can keep an eye on them, whereas if they break up into separate groups I can't be responsible for them.

PM Chou: We don't think it's good to break into several groups.

Dr. Kissinger: And if the Prime Minister would permit me to make another comment picking up a point we made this morning. (Chou nods)

This morning the Prime Minister said certain words are “empty guns” and we shouldn't take them so seriously, and in general I agree with him. But I thought it might interest the Prime Minister if I showed him a report which I received from my office on how the American press played the arrival here, and which points they stressed. A lot of this material doesn't concern China at all, but I didn't want the Prime Minister to think that I am being secretive so I am giving him the whole cable. And I think the Prime Minister will see that in both the written press and on television, instead of emphasizing the purpose for which I came here, people stress certain signs that the press noticed that were put up at the airport. (Chou laughs)

Here is the whole document; you can read it yourself. I have underlined the points. It's … the only reason I mention it is because, in my case it is not a matter of great importance, except I am convinced at this moment the Ambassadors from Taiwan, the Soviet Union and Japan are very active in spreading this all over Washington.

PM Chou: That's certain.

Dr. Kissinger: And if this were to happen in the case of the President, then it would, of course, have a very bad effect on public opinion. But I say this in the spirit of our discussion this morning, and not as any criticism. Of course, I have sent a telegram to point out that despite all the press has reported, our reception could not have been more cordial nor the discussions more constructive. I have just sent this back.

PM Chou: Your comments were correct.

Dr. Kissinger: That is my profound conviction. I did this so that people would not misunderstand the report.

PM Chou: Right, I was fully prepared in spirit for all of this, for them doing so because our slogan has been up there for quite a long time.

Dr. Kissinger: I won't discuss it, because I considered the Prime Minister's toast our greeting and nothing else.

PM Chou: Don't they think that we have said enough? Our slogan includes application to imperialism, revisionism, and all other reactionaries, so they must be feeling better.

Dr. Kissinger: They don't know what revisionism means, Mr. Prime Minister. I hate to tell you that.

PM Chou: That's where the trouble comes from, and that's where the tragedy arises. They say we are left revisionists.

Dr. Kissinger: That is true.

PM Chou: So, shall we continue. Some small matters are bound to arise, but this does not obstruct the development of the general situation. With respect to the question of Taiwan, there is one more question I would like to clarify.

Dr. Kissinger: Please.

PM Chou: That is with respect to the proposal, the draft resolution put forward in the United Nations by the United States and Japanese Governments advocating one China and two governments. The proposal in this form, on the contrary, has made it even more unacceptable when it is considered from the point of view of the UN charter. Of course we oppose this resolution.

But about your putting this forward, some people say there is now a feeling on your part of wanting to have it fail, and in view of your words this morning, I don't think you would wish for your resolution completely to fail. The spirit in which the personal representative of your President, Mr. Reagan, acted in his visit to Taiwan and in his talks with Chiang Kai-shek, I don't think was in the same spirit. We don't think that resolution was of a very high standard. Of course, I also understand it is difficult to put forward a resolution of that kind.

Dr. Kissinger: First of all Governor Reagan is a specialized aspect of the American political scene. Now I will speak frankly to you Mr. Prime Minister, because it makes no sense … you will meet our diplomats soon enough. For us to carry out the policy toward you which you and I discussed in July, it is important that we maintain as long as possible the support of the sort of people whom Governor Reagan represents. And up to now, he has publicly supported our initiative, and this has been of great consequence in enabling us to restrain that China lobby.

PM Chou: So is the China lobby more concentrated in the western part of the United States than others?

Dr. Kissinger: It is concentrated primarily in southern California, and in some parts of the south, but more in the western part and southern part, not in the eastern part.

PM Chou: Is it because some persons in the western parts and southern parts of the United States are more interested in Pacific affairs, have some investments in the Orient, or because some missionaries when they withdrew from the Orient went to the West and South?

Dr. Kissinger: I think the missionary element is of considerable importance, as with Representative Judd.

PM Chou: Judd?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. And I think also Governor Reagan represents the conservative wing, and for the conservative wing anti-communism has always been an ideological necessity.

PM Chou: Was Senator Judd's family missionaries?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, medical missionaries.

PM Chou: And he has the same surname that I have.

Dr. Kissinger: Oh really? So Governor Reagan's trip should be seen in terms of the American domestic policy. He does not represent our foreign policy.

If you reveal these statements, you will also have to give me some employment in your foreign office.

PM Chou: (laughs) There is no question of revealing these things.

Dr. Kissinger: Now secondly, Mr. Prime Minister, it does indicate, however, as I said to you this morning, that victory this year for the Albanian Resolution would not be in the best interests of the policy you and I have been discussing.

PM Chou: That's why I am asking you, wouldn't it be very unfavorable to you if your draft resolution could not win the sympathy of other countries?

Dr. Kissinger: In my view, for this year it would be unfavorable for both of us.

PM Chou: It's easy for us. We can just not go and leave Chiang Kai-shek there. And Kishi especially went to ask Chiang to stay in the United Nations, no matter what the consequences.

Dr. Kissinger: Well, he cannot stay if the Albanian Resolution succeeds.

PM Chou: But now Kishi is going to see your President.

Dr. Kissinger: This visit of Kishi to the President is an annual event which is produced by the fact that they played golf together when the President was out of office.

PM Chou: (laughs) Does he also play golf?

Kissinger: Yes. It has nothing to do with the UN.

PM Chou: But it has something to do with Chiang Kai-shek.

Dr. Kissinger: I don't believe so. I believe from what I know, and if I am wrong I will inform you to the contrary, he wants to discuss the relationship of Japan to the U.S. primarily in the economic field. I will request a report on this conversation if it should take place while I am here. I do not believe it concerns Chiang Kai-shek . . I am certain it does not concern Chiang Kai-shek but I will check.

One result of an unfavorable UN vote this year would be that it would give our opponents a symbol around which to rally. But I am answering your question, Mr. Prime Minister. It is not a suggestion we are making to you. I am explaining to you why we have taken the position we have.

Now, with respect to the first question the Prime Minister put to me, whether we put forward the resolution in order to be defeated. The original proposal which our bureaucracy made was in the direction of a two-China solution, which simply said that any government that exercised jurisdiction over an area should be in the UN, and it put Taiwan on the same level as the two Germanies, and two Koreas, and so forth. After our conversation in July we have changed this to its present, somewhat inelegant, formulation, which is to say one China and in effect two governments for the time being. We thought, in the spirit of our discussion, to maintain the principle of one China might be more important to you than the subsidiary issue of representation in the UN.

PM Chou: The same with us. On our side, we will certainly not give up Taiwan, or accept a so-called undetermined status for Taiwan in exchange for a seat in the UN.

Dr. Kissinger: We understand that.

PM Chou: Because since the beginning of the debate in the UN up to the present I have felt such a shadow and I have been openly discussing this with some foreign visitors. I have asked some Japanese friends: if the UN agreed for Japan to be a permanent member of the Security Council, but would not allow you to reacquire full sovereignty over Okinawa, and asked you to give up forever all sovereignty over the four small islands north of Hokkaido, would Japan agree? They said they wouldn't, and those whom I spoke to included representatives of the Japanese-opposition, of the Democratic Liberal party, and those with no political affiliations.

Dr. Kissinger: Under our present formula, you are not required to give up sovereignty.

PM Chou: You mean your draft resolution or the Albanian Resolution?

Dr. Kissinger: Even under our resolution.

PM Chou: It's very easy to deal with the U. S. draft resolution. We can just refuse to go. That's very simple. I can go back and go to bed. The question is that in the other resolution it calls for the restoration of all lawful rights of China in the United Nations, including its seat in the UN.

In that resolution it is not possible to put in a clause concerning the status of Taiwan, and if it is passed, the status of Taiwan is not yet decided.

Dr. Kissinger: In the Albanian Resolution?

PM Chou: There is such a danger. Of course, countries who support the Albanian Resolution haven't thought of this side of the question. But under this condition another shadow has appeared in the UN, and that might meet us on this.

Dr. Kissinger: Which shadow?

PM Chou: The activities I told you about conducted by Japan.

Dr. Kissinger: Oh I see.

PM Chou: Why does Britain want to leave such a tail behind? Few countries in the world operate this way. And therefore in the draft communique we would like to prepare between our countries for the visit of President Nixon the wording regarding Taiwan is most difficult, and we will have to rely on your assistants. They are young and will be able to find a good way.

Dr. Kissinger: We will try to find some formulation that … as I told you, it is harder for us to say everything than to do some of the things described, but we will try to find a way to indicate our understanding of your concern. Although it probably will not go far enough for your ultimate desire.

PM Chou: And do you mean it's diametrically opposed to our ultimate desire or in the same direction?

Dr. Kissinger: It will be in the same direction.

PM Chou: We will wait to see your wording and your wisdom.

Dr. Kissinger: We will try various formulations.

PM Chou: We are also considering this question.

Dr. Kissinger: As for the U. S. resolution in the UN, I think this is one of the questions history will take care of.

PM Chou: That's true, but the struggle that we face here today is quite troublesome. Because the majority of the countries in the UN truly wish to restore the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations, especially in view of the fact that it has been deprived this for twenty-six years, and especially in view of the fact that since the announcement has been made it has encouraged them greatly. Japan itself wavered for a long time over this issue, and that is very natural.

But what we think is more important is the future of Taiwan. And this is the most crucial issue between our two countries.

Dr. Kissinger: I agree.

PM Chou: And so the question is rather complicated.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: Since August 20, we haven't said anything on the issue of the UN.

Dr. Kissinger: I know. You have been very restrained and we have greatly appreciated it.

PM Chou: We have to see how the debate comes out.

Dr. Kissinger: We have valued your restraint.

PM Chou: Because in view of the whole situation in the world, since our two countries wish to improve our relations, then every step we take should be beneficial to that direction, but it shouldn't be detrimental to the interests of our two peoples.

Dr. Kissinger: I agree. The only question we have to discuss is not the direction but the rate of progress we can make.

PM Chou: If the rate of progress is a bit slower, that's an easy aspect of the matter to deal with. The trouble is if anything else from another direction barges in that will be troublesome, like the knife of Mishima. A horizontal knife like that, if it should come, that would be troublesome.

Dr. Kissinger: We both face the problem that many countries and groups in the world might have an interest in destroying the fragile relationship we are trying to build. We are determined to proceed in the direction which we have started.

PM Chou: There are not a few who wish to break up this relationship. I am not speaking about those among the people. I am speaking about those in power.

Dr. Kissinger: I agree. We have two dangers from which to guard, speaking from our side. One is the elements who want to come in from the side, as the Prime Minister points out, and the second is that if we try to go too fast we tear the fabric. So what we should do is to establish the direction both in these talks and when the President comes here, and then to be sure that every step we take is in this direction, and that we take no steps that are detrimental.

So we can call that a stage in our discussions and we can mention it later on in our conclusion if it is agreeable to the Prime Minister.

PM Chou: Shall we go on to the next question, the question of Indochina, which is an even more urgent question than the Taiwan issue, because your troops are still in Indochina and haven't left yet; and we said very long ago that we wish to settle matters not through force but through peaceful negotiations. We said this 16 years ago, and now in view of the fact that your President is coming to visit it should be more so.

Now the United Nations is discussing this matter so there is no special reason for us to be very hasty on this matter. On the contrary, what we are worried about is that if our legitimate rights in the United Nations are restored, while the status of Taiwan is left hanging in the air, we will have to consider this matter.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand this point. It is new to me quite honestly. I had not thought of it this way.

PM Chou: But now the relatively more urgent issue is the issue of Indochina, because the war there has not yet ended; your troops the re have not withdrawn totally and the date of final withdrawal has not been set even. And this year and in the coming year it will be an issue which people throughout the world, including people of the United States, will call for even more urgently. Especially since you left here, since you went back, the United States Government has not replied to the seven points put forward by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam.

Dr. Kissinger: This is not true. The Prime Minister is not correctly informed.

PM Chou: But it is an open fact, open propaganda if that is the case.

Dr. Kissinger: No.

PM Chou: Because the whole world is saying the seven-point proposal can be taken as a basis for discussion but the United States, since the proposal was put forward, has refused to answer it. Especially after you returned from China, the U. S. has refused to take such a position, and this makes the people of the world more unhappy.

Dr. Kissinger: I will let you finish, Mr. Prime Minister.

PM Chou: Some people are saying that it goes without saying the United States in coming to China is wishing to put the Vietnamese people aside in this matter. The seven-point proposal put forward by the Minister of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the —

Dr. Kissinger: I know what you mean.

PM Chou: Was put forward on the first day of July and the announcement was made on the 15th of July and after that the United States Government has refused to give any answer to the proposal and some people are saying it was due to pressure from the Chinese. Though the Chinese Government would never undertake any such obligation, some people are talking in this way. You told me beforehand you were going to change the head of your delegation at Paris, and you said he could also be sent to China. At that time I didn't connect it with the Paris talks. But after the issues of the announcement, and after such rumors were spreading around in the world, it was impossible for us to accept Mr. Bruce.

Dr. Kissinger: We understood.

PM Chou: Of course, personally, we are sorry, but under that political atmosphere, it was impossible to accept him.

Dr. Kissinger: We understand this, but we hope after some interval you will be able to accept him because he is the diplomat whom the White House trusts the most, who is most reliable and can speak freely.

PM Chou: Why is it he couldn't succeed in Paris? So it seems to us that if the United States Government and President Nixon doesn't take the initiative to proclaim a date of final withdrawal from Indochina, it will be detrimental to the President's visit to China. Of course, it would not have any other effect—the visit will still take place, but it will be better if this is solved. And I have told you before that as a matter of principle we support the PRG's seven-point proposal.

Dr. Kissinger: I have never doubted it.

PM Chou: The specific solution must be worked out between your two sides, because that is a matter of other sovereign countries, and we cannot intervene. Although we have given such large amounts of assistance to Vietnam, we never intervene in their internal affairs. The final decision lies with the Vietnamese.

And therefore we find it difficult to understand why President Nixon would not like to declare a date of final withdrawal from Indochina at such a favorable time like this. Because you told me last time that you really did wish to withdraw from Vietnam, that you didn't want to continue to be bogged down in that quagmire. People in the United States and the rest of the world have their eyes on this issue. And this is a question even more important than the question of the restoration of the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations, and a question even more urgent than the normalization of Sino-American relations.

Dr. Kissinger: Are you finished?

PM Chou: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger: Let me reply to you, Mr. Prime Minister, with absolute frankness. For us, Vietnam is a very anguishing problem. We have been there now for many years, and it has provoked enormous suffering in the United States. It was not this Administration that got us into the war, but we have a responsibility for ending it.

PM Chou: Yes, before President Nixon came to office he had promised he would do so.

Dr. Kissinger: In 1967 when I was a private citizen, I started private negotiations with Hanoi on my own initiative, which later became official negotiations. But I must say that while your allies in Vietnam know how to fight, I am not sure that they know how to negotiate. Also I do not believe they have correctly informed you about what has gone on this year.

First of all, which is a point of your honor, namely, the implication that you have in any contributed to enabling us not to answer the seven points—this is of course totally untrue. When I met with Mr. Le Duc Tho in Paris on July 26 I told him we wanted to end the war in Hanoi, and not Peking, and when we went to Peking it was to discuss Sino-U.S. relations and not the Vietnam negotiations.

Now, let me tell the Prime Minister what we have done this year, and he will see that the accusation that we have not replied to the seven points is totally wrong.

On May 31 I met Minister Xuan Thuy secretly in Paris and proposed to him seven points for ending the war, seven American points. One of these seven points was an offer to set a deadline for our withdrawal. On June 26, Mr. Le Duc Tho came to Paris, and I met with him secretly and he proposed to me nine points in reply. On July 1, Madame Binh published her seven points, and the Prime Minister will admit that it is an odd procedure to be given nine points secretly and seven points publicly. As a diplomatic historian, I don't know many examples of this procedure.

On July 12, on the way back from Peking, I met Mr. Le Duc Tho secretly in Paris. I may tell the Prime Minister, while it was difficult to get to Peking unobserved, it was infinitely harder to meet Mr. Le Duc Tho secretly with 200 press people chasing me all over Paris. I asked Le Duc Tho which points we should deal with, the nine points or the seven points. He told us that the nine points were the more significant points, and that these were the ones we should negotiate. Since the nine points were secret, it was obvious that we could not make a public reply to the seven points, or there would have been absolute confusion.

Nevertheless, on August 16, we made a formal eight-point proposal which incorporated our reply to the nine points as well as our reply to the seven points and which in fact accepted verbatim several of the seven points, word for word. I might point out, Mr. Prime Minister, that while I came secretly to Paris, Mr. Le Duc Tho could not find it possible to come from Hanoi, and I had to deal with a subordinate.

PM Chou: Xuan Thuy?

Dr. Kissinger: Xuan Thuy.

On September 13, I came again secretly to Paris; again Mr. Le Duc Tho was not present. At this meeting, Mr. Xuan Thuy rejected two of the eight points we had made. We then reformulated our proposals, and we have submitted eight new points on October 11. Of these eight points, six are the same; we reformulated the two points to which Hanoi objected.

We have requested another secret meeting on November 1, and we have not yet received a reply. Therefore, far from our refusing to reply to the seven points, it is Hanoi who has refused to reply to us. Of our eight points, four are drawn almost verbatim from the nine points of Hanoi and two are drawn from the seven points of Madame Binh, verbatim.

Also, Mr. Prime Minister, you spoke very eloquently the last time we were here about the necessity of not leaving any tail behind. This has been reflected in our proposals of August 16, but especially in our proposal of October 11.

I want to be candid with you, Mr. Prime Minister. If we made our proposals public we could completely dominate public opinion on this question because we have gone as far as anyone could possibly go, and there will be no one in the United States of America who will ask us to go further than we have gone. But we are not interested in winning a propaganda battle; we are interested in ending the war. And we see no reason why Hanoi will settle more easily if we engage in a public exchange with them if it doesn't in the form of secret exchanges.

So the problem as we see it is this. We have offered to set a fixed date for withdrawal. We have offered new elections six months after a peace is signed. We have offered that all American troops withdraw one month before the election. And we have offered that the President and Vice President of Vietnam resign one month before the election so that they do not run the election.

So you see, Mr. Prime Minister, we have taken the matters you mentioned to us to heart. And while we understand that you do not want to interfere in this process, it is an interesting question whether one little country obsessed with its suffering and obsessed with the war should be permitted to thwart every progress because its suspicion is so great that it will not make a negotiated settlement. Why should we want to maintain bases in one little corner of Asia when the whole trend of our policy is to form a new relationship with the most important country in Asia? If the leaders of Vietnam ever spoke to us with anything approaching the largeness of spirit that has been shown by you, Mr. Prime Minister, we could settle the war within a matter of days.

At the same time, I must tell you, in all honesty, we have made our last offer. We cannot go further than we have gone. We believe that every reasonable objective that Hanoi could have can be safeguarded. We want the independence for the countries of Southeast Asia—the only countries who want the war to continue are those who wish to create a bloc against you, not us, whatever our original motive.

Hanoi has not yet replied to our last proposal, so we do not know what their attitude is, but it is they who owe us an answer.

PM Chou: You mean the …

Dr. Kissinger: The October 11 proposal. But I can assure you we would like nothing better than to have ended the war when we come to Peking.

PM Chou: That is also something we would hope for.

Dr. Kissinger: We know you do not trade in principles. Nor do we ask you to do so, but we do not believe that one now has to trade in principles to end this war on the basis of proposals we have made.

PM Chou: So did your final proposal include a clause regarding the date of a final withdrawal?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: For a complete withdrawal or a partial withdrawal; are you going to leave some behind?

Dr. Kissinger: All American forces, except the normal number in a military attache's office, which is very small, will be out of the country during the month before the election. And the election will be six months after a peace settlement. At this time there will be no American forces in Vietnam except at the American Embassy.

I will be very specific so that you know the precise proposal if you are interested. We have proposed that we sign immediately, in a matter of weeks, a statement of principles on which a settlement should be based. We will withdraw all American forces except a few thousand within seven months of the signing of these principles, even if there is no peace treaty. We will withdraw all American forces, even these few thousand that are left, within six months of a peace settlement, of the final settlement. So we have given them two versions that guarantee in effect our total withdrawal.

PM Chou: You mean after you withdraw all your military forces, except the military attache's office, a month afterward there will be an election?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: You mean this present election that was held will not count?

Dr. Kissinger: It will count until that election.

PM Chou: (laughs) It's a question; that is your view.

Dr. Kissinger: We don't have to debate that because that isn't relevant to the proposal.

PM Chou: Is there any such condition that not only the war between the United States and Vietnam should cease, but also the civil war should cease?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, there is a condition for cease-fire.

PM Chou: You mean an all-around cease-fire?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, but there is also the provision that the existing President and Vice President should resign one month before the election.

PM Chou: But you mean, both the cease-fire and the resignation of the former President and Vice President, and new elections, is it only confined to Vietnam?

Dr. Kissinger: The election is confined to South Vietnam, because that is the only issue we have so far negotiated with Hanoi. The cease-fire applies to all of Indochina. But that, of course, includes our bombing also, air activity.

PM Chou: By withdrawal of troops, do you mean withdrawal of your Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps from the whole of Indochina?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: Recently we have heard your commander of the Pacific, Admiral McCain, was saying very loudly that you must not withdraw from Indochina. He said that you shouldn't withdraw from places that he was in charge of.

Dr. Kissinger: That leaves either two choices. He will either carry out his orders, or we will put someone else in charge of these places.

PM Chou: Probably also some “empty guns.” (laughs)

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, Admiral McCain is a very enthusiastic admiral.

PM Chou: Something like General Patton, maybe? (laughter) I have a very deep impression of that general. I saw the film only after you left. If I had seen it before you came I would have talked to you a lot about that film.

Dr. Kissinger: The President has seen that film more often than Admiral McCain.

PM Chou: That's why I was more interested in Patton. I hear he was a real character.

Dr. Kissinger: Patton? Yes. I was a private and I saw Patton, and the actor really had all his characteristics.

PM Chou: You were under him?

Dr. Kissinger: In the way a very low-ranking man is. I served in his Army. I do not believe he was conscious of my existence. (laughter)

PM Chou: (to notetaker): You liked to see Patton?

Miss Pineau: Quite honestly I haven't seen it. I would like to see it.

Dr. Kissinger: There will be compulsory attendance.

PM Chou: There must be some knots in this question to make them not believe the United States really wants to withdraw and make this into an area of peace and non-alignment.

Dr. Kissinger: Of course, they have not replied to this proposal, and maybe they will accept.

PM Chou: I must tell you honestly I don't know a word of this, of the eight points just now mentioned, and the two points changed. I don't know a word of it, because it was during the period just after the visit of Mr. Podgorny of the Soviet Union. You know about this visit.

Dr. Kissinger: I know about it but I don't know what went on. We did not send a message with Podgorny.

PM Chou: (laughs) I would not think you would send it through him. But he had some demands Vietnam would not agree to. They are sticking out their hands everywhere. All three horses of the troika are busier than ever.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, we have stimulated them into frantic activity.

PM Chou: (laughs) Probably; possible.

Dr. Kissinger: I have often asked myself the question you put to me, why will they not accept it? And I have no good answer except to say that the qualities that make for heroism are not necessarily the qualities that make for peace.

PM Chou: Not completely; some have both qualities.

Dr. Kissinger: Some have both, but …

PM Chou: But to take the nation as a whole, it will finally temper itself to a fine degree. For instance, Napoleon was a hero in war, but he failed in the end. But the revolutionary spirit and tradition of France as a nation was preserved. The same as the pioneer spirit which exists in your people's tradition. So every nation so long as it exists has its good tradition and its strong points.

Dr. Kissinger: No question, and as I told the Prime Minister last time, I personally admire the North Vietnamese.

PM Chou: Yes, I always think that if you were to categorically withdraw it would be a glory to you and not a defeat. General DeGaulle withdrew even more troops than you did and following that, two million inhabitants withdrew from Algeria, and that was even more difficult than if you were to do it now.

Dr. Kissinger: He found someone to negotiate with. The North Vietnamese are so suspicious, so convinced we are trying to trick them, that either they would find a trick in our proposal, or if they can't find a trick they have to reject it until they have found a trick. There is a certain egocentricity about them. They believe we have nothing else on our mind except how we can out-maneuver them. This isn't true. We genuinely want to make peace with them and we genuinely want to establish a basis of trust with them. If this were not true, and we were not seeking a negotiated end, I wouldn't have come to Paris secretly on so many occasions.

We will withdraw one way or the other. The only question is whether we will withdraw more slowly or we will withdraw as the result of a negotiation.

PM Chou: But there is a historical reason for the Vietnamese attitude, which I discussed with you the last time, that is because they were taken in in 1954 during the Geneva Agreements.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand this, but if they have learned a lesson from 1954, so should we have. The lesson they have learned is they were tricked. The lesson we have learned is that if they are tricked again they will fight again. No peace lasts unless the countries it affects wish to maintain it. This is true in our relations and it is true in our relations with North Vietnam.

PM Chou: So the question now arises, if you want an all-around ceasefire, wouldn't that be equal to a freeze on the situation? And then the Vietnamization program would continue?

Dr. Kissinger: No, because the government would resign and we would withdraw, and because we have reformulated one of the points of Madame Binh. We are willing to accept restrictions on the amount of military aid which we can give to South Vietnam as part of the peace settlement.

PM Chou: You mean the government that is set up after this new election?

Dr. Kissinger: Whatever the government is, we will accept limitations on the amount of military and economic assistance we can give. And finally, there is one point I have not yet mentioned to the Prime Minister, which we have not put into the proposal because we cannot accept the principle of paying an indemnity. But we have said after the principles are agreed to we would, as an act of free will, ask our Congress to earmark $7.5 billion for the reconstruction of Indochina, of which $2 billion would be for North Vietnam. That is not a formal proposal; that is a separate understanding, or rather a promise. That is over a five-year period.

PM Chou: Then there is a second question. What will be the effect of all-around cease-fire on Cambodia? Wouldn't that mean the Lon Nol clique would remain?

Dr. Kissinger: We don't accept the characterization of the Prime Minister. It means the political forces in Cambodia will work themselves out over a period of time. If the North Vietnamese forces withdrew from Cambodia, the question wouldn't arise at all. But it would be unlikely that history would stop in Cambodia.

PM Chou: The Lon Nol/Sirik Matak clique is a clique that is reactionary to the extreme, and on this matter perhaps our views differ greatly. And the Cambodian people want to continue to work to overthrow it. What can you do about that? Like the Chinese people worked to overthrow Chiang Kai-shek, you can go on to aid them for three to five years. What will be its result? The result will still be its collapse. How can you maintain Southeast Asia as a region of peace and non-alignment?

Dr. Kissinger: If the North Vietnamese withdrew their forces from Cambodia it would be easy for us to accept restrictions on the amount of military aid we can give to Cambodia, and then the Cambodians can settle their future by themselves.

PM Chou: If you are going to give assistance to Lon Nol-Sirik Matak, then we will certainly have to give assistance to Sihanouk. What good is that?

Dr. Kissinger: If all outside forces withdrew and neither side gave assistance, then the local forces can determine their future.

PM Chou: You mean they will resolve it between themselves.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. Our interest in Cambodia has always been the presence of the North Vietnamese; it has never been the Cambodian situation as such.

PM Chou: But this question was created there in your invasion into Cambodia.

Dr. Kissinger: I don't know whether the Prime Minister wants to debate history, but there were 50,000 North Vietnamese in Cambodia before we went in there.

PM Chou: That was because the United States troops went into South Vietnam and they had sympathy there for South Vietnam. Even we didn't know about that. It was Lon Nol himself who told me about this fact in this very room. I was sitting in this chair; he was in the one you are in. That was when he came to China in 1969 to celebrate our 20th anniversary. He came as the Prime Minister of Cambodia, and I was greatly surprised and taken aback by that fact. Because I know first of all that Sihanouk believed in Buddhism and was peace-loving. The second fact was that he was pro-French, although very friendly toward China. Because we are good friends, he also wrote some good poetry in memory of our friendship. But his politics and his life were both French still.

Dr. Kissinger: That's correct.

PM Chou: But because he sympathized with the South Vietnamese people who had been pushed into war for 10 years, he allowed some of their troops to use the eastern part of Cambodia to maneuver their troops. He didn't even tell us. It was in 1969 when I was talking with him in this room that Lon Nol told me about it. It was upon hearing this I said this Prince is truly remarkable. And Sihanouk had this sympathy for them. But the United States has no reason to rebuke Sihanouk, nor does the United States have any reason to rebuke the North Vietnamese for assisting their compatriots in South Vietnam. Because in 1954 after the Geneva Conference, they withdrew their armed fighters and they did so very scrupulously, in good faith.

After we reached agreement on the announcement last July the first country we went to was Hanoi. I told them about our meeting so there would be no misunderstanding.

At that time (1954) Le Duan and Pham Van Dong, who were both from the south, said it had been a very painful experience for them to persuade their fellows in the south to withdraw to the north with their weapons and leave their families in the south. At that time Le Duan had asked to remain in the south. He was confident that after 30 years the revolution in the south would be successful. Because he saw it was difficult for these fighters to leave their families. They were only able to persuade their fighters to go because of the prestige of Premier Ho Chi Minh. Because it was stipulated in the Geneva Agreements that one year after the Conference, representatives of the North and the South would meet and discuss a way of holding elections under the provisions of the agreement to unify Vietnam, and it was on the basis of this that they persuaded fighters to withdraw to North Vietnam, though they left their families. They believed that soon after they would be able to hold elections.

And I believe you also believe that if elections had been held, Premier Ho Chi Minh would have been elected. John Foster Dulles said so, as did many others. But this was false, dirty, what Dulles did, and even Eden wrote about it in his memoirs! He said, “I won't sign this. I will issue a statement saying I will not disturb the agreement.” But it was he himself who disturbed the agreements, and he told Eden, and Eden wrote in his memoirs that this was false and that after the Geneva Conference they had immediately worked with the Southeast Asians. They had worked on a policy of brinkmanship… they had drawn a line. He believed in a philosophy you no longer believe in, that he thought they could draw a circle around the communist countries to contain them as if all the socialist countries were one monolith.

But that is not true. On the other hand, they believed once they drew a line all the countries on their side would also be a monolith. But that is not possible either. Even those in South Vietnam would not listen to them. The U. S. sent in military advisors, military forces, and it was this thing that gave rise to the war of aggression in South Vietnam. And it was these members of families of fighters who had gone to the north that rose up to fight against this aggression. Why should such an indomitable nation not be allowed to be independent?

Dr. Kissinger: But no one is keeping them from being independent now. Whatever the reading of history, we now have the wisdom to make a peace that accords with these national aspirations. They have proved they will fight; they no longer need show it. Their guarantee is not this or that clause or proposal; their guarantee is that there is a completely different world outlook between Dulles' policy and our policy. In 1954, the United States was getting engaged; in 1971 our approach is quite different. If we wanted to pursue the Dulles policy, I wouldn't be talking to you. Therefore, if we want to pursue peace in Indochina now it will not be for reasons of intervention, but for peace over the longer term.

PM Chou: Anyway, there is a knot in your negotiations that hasn't been untied.

Dr. Kissinger: This is true.

PM Chou: Because they believe that your tendency is to assist Thieu, Lon Nol, Sirik Matak, and Tam. So on this question if you don't take a fair attitude, they won't understand you.

For instance, if you now were to assist Chiang Kai-shek to come back to the mainland, or separate Taiwan from the mainland into an independent state, how could we understand? Because you wish no such policy and because we know your President wishes to change this situation in the world, we have a common point.

Dr. Kissinger: But this proves my point, because our basic attitude toward Vietnam summarizes our attitude toward you, and if they showed us that minimum degree of confidence we could end the war very quickly. Because we have shown them a way by which both the military and political problem can be resolved. But they must leave something to the political process; they cannot ask us to surrender to them.

PM Chou: It is not surrender. DeGaulle withdrew his troops on his own initiative, and the whole world believed it was a glorious thing. And if your President wishes to win the respect of the world, withdrawal of your troops from Indochina would be a great action indeed.

Dr. Kissinger: But as I have explained, that is what we have offered. The question is whether Hanoi will negotiate on this basis. Withdrawal is not the issue. We have offered the most generous terms possible and the only reason we have not published them is because we want to make peace and not propaganda. But I am fairly optimistic that they will accept our last proposal.

PM Chou: I don't know the content of your final proposal, so there is no way for me to say anything on this. What I want to tell you is the mental state they are in. They are in a state of war, of being submitted to aggression. They are not like China. China is so big that though there are a million troops on our northern frontiers, among which three hundred thousand have entered into the People's Republic of Mongolia, spearheaded against China; and though there is no withdrawal yet from Taiwan and Chiang Kai-shek makes a great cry about returning; and though some Japanese militarists are making great cry about self-defense, they want their self-defense troops to go abroad; although such a situation exists and Admiral McCain is saying loudly his troops in the Pacific should do this and that…

Dr. Kissinger: If the Prime Minister faces no greater threat than that, he is in good shape.

PM Chou: I just added that as one more example. If I were to add more that would be the Soviet Union and India. But Madame Gandhi says this is not spearheaded against any country, and India is still non-aligned. Although the situation is such, we still recognize the times have changed and we should look at the future.

But you cannot rebuke the 14 million people of South Vietnam who are suffering in the extreme misery at the present for not accepting anything they do not feel is safe. There is no reason to rebuke them for that; they should feel safe. It is about the same situation George Washington was in 200 years ago. How many did you have at that time?

Dr. Kissinger: Three million.

PM Chou: And with such a small population they dared to defy the British Empire because they had no way out. That also was a kind of guerrilla warfare, I think, and it was three years afterward he was elected commander-in-chief. But in the end your ancestors won. The pioneer spirit was victorious. So when we think of the experiences of our own nations we should sympathize with the miseries of others. So you should do your utmost to let them see your policy as truly changed. But if it was only us, it would be impossible for us to say this to them, because we are in a different position; we are not participants.

Dr. Kissinger: We understand this.

PM Chou: And also there are people on the side, as you said, doing their best to provoke things.

Dr. Kissinger: We are well aware of this.

PM Chou: So we hope you will also consider this because when your President comes there must be some clause dealing with this and wouldn't it be a good thing if by the time he came it had been settled? I don't mean everything has been settled, but there should be an agreement. That would be a great victory and glory to you. I don't think it would be a defeat.

Dr. Kissinger: I have taken seven secret trips to Paris this year, which is not my principal job, to try to make peace. We want to make peace. Continuation of the war is not in the interest of the U.S. or China. Continuation of the war can only help outside countries. We are no long-term threat to the independence of Vietnam in any concept of the future of Asia. We want to make peace.

We also recognize there are limits to what you want to do and what you can do, because we know there are outside forces encouraging continuation of the war for reasons unrelated to Vietnam, but related to rivalries and ambitions. But if an opportunity presents itself in which you might be asked about the degree of our sincerity, without telling us, you could perhaps offer your opinion as to the degree of our sincerity.

We'll do what we can, but in all frankness we cannot go further than the proposal of October 11 to which they have not responded.

PM Chou: You don't mean by the outside countries you were mentioning.

Dr. Kissinger: No.

PM Chou: Yes, we wish you can get out of that place.

Dr. Kissinger: We have no doubt of that. I was thinking of countries farther away.

PM Chou: We know. They hope you can be tied down to that place.

Dr. Kissinger: And that you can be embarrassed.

PM Chou: I haven't read the document of October 11 yet, so I cannot say anything on that. I only said a few words on the matter of all-around cease-fire. I can think over the question more and maybe later on I can say more about it, because I think it would be impossible to say nothing about this matter in the communique.

Dr. Kissinger: On the other hand, you should be under no misapprehension. Vietnam is a subject of extreme sensitivity to us, and it is impossible for us to accept a communique which is critical of us. We can, of course, accept silence, but we cannot accept a communique which can be construed as an attack on us.

PM Chou: But the declaration of withdrawal of troops from Indochina by a United States President, wouldn't that be something worthy of the hailing of the people of the world? Because the people of the whole world in many countries have been asking you to take such a step. If you did so, wouldn't that be worthy of the acclaim of the people of the world? Why is it impossible for President Nixon to do something it was possible for General DeGaulle to do?

Dr. Kissinger: President DeGaulle found a party on the other side prepared to negotiate. We have up to now not found it possible to get the agreement of the other side to a settlement.

PM Chou: But if the United States were to take the initiative in declaring a withdrawal, wouldn't that win the support of the people of the world, including the United States?

Dr. Kissinger: Our belief has been that we could not do this as a propaganda exercise. We could get favorable headlines for two or three months, but these victories are empty.

PM Chou: I don't think that would be necessarily so. Haven't you said your policy has been determined?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, but if we announce something Hanoi then rejects, your problem will not be any easier. You can still not support our position in a communique.

PM Chou: Of course, it cannot be written into a communique if you don't reach an agreement with Hanoi. Of course, first of all it is hoped your two sides will come to a conclusion.

Dr. Kissinger: We will try very hard.

PM Chou: Because this is the most urgent matter in the relaxation of tension in the Far East. This will benefit people of Indochina, and neither will it be detrimental to the glory of the United States. In my view it will make the United States even more glorious.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand the Prime Minister's point of view, and have explained our point of view. The only reason I do not give the Prime Minister our formal proposal is because we feel since we are negotiating secretly with Hanoi, it is not proper for me to give you our documents, because if we were negotiating with you, you would not appreciate our giving our private documents to other countries. But if Hanoi gave it to you, we would be very pleased.

PM Chou: I agree with that point of view.

Dr. Kissinger: We will take what the Prime Minister said to us very seriously, and we hope that if things do not work out as we both hope that we will find some understanding, if not, of course, agreement.

PM Chou: You mean with the North Vietnamese side or with us?

Dr. Kissinger: I hope we can find understanding with the Vietnamese side, but hope you will understand what we are trying to do even though we understand that you will support your allies.

PM Chou: If in Indochina the policy of peace and non-alignment can be realized, that will be most beneficial to peace and the relaxation of tension in the Far East.

Dr. Kissinger: If the Prime Minister could teach some of his methods to his allies we would have peace very quickly.

PM Chou: That wouldn't do because the styles of various countries are different.

Dr. Kissinger: That is true.

PM Chou: And we cannot impose our will on others.

The relations between our two countries have been cut off many years. The style of our words is very straightforward and there is not so much reluctance, and there does not arise the question of imposing will on each other. And this is what Chairman Mao teaches us, not to impose our will on others. Because the conditions and history of each country are different, and even though their world outlooks may be similar in general, there may be differences in their ways of thinking and their style. And each has their own experience of struggle, and it is through this experience that progress is made. Why is it the world is not tranquil, not only the western world, the so-called socialist world as well? There are all kinds of socialism. And this proves the bankruptcy of Dulles' policy. Both of us are attacking Dulles' policy in front of our other American friends. I hope they don't see that as unforgivable.

Kissinger: Miss Pineau wasn't even alive when Dulles was. She doesn't mind.

PM Chou: You were not alive?

Miss Pineau: Mr. Kissinger is flattering me. I was alive.

PM Chou: Did you ever meet him?

Miss Pineau: I am trying to remember. I don't think so.

PM Chou: Did you know that once he wouldn't shake hands with me?

Miss Pineau: No, I didn't.

PM Chou: Wasn't that curious?

Dr. Kissinger: It was unforgivable, Mr. Prime Minister.

PM Chou: We still have three more days, so we have to step up our work. If the weather is nice, and there's not too much wind, maybe you can go to the Great Wall in the morning.

Dr. Kissinger: We should, in any case, before I leave have a general agreement on a communique.

PM Chou: You have the general idea in your mind, so we can formulate one in our discussions.

Dr. Kissinger: I have a suspicion the Prime Minister has an idea in his mind.

PM Chou: But not much. Because it was you who mentioned it after you arrived. It was only then that my mind began to work. But it was said in the press that you have been preparing for a month.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People.

42. Messages From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 22, 1971 42. Messages From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 22, 19711

Washington, October 22, 1971

October 22, 1971

TO:

HENRY KISSINGER

FROM: AL HAIG

The President asked about your response to his desire for private sessions with Mao and Chou and I gave him the essence of your discussions with Chou on the subject. The President asked that I wire you immediately and confirm that he was most comfortable with a meeting with both Mao and Chou together but insisted that the session include him only on the U.S. side. Haldeman informs me that if a meeting of this type is held simultaneously with both leaders then there is no requirement for a separate private session between the President and Chou En-lai. He agrees with me, however, that since you have already requested such a meeting that he will leave this issue to your judgment in light of your assessment of conditions there.

The President stated that if “anyone else” were present this would differ from the style he has established in his trips abroad and, more importantly, would raise the “Rogers problem.” There may be more to this than that simple explanation and I suspect the Sherman story in Sunday's Post which touched upon the genesis of the Peking and Soviet initiatives was not helpful in any sense. You will recall that Sherman suggested that both trips had long been part of “your” conceptual agenda.

I hope to speak to the President this morning about the Middle East problem and its implications. He spent all day yesterday preparing for the TV announcement of the two Supreme Court appointments.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No time of transmission or receipt appears on the message.

43. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 22, 1971, 4:10-5:37 p.m. 43. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 22, 1971, 4:10-5:37 p.m.1

Beijing, October 22, 1971, 4:10-5:37 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS

John Holdridge

Alfred LeS. Jenkins

Hsiung Hsiang-hui

TIME AND PLACE

Friday, October 22, 1971; 4:10 - 5:37 p.m.

Great Hall of the People

SUBJECT:

Exchanges and Trade

Hsiung: Yesterday morning we had a meeting which has been carried out in accordance with procedures agreed upon by Premier Chou En-lai and Dr. Kissinger. And to speak frankly, I didn't expect what kind of questions the United States side put forward before the meeting. But you have made very good preparations.

Holdridge: All very tentative.

Hsiung: And only during the course of our exchanges of views have I come to realize the nature and contents of the questions you have put forward. That is why yesterday morning I mainly listened to what you have got to say. And in the course of our talk I made a very brief clarification. That is to say both Mr. Jenkins and Mr. Holdridge must be very familiar with the whole process of the Sino-United States talks so far as the consistent stand of China. And there is much content in this sentence. I think both of you will understand it. And after the meeting I joined another meeting in the afternoon and in the evening we also attended the performances and in the morning we went on an excursion to the Great Wall. So to speak frankly I haven't read over the list you handed over to us. Because we haven't got enough time.

Jenkins: We fully understand. You have been so gracious in affording us so pleasant and profitable a time, we fully understand.

Hsiung: So we are not in the same circumstances. So I would like to say a few words about my preliminary ideas. Of course, we will report our respective preliminary ideas to our respective leaders.

Jenkins: Certainly.

Hsiung: And of course eventually it will be solved by Premier Chou En-lai and Dr. Kissinger: this is just for exchange of views.

Jenkins: I think that would be very useful.

Hsiung: It's not a decision, just an exchange of ideas.

Jenkins: I understand.

Hsiung: Yesterday, Mr. Holdridge had raised some points on the contacts between China and the United States. I haven't got a note here; this is a translation of your proposals.

Holdridge: It looks far more concrete in the form that you have it there than in the way that I presented it.

Hsiung: That's the Chinese characters. The way they print it gives you the impression.

Holdridge: You must assume that the way we talked about it yesterday was very informal.

Hsiung: Just an exchange of views.

Holdridge: Yes.

Hsiung: So what I am going to touch on is first of all the questions of the contacts between China and the United States as was mentioned yesterday by Mr. Holdridge. And yesterday Mr. Holdridge also mentioned that there had already been established effective contacts between Premier Chou En-lai and President Nixon so I am not going to talk at length on this point. Of course, it goes without saying such contacts will go on. And in addition to that Mr. Holdridge had made three suggestions for the consideration of the Chinese side. Because I haven't brought the note with me, if I don't speak very accurately please correct me. The first point is to establish, on the basis of reciprocity, a liaison office by both sides.

Holdridge: May I make one statement here? We said reciprocity if the Chinese government is interested in reciprocity.

Hsiung: Of course I mentioned just now your suggestions are for the consideration of the Chinese side. So it's all right if I didn't mention that point. We think this is not realistic. It is quite obvious there is a so-called embassy of the Chiang Kai-shek clique in Washington. And as regards this, we haven't ___________ to the United States. If any situation of two Chinas occurs then it is utterly unacceptable to us. That is if there is a so-called Kuomintang Embassy in Washington and at the same time there is a so-called kind of liaison organization whether official or non-official of the Peoples Republic of China in Washington. And it goes without saying it is not appropriate. And we are not willing to put the United States side in an embarrassing state and wish the United States side will also not put us in an embarrassing state. That is why I say that as for the first point, it is not feasible.

As for the second suggestion, it is to establish a section in a friendly embassy on both sides. And on this there is some sort of similarity between this point and the last suggestion. We are used to doing things in a frank and open way.

Jenkins: That we welcome.

Hsiang: I don't mean to make any criticism of U.S. representation at missions in the Middle East, but that's not our practice. That's why the second suggestion is also not feasible. As for the sort of suggestion about the sending of sort of technical personnel to deal with administrative questions before or during or after the visits of senior representatives of President Nixon or Dr. Kissinger either from Hong Kong or from Washington. As for this point, we think it can be considered. ________________ in July Dr. Kissinger came here to China and this time he has come again and with even a larger party. And the period for your stay is for you to decide. Of course, it is impossible for you to stay for a longer time. Because Dr. Kissinger has told me that he is going to leave on the 25th. So shall we put this question on a more realistic basis. So from the 25th of this month when Dr. Kissinger and his colleagues are leaving China to the date of President Nixon's visit to China there is still quite a few months, about four or five months. Plus, the final date is not yet known, for during this period of time the United States side thinks it is necessary to send some people here to China we think it can be taken into consideration. If there is some other preparatory work to be done in that case, this can be realized through the channels mentioned by Mr. Holdridge yesterday. As to who will come or how many of them will come, and how long they are going to stay, it can be consulted and agreed upon through the channels which already exist. But we think it is better and more effective to send a representative right from Washington. As for the function of the personnel and Hong Kong, I am sure that both you and they in Hong Kong are very clear about the function of them. It's a very big consulate. If they came here, it will affect their function in Hong Kong. So we think in that case it will be more effective to send representatives right from Washington although they only deal with administrative work, but it is more effective to send them right from Washington, the personnel, not the senior representatives, but the personnel. It is more realistic to have them during the period after Dr. Kissinger's interim visit and before President Nixon's visit to China. As for the contacts after President Nixon's visit to China, we can leave it to them to decide. What would you think of such an idea?

Holdridge: Certainly this is something we want to consider and discuss with Dr. Kissinger, and we appreciate the receptivity of the Peoples Republic of China.

Hsiung: What is your opinion?

Holdridge: I think that certainly my contacts … I think this will be beneficial and be helpful to others who come of higher rank, to have this assistance on the groundwork so to speak. This of course is my personal opinion.

Hsiung: What I was referring to is the period after Dr. Kissinger's interim visit to President Nixon's visit to China.

Holdridge: I don't believe Dr. Kissinger has yet formed any particular idea on what type of contact or further conversations we should have in that period. At this point I am not in a position to comment any further. At this point it will depend on what Dr. Kissinger and Chou En-lai should discuss.

Hsiung: Because this is the third suggestion you made yesterday, so that's what I have considered because I have put it on a more realistic basis.

Holdridge: I do recall offering to receive any suggestions from the People's Republic of China and wonder if your side has any suggestions to make going beyond what I said yesterday.

Hsiung: I think as for this point it is in conformity with the point put forward by Premier Chou En-lai last July.

Holdridge: Fine, I have nothing further to say then.

Hsiung: Now, the second question. That is the question put forward by Mr. Jenkins. That is the proposal on the exchanges of scientific, technical and cultural and so forth. I think altogether there are 25 proposals.

Jenkins: May I say these were very illustrative, and we didn't have any idea we'd want to consider them as a package, but simply to start our thinking going.

Hsiung: Last time you mentioned three proposals orally; as for the written list, it consists of 25. Of course last time you did mention the three suggestions were just illustrative. My idea is like this: The Chinese and the American peoples have long been friendly to each other, and owing to reasons not because of the Chinese side, for the last 2-1/2 years, and more, the exchanges between the two countries have been cut off. A new page has been opened after the visits of the American table tennis team to China in last April. Of course, before that there were a few American friends who have come to China, say Mr. ___________. And after the visit of the table tennis team from the United States there has been an increasing number of the American friends who have come to China for visits and many of them include correspondents. Of course, there were also correspondents who came with the table tennis players and after their visit there have been a number of correspondents who have come and also tourists and scientists and so on. That's why in his toast at the banquet Premier Chou En-lai also mentioned that the contacts between the Chinese and American people are bound to develop. I think you are also clear on this point. But so far, it's American friends and American people who have come to China. And from April up to now it's one-way traffic. And of course, the American Table Tennis Association also has invited the Chinese Table Tennis Association to visit the United States. And our Chinese Table Tennis Association is most thankful to the American Table Tennis Association. And we have also noticed that in last August the Chiang Kai-shek clique had also sent its table tennis team to the United States and they visited many cities. They visited more than 20 cities and finally they arrived in Washington. And we are very thankful to the American Table Tennis Association who refused to play with them. They refused to have any matches with the Chiang Kai-shek table tennis team.

Jenkins: I recall that.

Hsiung: There were still people who, although not members of the Table Tennis Association, they did play with the Chiang Kai-shek table tennis team. I cite this question just to illustrate that there is a political factor to the question of contacts.

Holdridge: May I say something here? This brings up precisely the point we were making yesterday. There are those in the United States who are very critical of the policy established by President Nixon, doing their best to interfere with the normalization of relations and this is an illustration. This visit of the table tennis team from Taiwan was arranged by the groups critical of the President's policy, and the United States Government had nothing to do with the visit of the group from Taiwan.

Hsiung: I would like to make two points of comment on this. Firstly, we would not like to put the United States in an embarrassing state, nor do we wish that the United States will put us in an embarrassing state. If we have to take into consideration that aspect of the picture, why didn't you take into consideration this side of the picture? And the second point is to say the United States Government has nothing to do with the invitation of the Chiang Kai-shek table tennis team is only to speak of the picture. We have all engaged in diplomatic work. First of all, you have to give them a visa, and a visa doesn't come from non-governmental organizations, and prior to that it is clearly written in United States passports they are not permitted to come to the People's Republic of China.

Holdridge: I don't understand.

Hsiung: In your American passports.

Holdridge: That's incorrect. Since 15 March, there are not more restrictions.

Hsiung: Prior to that.

Holdridge: What we should talk about now is not the past but the future.

Hsiung: I was just making comments on the fact that you mention your government has nothing to do with invitation of the Chiang Kai-shek table tennis clique to the United States. Because prior to that your government has laid down rules to which countries they are allowed to issue passports for U.S. citizens. And for the people of other countries to go b the United States, they have got to get visas from the U.S. side. Without visas, how could they go to the United States? Who would issue the visas, and also as to when to issue the visas, it is up to the United States government organizations to decide. If the Chinese Table Tennis Team also went to the United States in August then in that way they would have been put in a more embarrassing position. The State Department ______________ refused to issue visas to the Chiang Kai-shek team.

Holdridge: But this was apprivate arrangement, and for the government to do that would have been a distinct political act.

Hsiung: This is a political act?

Holdridge: Not to act is a political act.

Hsiung: This is a political question. Whether you issue the visa or not is a political question. You can't ignore this point. Whether this side or that side, it is always a political consideration. That's why I said in these circumstances as for your suggestions as to exchange between the two countries it would be impossible to be conducted on a governmental basis. That is to say, subsidiary questions have to be subordinated to the fundamental questions. This is our consistent fundamental stand in the Sino-U.S. ambassadorial talks in Warsaw.

Of course, after the publication of the announcement, after Dr. Kissinger's July visit to China, it is clearly stated in the announcement that we are seeking the normalization of the relations between the two countries. President Nixon's visit is to seek the normalization of the relations between the two countries. So in these circumstances it can be considered that the cultural, scientific and technical exchanges can be conducted on a private basis, but it can't be too much because up to now the relations between our two countries have not been normalized. There is still the Taiwan question. So it can be considered to conduct exchanges on a non-governmental basis, but there cannot be too much of this. What I referred to as exchanges, as for exchanges ov visits between the two peoples, as Premier Chou En-lai has mentioned, this is bound to develop. As to which proposals out of these 25 proposals can be conducted in either the present or the near future, these can be discussed. And generally speaking, this kind of exchanges will be put on a non-governmental basis and there can be not too many of them. That is my preliminary idea.

Jenkins: It is perfectly agreeable to us that these exchanges be on a non-governmental basis, and we think that it is reasonable that progress in this area be step-by-step. I think that our leaders have both expressed the idea that an eventual increase in such things is virtually inevitable, and this is something we can look forward to in the future if things go well in the interim. I think it is acceptable for there to be a somewhat modest beginning, but the important thing is that there be a beginning.

Hsiung: Such exchanges can be realized, but as for whether it will be mentioned in the joint communique after the visit made by President Nixon, that is the joint communique issued during President Nixon's visit this is not up to me (if there is any communique). This is another matter. It is up to Premier Chou En-lai and Dr. Kissinger to consider it.

Jenkins: Yes, we agree.

Hsiung: So what I have mentioned and whether the joint communique should refer to this is two matters.

Jenkins: Yes, I understand that. We agree. I want to emphasize that this rather large package of illustrative suggestions is by no means exclusive. Any idea you have that is not in this we would, of course, be very interested in considering also.

Hsiung: What I have said just now, when you handed over this list I haven't thought it over before that. I don't know whether our comrade from the Foreign Ministry has thought it over or not.

___________: Then I will consider it.

Hsiung: But when our Foreign Ministry is going to explain this to the departments concerned, they have to provide some sort of information to them to ___________ further exploration.

Jenkins: I think the proposals as we gave them are about as detailed as we can go into now, because they cover so many fields that none of us are real specialists in these fields, and I think we need to come to some general agreement as to where we are going in the field and then we can prepare more detailed studies on any of these items which we find to be of mutual interest. I think when you have time and an opportunity to study what we have given you that you will find we have indicated fairly clearly what types of steps we are prepared to take in general and in most instances we have indicated the type of organization in the United States which we think would be primarily concerned with them. But that is not fixed either. We can describe to you the facilities and types of experience which these organizations have which might be of interest to you and then move on from there on which _____ you might wish to follow up on.

Hsiung: According to your concept, your ideas, would such kind of contacts be carried out by the method of direct contact between non-government organizations on our side and in your country, or by the government.

Jenkins: Either way is satisfactory to us. I think it would be a little easier if the government were in the picture, because as I mentioned earlier of the multi-faceted nature of this many types of atheletic, cultural and ecientific associations we have. But it is also perfectly acceptable to us to ______________________________________. If that is done you may wish to consult with us concerning the facilities, reputation, etc. of these organizations to better understand what they would be able to do and perhaps what they would not be able to do.

Hsiung: Because these proposals were put forward by your side, that is why I think I would like to clarify some points. To make clear some of the points which I can conceive at the moment. So it's not a matter of suggestions put forward by our side which are satisfactory to you. I just want to make clear on certain points. Just now you said it would be better to have the government in the picture. What organizations do you refer to?

Jenkins: I am saying it would probably be easier for us if, for instance, at least as sort of a clearing house the Communist Affairs Office of our State Department were involved. However, if you don't wish it that way it is agreeable to us. It might facilitate matters, but if for political reasons you prefer to have it not that way, that is agreeable. Or similarly, our United States Information Agency would be a normal clearing house for journalists or things of that nature, but we would not insist upon it. As a matter of fact, we can furnish you a list of names of any number of organizations in the United States which would be entirely non-governmental and if you prefer you can make your arrangements with these organizations without governmental activity on our part.

Holdridge: Other than to facilitate the issuance of visas.

Hsiung: What do you think of the prestige of the United States Information Agency in other countries?

Jenkins: I think I would rather not address that question today if you don't mind.

Hsiung: To increase our mutual understanding, I would like to ask how many sections are under your State Department.

Jenkins: In the State Department we have several bureaus. There must be six geographical bureaus in the world.

Hsiung: Bureaus?

Jenkins: Yes.

Hsiung: And secretaries?

Jenkins: There's a secretary, an under secretary, an under secretary for political affairs.

Hsiung:

Jenkins: That's right. Then Assistant Secretaries who head bureaus. There are six geographic bureaus.

Hsiung: Would the assistant secretary also be the head of the geographic bureau?

Jenkins: That is correct. Also several functional bureaus at the same level as geographic bureaus. For instance, the Bureau of Economic Affairs, the Bureau of International Organizational Affairs which handles U.S. affairs …

Hsiung: Cultural affairs?

Jenkins: Bureau of Cultural Affairs.

Hsiung: How many bureaus are there altogether?

Jenkins: I would guess ten, maybe twelve, but I would say ten.

Holdridge: We would have to count up.

Jenkins: Approximately ten.

Hsiung: Including the functional bureaus?

Jenkins: Yes.

Hsiung: Six geographic bureaus?

Jenkins: Yes.

Hsiung: Which bureau are you in?

Jenkins: East Asia and Pacific Affairs.

Hsiung: How many areas are included?

Jenkins: From Japan all the way down through Indochina, Southeast Asia, China through Burma. It stops there.

Hsiung: Australia?

Jenkins: Yes, Australia and New Zealand. (Lists countries)

Hsiung: East Asia and Pacific Affairs?

Jenkins: That's right.

Hsiung: There is such a bureau called Asia and Communist Affairs?

Holdridge: Not a bureau.

Jenkins: Not a bureau, it's an office. I have 11 people in my office.

Hsiung: And a desk in the office?

Jenkins: There are several officers within one office. It varies. Some officers are large; some are smaller in number of personnel. An office includes several offices.

Hsiung: That means for instance if you want to contact an Asian country aside from regional bureaus you make contacts through the cultural bureau if it is in cultural affairs and contact the economic affairs bureau if it is in economic affairs. Is this world wide?

Jenkins: Yes, but the normal point of contact for official representatives in Washington would be the geographical bureau usually. The geographical bureau then works closely with those functional bureaus.

Hisung: I am not very familiar with this. That is why I asked. Which bureau is in charge of issuing visas? Is there a special bureau in charge of it?

Jenkins: I don't think it's called a bureau; it's an office.

Holdridge: Security and consular affairs.

Jenkins: And in that is the passport office and the visa office. I do have one other topic I would like briefly to mention before the break if that is agreeable, and Dr. Kissinger said if we finished here before the other meeting has finished he would be glad if Mr. Holdridge and I joined them in the other meeting, and we want to know if that's agreeable.

Hsiung: We can do it according to Dr. Kissinger's wish.

Jenkins: Thank you.

Hsiuing: When shall we stop?

Jenkins: Whenever we have finished what we need to do. It's not specific.

Hsiung: If that's the case then we can take some refreshments.

Jenkins: I mentioned very briefly at our previous meeting the subject of trade. I don't know to what extent you want to discuss that subject now. We are prepared to discuss it if you wish. I would like to mention one matter which Dr. Kissinger has asked me to say and that is that we are prepared to enlarge our general list of trade items to the limit of our present laws before the President's visit to China and we are prepared to do that without any conditions.

Hsiung: Personally, I am not interested in this question. This morning on the way back from the Ming Tombs as our Acting Foreign Minister was preoccupied with some other work, he said goodbye to Dr. Kissinger early so I was in the same car with Dr. Kissinger and he also mentioned that the withdrawal of the Soviet exports greatly affected China. I said that we are most grateful to Khrushchev. Because in acting that way he had enabled us to carry out Chairman Mao's policy of self-reliance even more rapidly. But first of all, we must give thanks to the United States policy of embargo. First _______ it was the United States who imposed embargo on China and then it was Khrushchev who removed Soviet exports and _________ the agreements, and it was a good thing because we don't care for such things. In this way we have developed even more rapidly.

Jenkins: We certainly respect self-reliance, and we understand your feelings on that score. We feel that even though the United States too is able to be self-reliant, we would profit too from mutual trade with others quite apart from the ability to be self-reliant. And we feel this area also leads to increased understanding between peoples, and to the further inhancing of their economic status and the livelihood of their people. But we fully understand your justifiable pride in self-reliance and we respect that attitude.

Hsiung: While saying self-reliant, we also have trade relations with many countries on the basis of ______ and mutual benefit and supplying each other what it needs. But as for Sino-U.S. trade, at present conditions are not yet right. That is my opinion; that is why I am not interested in this question.

Jenkins: We will not press it. I had mentioned it as another possible area to supplement exchanges we have spoken of and I would like to say again that we consider whatever you are ready to discuss in these areas as contributing to making movement possible in the fundamental issues. We would not want to use these terms “subsidiary” questions as any diversion from facing the fundamental questions, but it makes it easier for us to approach normalization of relations if we can show our detractors from our present policy that tangible progress is possible without conditions attached to it.

Hsiung: But the normalization of the Sino-American relations is conditional.

Jenkins: Would Mr. Hsiung enlarge on that comment?

Hsiung: That means the normalization of relations between the countries cannot be carried out without conditions.

Jenkins: I understand what you mean, and our principals are talking about the fundamental issues.

Hsiung: That is why before the normalization of relations between the two countries is realized many matters have to be handled in the circumstances when our relations have not yet been normalized.

Jenkins: We understand that.

Hsiung: Out of courteous reasons we are ready to listen to whatever ideas you would like to put forward, but as to the question of trade, I am not interested. But you can put forward your ideas.

Jenkins: Of course it makes it difficult to express any specific proposals if we are told there is no interest. I would not like to press this matter.

Hsiung: What I mean is if you have any ideas you can put them forward and if not then it is not necessary for you to speak.

Jenkins: We could offer ideas if there were interest expressed in them but I am not sure it would be fruitful if there is no interest in the subject.

Hsiung: It is not necessary that everything will be fruitful. We can exchange views and exchange our ideas. I am willing to listen.

Jenkins: I think perhaps we can address this letter.

Hsiung: We will break now then.

Jenkins: (To Holdridge) Break or end?

Holdridge: If Mr. Hsiung has nothing further to bring up, we don't either.

Hsiung: You are going to join in the other talks? He is going to contact them.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. An unknown hand crossed out a portion of the date on the memorandum, changing the year from 1972 to 1971. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People.

44. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 22, 1971, 4:15-8:28 p.m. 44. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 22, 1971, 4:15-8:28 p.m.1

Beijing, October 22, 1971, 4:15-8:28 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Chou En-lai, People's Republic of China

Chi P'eng-fei, Acting PRC Foreign Minister

Chang Wen-chin, Director, Western Europe and American Department, PRC Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Hsuing Hsiang-hui, Secretary to the Prime Minister (after 6:00 p.m. )

Wang Hai-jung, Deputy Chief of Protocol, PRC

Tang Wen-sheng and Chi Chao-chu, Chinese Interpreters Chinese Notetakers

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, Senior Staff Member,NSC

John Holdridge, Senior Staff Member, NSC (after 6:00 p.m. )

Alfred Jenkins, State Department (after 6:00 p.m.)

PLACE: Great Hall of the People, Peking

DATE & TIME: October 22, 1971, 4:15 - 8:28 p.m.

GENERAL SUBJECTS:

Korea, Japan, South Asia, Soviet Union, Arms Control

PM Chou: There are even fewer members on your team.

Dr. Kissinger: I am afraid you will want agreement by vote.

PM Chou: That will never happen. We want agreement by consultations. I was afraid that the wind was too great at the Great Wall today.

Dr. Kissinger: It was very impressive.

PM Chou: Did mademoiselle go?

Matthews: Yes.

PM Chou: Did you catch cold?

Matthews: No, they had given us big coats.

PM Chou: The lady yesterday [Miss Pineau]had a runny nose. Now that it's getting later it is getting very cool.

Dr. Kissinger: At the Ming tombs it was very warm.

PM Chou: Did you climb to the top? How far?

Dr. Kissinger: The Foreign Minister would not let me go the whole way.

PM Chou: Too windy. Did you take some pictures?

Dr. Kissinger: I didn't have a camera, but I hope for some of your pictures.

PM Chou: No question about that. So, shall we begin now?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: We hope we will be able to reach a certain stage in our political discussions today. I think the main issues that remain to be discussed are Korea, Japan, and the issue of the subcontinent of Asia. I have heard that your preference is to speak about the questions of relations between the U.S. and Soviet Union, or the Soviet Union, at a more general meeting and we agree and think it will be all right.

Dr. Kissinger: My preference is to discuss the Soviet Union at a more restricted meeting while Japan and Korea I don't mind discussing at a more general meeting.

PM Chou: Then I was misinformed.

Dr. Kissinger: I expressed myself with my usual lack of clarity. (laughter) At Harvard complicated sentences are considered profound. (laughter)

PM Chou: British style, isn't it? Is Harvard more like Oxford or Cambridge? In comparison with Yale.

Dr. Kissinger: I would not admit, Mr. Prime Minister, that you can compare Harvard and Yale. (laughter)

PM Chou: That's a quarrel between you two [indicating Mr. Lord]. We have only one from our side from Harvard. No one else has studied in the United States. He is outnumbered so don't mistreat that one [again indicating Mr. Lord].

Dr. Kissinger: Harvard concentrates more on social sciences so it's not fair to compare. It is probably more similar to Oxford than Cambridge.

PM Chou: We have a piece of news that a U.S. electronic reconnaissance plane is often carrying out reconnaissance over Laos and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. It is high altitude, 30,000 meters, a high altitude reconnaissance plane that takes pictures electronically.

In the past there have been planes of this kind that have passed through the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and passed into Chinese air space—a few kilometers into it and back into Vietnam. Our orders are that any military airplane that intrudes into China air space should be fired at. Our radar today found that there were such planes which had gone from Laos into the northern part of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam in an area quite close to Chinese borders.

So as we have received news of this event today we would like to give it to you for your attention, and it would not be good with either side if such a thing occurs during your visit here. So I have ordered them that if there's a bit of an intrusion on a very small scale that we should be informed first. We hope that you will also notify your side so that nothing will occur.

Dr. Kissinger: I appreciate your frankness. I will get a message off as soon as I get back to the guest house, calling the attention of Washington to this conversation. I can assure you that no ambiguous event will occur after that message is received.

I would also like to tell the Prime Minister that after my return in July we reviewed those intelligence activities and did away with those that could be construed as having a provocative character. We will review them again, but there are no overflights of the People's Republic of China authorized. If any should occur, which I do not believe,but if they should, it will be an unauthorized action with which we will deal severely. We would appreciate—we, of course, understand you will take action if there's an overflight. If for any reason you do not and let us know the details—the time and place and altitude or type of plane—we will take appropriate action. I have enough about this; I don't need more detail on this. If there should be any others, they are not authorized, but should they occur let us know through our channel and we will take immediate action.

PM Chou: And we will inform you of such things if there is time. For instance, you are here now but if there's no time —

Dr. Kissinger: I understand. You reserve the right to take action if there's a flight over China, but if you will tell us if it occurs, we will prevent it's reoccurrence. In any event, I will look into this question again after I return and make sure there's no such action. It has already been prohibited, but you can never be sure about every commander.

PM Chou: The area in which such instances happen most is Hainan Island, Kwantung province and the Chinese-Vietnam and Chinese-Laos borders.

Dr. Kissinger: They are all SR-1 high altitude planes.

PM Chou: That is today, because they came very near to our border. We ordered that it should be followed but no action taken immediately.

Dr. Kissinger: I will get a message off when I return to the guest house, and when I return I will again review the whole situation. It's not our policy to have intrusion over Chinese air space.

PM Chou: I would like to say something on the Korean situation. Perhaps in your preparations you did not take so much attention to this issue, but to us this is an issue that has not yet been settled and it's now an issue where a new crisis may now arise. The reason is that though a ceasefire has been reached in the Korean war, no new treaty has ever been concluded or no new arrangement. I have already mentioned the situation of the 1954 Geneva Conference. During that conference we made attempts to settle this issue but no results whatsoever were reached. And now in Panmunjom there is a meeting of the two sides of the armistice, and there is also a stretch of the demilitarized area in the zone. There is also a four country group composed on the northern Korean side by Poland and Czechoslovakia, and Switzerland and Sweden on the side of the United States. Taking part in the meetings on the southern side is the U.S. representative as chief, with the South Korean as his deputy. On the northern side the Korean representative is the main representative and the Chinese representative is his deputy. This is a treaty that has not yet reached a status of peace. This is an unstable state of affairs and often there are incursions into one's territory and other conflicts.

Also every year when the UN meets it also discusses the Korean Question. When those discussions are heard the committee is partial. It doesn't allow the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to be represented. Of course, China is not there because China is not a member. There is such a commission in the UN, the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea.

Dr. Kissinger: I know what the Prime Minister is talking about.

PM Chou: The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has requested to participate in the discussion in the United Nations and was not allowed to do so, but was only invited to do so with conditions attached. It's only this year that meetings have been held between South and North Korea to deal with correspondence and visiting between families in North and South Korea. It was held between the Red Cross representatives at Panmunjom.

Dr. Kissinger: I think our discussions in July helped on this matter.

PM Chou: Perhaps, because it was proposed by the South Korean Red Cross. As a result the Democratic People's Republic of Korea immediately responded to this proposal. Initial meetings were held altogether five times. And then they held preparatory meetings five times up to your arrival. Altogether ten meetings. They reached an agreement that the two sides first meet in Panmunjom and then alternately in Pyongyang and Seoul, the two capitals. Agreement was only reached on the place where the meetings should be held, not on another matter. It will probably be a marathon meeting. This has almost become a law of the meetings. These meetings are a step forward from the previous state of affairs. And then it was proposed by the UN, I believe by the U.S., that discussions should not be held this year but postponed to next year. But the Korean question still exists both on the agenda of the UN and in reality.

Our stand is that the United States military forces should withdraw from Korea because Chinese forces have been gone from North Korea since 1958, as I said before. Of course, the United States has taken out more than one-third of its forces. Of 60,000 it's withdrawn over 20 000. Of course you paid a certain price because Park Chung-hee had very high demands. There is also the question of what we discussed last time, the mixed troops of Park Chung-hee and the U.S. You said last time they were set up to train South Korean troops to engage in combat on their own.

A more serious fact is that in 1965 the Park Chung-hee government had already concluded a treaty with the Japanese Government. The Japanese Government doesn't recognize the sovereignty of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and therefore it's a great possibility that the Japanese militarists may plan to replace the American troops and officers with the troops and officers of Japan. And according to our information from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea there have indeed been officers of self-defense troops in Korea in plainclothes to investigate the work, including engineering work, of the South Korean troops; they have also assisted them. The Japanese militarists take Korea and Taiwan as a springboard for their expansion and this is well known to the world. We are both guarding against Japanese troops replacing U. S. military forces on Taiwan and also the Japanese forces replacing U. S. forces in South Korea. If you are to increase the military strength of the South Korean troops to an even greater extent and more armed conflict should appear after you withdraw, this will greatly affect the relaxation of tensions in the Far East. This is quite similar to what Secretary Laird said when he visited South Korea. Our Korean friends are most tense about this question and this cannot but affect the Chinese Government and people.

In order to save time I would like to read to you the eight points of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea with regard to this matter. (Attached at Tab A is the full text. He reads the first point.)

Dr. Kissinger: When were the eight points published?

PM Chou: It wasn't published in this form.

Dr. Kissinger: You are transmitting them to us?

PM Chou: They are the points given to us by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

Dr. Kissinger: For us?

PM Chou: Yes. They also made their stand public in another form, and also on some domestic issues including the peaceful reunification of Korea. (He reads the additional seven points.)

Because we stand together with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, therefore we have the obligation to transmit these eight points to you. The Korean question is one of the questions related to easing tension in the Far East and should not be excluded. It's discussed every year in the UN and if not solved it will not benefit the easing of this whole situation.

Among the powder kegs with regard to the Far East are the following questions: one, Vietnam; two, Taiwan; three, Korea. Comparatively speaking, the question of Taiwan can be considered subsidiary to the other two questions because we are separated by an ocean. Chiang Kai-shek also advocates one China and therefore we do not go to Quemoy and Matsu, although we could, and Dulles one time advocated they withdraw from Quemoy and Matsu, but this plan did not materialize and now there is this present situation. Only a big country such as ours could afford to do so. How can you ask the Vietnamese to tolerate such a long split? And how can the Korean people tolerate for a long time a situation of non-unification in their country? And how are they to tolerate a non-equal position in the UN? So if China enters the UN, there will be even more issues. (laughter)

Dr. Kissinger: I did not think life would be easier when China enters the UN. I was under no such illusions. (laughter)

PM Chou: Because you are not in favor of China entering the UN.

Dr. Kissinger: The Prime Minister knows our views. We believe in the entering of China into the United Nations, and it's a question of timing for this year.

PM Chou: The main issue is whether the tension in the Far East should be relaxed or should be intensified. That's the question. Why is it more easy for us to discuss the Taiwan question? Isn't it strange? Perhaps you don't feel it's strange.

Dr. Kissinger: Are you finished? Let me reply with the frankness with which I always speak to you, Mr. Prime Minister. As the Prime Minister knows, I am personally, the President is personally, dedicated to the betterment of relations between the peoples of the United States and the People's Republic of China and to the easing of tensions in East Asia. At the same time if the easing of tensions is associated with a whole series of demands about what the United States must do then it takes on the character of a series of unilateral propositions.

We are prepared to discuss in the spirit with which we have discussed the Taiwan problem in order to find a just basis for a long-term relationship. But it's difficult for us to accept pieces of paper or documents in which every other sentence says the United States must, the United States must, the United States must. This is not a basis for anyone to deal with us. Of course, the People's Republic has never done that. I respect the Prime Minister for standing by his friends, and we have expected nothing else. But I would like to repeat what I said yesterday, that it would greatly speed up the solution of outstanding problems if some of China's friends could learn from China some of the largeness of spirit that has governed our negotiations.

We discussed yesterday the problem of Vietnam and unless the Prime Minister has any additional points or questions, I will not return to it. But that is a problem that is on its way to a solution. The only issue is the speed with which it will be achieved.

PM Chou: We were discussing Vietnam only yesterday. We did not mention the matters of Cambodia and Laos. We only touched upon the matter of Cambodia in passing and did not go into the subject, and it's a matter of the sovereignty of Cambodia.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand but I will leave that aside for the time being unless the Prime Minister wants to discuss these. I will return to Korea, with his agreement. (Chou nods)

We cannot discuss on the basis of a document which says our ally is a puppet government, and other objectionable phrases in this document which I will not enumerate. But let me leave the form and turn to the substance. It's true that I had not thought in detail about the problem of Korea prior to the Prime Minister's conversation with me in July. It is also true that the contacts that have begun have not been uninfluenced by our conversations. But, of course, it is extremely difficult for us to advise our friends to go further towards a government that calls them a puppet. So if the two Koreas are to talk with each other they must do so on a basis of equality.

PM Chou: Then the first thing is that the UN must treat them equally.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand your point and that can be an ultimate objective. Let's leave out the word “ultimate.”

PM Chou: For instance, the two Red Cross Societies meeting recently were on an equal basis. Neither called the other a puppet Red Cross Society. That proves there is progress.

Dr. Kissinger: I was referring to this document.

PM Chou: The wording is easy to revise but that doesn't change the substance.

Dr. Kissinger: Let me talk about the substance. Our attitude towards the Democratic People's Republic of Korea… I would like to tell the Prime Minister something with which he may not be familiar. We received a communication from them early this year. I don't remember the date. I will let you know. I think it was January. It was through the Romanian Vice President who was travelling in this part of the world. And we returned a very conciliatory reply which has never been answered. We are not complaining about this. We are simply pointing out our attitude is not intrinsically hostile. This is an exchange about which Mr. Jenkins and his colleagues have not been informed. So you were wise to move Korea after all into a restricted session.

Let me turn to the substance. I am a great believer in setting an objective first and then working out the details in relationship to that objective. If our objective is a more permanent legal basis for the existing situation in Korea, we are prepared to discuss with you how to bring this about. We are not interested in having a legal basis that makes it possible to reopen hostilities. If your objective is to bring about a reduction of American forces in Korea, I have already told you last time, without making this an international undertaking, this is our policy in any event.

PM Chou: I would like to add a word. That is if your ultimate aim is to withdraw U.S. troops in South Korea, is it also your aim to replace them with Japanese troops? It's not so, is it?

Dr. Kissinger: The Prime Minister is always one step ahead of me. I had a rhetorical flourish for that point. (laughter) It's not our objective to replace with Japanese self-defense forces and indeed the same general principle I mentioned yesterday about sending Japanese self-defense forces to Taiwan would apply to sending them to Korea. The United States is opposed to the military expansion of Japan.

PM Chou: We attach great importance to that statement.

Dr. Kissinger: In this connection I would like to tell the Prime Minister that after our discussion in July I looked into the problem of Japanese officers visiting Korea, and I regret to say that he was right on some points. I have a list of Japanese officers who have visited Korea this year. And we are keeping an eye on that situation. I was not aware of that when we first met. (Chou nods)

I must also tell the Prime Minister in candor that what we can do depends importantly on where we think we are going. If the objective is to bring about stability on the Korean peninsula, to avert the danger of war, and to lessen the expansion of other powers into that area, then I think Chinese and American interests could be quite parallel. But if the objective is to undermine the existing government in South Korea and make it easier for the North Koreans to attack South Korea or to bring pressure on South Korea, then, of course, a different situation exists. So we have no problem about cooperating with you in bringing about a more permanent legal status for the Korean Peninsula, and while it's a delicate matter on how to do it I believe we can reach an understanding on that point, but you also must keep in mind the concerns that I have expressed.

PM Chou: But since the situation and the atmosphere in the United Nations is such, and the UN takes such a position of opposition against the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, then the Democratic People's Republic of Korea cannot but think of its own self-defense. And it cannot but be uneasy about the situation in South Korea because South Korea can at any time expand out of its boundaries.

Dr. Kissinger: I can assure the Prime Minister that while the United States forces are in South Korea we are not cooperating with any attempt by South Korea to cross the existing demarcation line.

I will also tell the Prime Minister that we have started a study in our government on the subject of UNCURK. I am not in a position to tell you about it, but we have tried to take into account what we know to be your views. But if you are concerned with the problem of equality I think we can have meaningful discussions. If the attempt is to elaborate a new basis for a legal equality in the opposite direction, then of course it is not possible for us. But we recognize that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is a fact.

PM Chou: Could these three points just now mentioned by you, are they to be affirmed—that is, at a time when U. S. troops are in South Korea, at a time before they have withdrawn or at a time when they are about to withdraw, you will not allow Japanese forces to enter?

Dr. Kissinger: That's correct.

PM Chou: The second point is that the United States will finally withdraw their troops from South Korea and before that you will not allow South Korean troops to go across the demarcation line for aggression.

Dr. Kissinger: Let me be precise. Our present plan, which is not public and therefore it will be treated as a confidential communication, our present plan is to withdraw a substantial precentage of our forces from South Korea in the next years. If the tensions in the Far East continue to diminish, the number of forces in Korea can be expected to be very small. But in any event I can assure the Prime Minister that in the conditions that he described and in any other foreseeable conditions we will do our utmost to prevent the expansion of South Korean military forces across the existing lines, and we do not believe it's possible if we oppose it. We do not believe that the United States Treaty with Korea covers the question of South Korean aggression against its neighbors.

PM Chou: The third point is as you just now said, that on the part of the United States it would recognize internationally, including in the UN, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea as a lawful entity on your part, that is, the situation like one that exists in the UN cannot continue.

Dr. Kissinger: This is a complicated process. We can accept this as an objective but not as an immediate policy, and provided the Republic of Korea is also recognized.

PM Chou: Is there also a representative of them in UNCURK?

Dr. Kissinger: Is there a representative of South Korea in UNCURK? I believe so. I will check.

PM Chou: I remember there is.

Dr. Kissinger: There is. There clearly is.

PM Chou: These points were put forward by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the points handed over to you.

Dr. Kissinger: I don't like the grammar. And I don't like the adjectives either.

PM Chou: The grammar can be changed. We can do that. The translators can do it for you.

Dr. Kissinger: How about adjectives like “puppet government?”

PM Chou: I think that can be changed. They don't call each other the puppet Red Cross Society.

Dr. Kissinger: What is the question the Prime Minister is asking me about these 8 points? PM Chou: We are telling you of the stand of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The stand is not the nature of adjectives or grammar. You can see from it that their stand is that they desire lawful status in the international arena. And because they do not have such a legal status they are, of course, indignant and such a feeling is bound to be in the wording.

Dr. Kissinger: Leaving aside the 8 points, some of which are irrelevant to the problem—I don't believe we have to discuss with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea the problems of Taiwan and Indochina or if we deal with the three points the Prime Minister puts forward, I believe that the United States and the People's Republic of China can pursue a parallel course. We would like a recognized peaceful status in the Korean peninsula. We will not support the expansion of Japanese military forces into Korea. We will not support Japanese expansion there or anywhere else. We will not support South Korean expansionism. We believe that if the two states now existing in Korea are prepared to deal with each other on an equal basis peace can be brought to the Korean Peninsula and that is why we encouraged the contacts of the Red Cross after my conversation with you.

PM Chou: I do not like to use the term “the two states in Korea,” because that would be equal to saying that Korea will be permanently divided into two, regardless whether the Korean people should wish for unification and should be able to do so peacefully.

Dr. Kissinger: [reaching for a folder]I am even using a red folder in Peking.

PM Chou: But mine isn't red.

Dr. Kissinger: We are having a bad influence on one another. You prefer what phrase?

PM Chou: One objection is the UNCURK in the UN.

Dr. Kissinger: I have told the Prime Minister we are studying this program, and I will give him some tentative conclusions through our channel before the President's visit, or at the latest when the President is here. We recognize this problem, and I will be a bad negotiator and admit that there is merit in the criticism in what has been said to us. PM Chou: The second question is why should the Democratic People's Republic of Korea be blocked from attending the meetings of that commission by conditions attached to the invitation?

Dr. Kissinger: This is part of the general problem.

PM Chou: Because if the Korean question is to be discussed, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea should be allowed, as one party in the matter, to attend without conditions.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand.

PM Chou: As to how the final peaceful unification of the Korean issue should be finally reached we have not studied further, but it should be unified because it is a peninsula of only 40 million people. This issue has remained there for 17 years now. Of course, we need some time to find a way out.

Dr. Kissinger: If we can agree on the objective as we described, then I believe the point the Prime Minister raised about participation of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in UNCURK has a great deal of merit.

(The Jenkins/Holdridge meeting is reported to have broken up and Jenkins relays the message that it was his understanding that they should join Dr. Kissinger and the Prime Minister. Dr. Kissinger says he would like it, if the Prime Minister agrees. The Prime Minister says that is fine, but that he would like first to finish this part of the discussion.)

Dr. Kissinger: What other subjects were you going to suggest?

PM Chou: Japan and the subcontinent.

Dr. Kissinger: Let's have them in.

PM Chou: After we have finished this we will ask them in. We will have them rest awhile. Mr. Hsuing will accompany them.

Dr. Kissinger: Certainly.

PM Chou: Our stand is that it's not for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to be a member of the Commission—that is impossible because they are not a member of the United Nations—but that UNCURK should be abolished.

Dr. Kissinger: We are looking into that question.

PM Chou: On the other hand our stand is that when the question of Korea is discussed in the UN they should have the right to participate. We think the position is reasonable. But if we were in their place, that is if it were in regard to China, we should not have such a request. But we are not them. They are a peninsula, and China is a big country, and we can do without the United Nations if it doesn't come for us. So on this matter we can take two different positions, but because we are their friend we should represent their view on this matter.

Dr. Kissinger: How does the Prime Minister think we should handle the Korean question between our two countries?

PM Chou: Don't you say the time is not ripe for this? If you are interested, we will put forward our views for exchange.

Dr. Kissinger: The time is not right. Are you content to leave the issue at this exchange or would you like a continuing discussion?

PM Chou: We don't want to end it here. It is an issue and opinions should be exchanged.

Dr. Kissinger: Do I understand that on general objectives there is some agreement even though we differ about specific methods?

PM Chou: Not only the specific methods, but we haven't gone into the whole of the problem, for instance, how to help to bring about the peaceful reunification of Korea. We haven't exchanged methods on that either. What we are agreed on is only that ultimately the United States' forces should be withdrawn from South Korea. As for when that should be done, that is your question and also a question worth an exchange of views between our two sides.

Dr. Kissinger: Also it's my belief that the two parties on the peninsula should work as equals and neither has the exclusive right to unify the country.

PM Chou: It's only the Korean people that have the right to reunify their country, and neither party can call itself the representative of the whole Korean people. The immediate question is that the United States has no intention to let the Japanese self-defense troops replace it in South Korea. That's wha you just now said.

Dr. Kissinger: In the context of all other statements that is quite correct. But if military pressure should start from the north, then one cannot be sure of the consequences.

PM Chou: You mean if the north attacks the south?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: If that should occur, it will be prepared to undertake even greater burdens.

Dr. Kissinger: The north?

PM Chou: The north. Of course, we will not make provocations for foreign forces, but we must also be prepared for outside forces to attack us from all directions.

Dr. Kissinger: Under the conditions we described, if the north does not plan to expand into the south, and the south does not plan to expand into the north, which we believe, then we will oppose the movement of Japanese self-defense forces into Korea.

PM Chou: All these issues are mutual.

Dr. Kissinger: Exactly.

PM Chou: There is only one point we did not discuss. That is how the peaceful reunification of Korea will be brought about. We can discuss this later.

Dr. Kissinger: We have no concrete idea now.

PM Chou: It has been delayed for 18 years. The Vietnam issue was delayed for 17 years. But the Chinese question was delayed for 22 years, and it didn't matter, but our two countries should sympathize with the two smaller countries. Don't you think so?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. I think we should both use our influence with our friends to keep them from military adventures.

PM Chou: Didn't you propose the meetings of the Red Cross Societies? Maybe that is a good way. But now they are also being dragged out with no conclusion. So the era of negotiations can also be an era of dragging out things.

Dr. Kissinger: Except between us.

PM Chou: That should not be any more. If they continue to drag on, they will not be solved.

Dr. Kissinger: That's not our position.

PM Chou: But we tolerate your dragging out, because you have not taken action in Taiwan.

Dr. Kissinger: We have taken some action.

PM Chou: We can tolerate that, but other nations wouldn't. Can you find others? I don't think so. Including the states of Latin America.

Dr. Kissinger: The states of Latin America are not known for their patience. Mr. Prime Minister, I think you have approached the problem of our relationship with great wisdom and I have said so often in the United States.

PM Chou: The great wisdom is represented by Chairman Mao-Tsetung and it is a summary of his experience in past struggles. He doesn't agree that this is foresight.

Dr. Kissinger: It has also not been easy for us. It has also been a major change in our policy, and the Prime Minister pointed that out to Mr. Reston—to his displeasure.

PM Chou: He doesn't understand that, and there was nothing I could do about it.

Dr. Kissinger: Before Mr. Jenkins and Mr. Holdridge join us, there is one subject I want to mention. If the vote for Secretary General should come up before you have joined the UN, and if there is a candidate who is objectionable to you and you let us know, we will take it very seriously into account.

PM Chou: We have not studied that problem.

Dr. Kissinger: There is no need to reply now.

PM Chou: We have absolutely no knowledge of such things, to speak honestly. There have been a number of countries who are telling us whom they will propose for the Secretary General.

Dr. Kissinger: I know the candidates, but I didn't know if there were some to whom you violently objected.

PM Chou: It wouldn't do to let Sygman Rhee be Secretary General.

Dr. Kissinger: No South Korean. That is what I learned in the previous session.

PM Chou: Or South Vietnamese. I don't think it would be all right for you to put it forward either because if you put it forward it would be impossible for you to continue your negotiations. Similarly, it would be bad for you to put forward Sirik Matak.

Dr. Kissinger: But among the serious candidates, like the man from Finland and the man from Ceylon. Perhaps the Prime Minister wants to think about this or not respond at all.

PM Chou: The best thing would be not to reply.

Dr. Kissinger: All right.

PM Chou: Anyway, I should say that it would be very unseemly to nominate anyone from South Korea, Cambodia, or South Vietnam. I do not think it would be suitable to nominate a Japanese either.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand. A neutral person.

PM Chou: Relatively neutral. Mr. Hammarskjold did something. It's a pity he has passed away.

Dr. Kissinger: A very complicated man.

PM Chou: But how can one deal with things in the United Nations if they are not complicated?

Dr. Kissinger: One has to be very complicated or very simple.

PM Chou: There is something I would like to ask you. You mentioned the Soviet Union should be discussed at a restricted meeting.

Dr. Kissinger: It is not essential. If there is a point, I will leave it out and tell someone from Protocol, and we will discuss it for a half hour sometime.

(Break, 5:55 p.m. - 6:05 p.m. Messrs Jenkins, Holdridge and Hsuing join the meeting.)

PM Chou: After the meeting I will let them give you a paper on the activities of your reconnaissance planes on our border and also along our coastal areas. Let us have some discussion on Japan. What are your views on Japan now?

Dr. Kissinger: Why doesn't the Prime Minister, who has thought so much about the problem, begin with his concerns and perhaps I should respond to him.

PM Chou: At the present level of the economic development of Japan, it is difficult for her to put brakes on that. And so inevitably that gives rise to contradictions overseas, like some large groups of developed and also developing countries. For instance, there was a question of a big country when President Nixon announced the new economic policy that affected the economic development of Japan. On this it appears you are finding a way to solve these problems, but nevertheless they exist and are increasing. That's one aspect of the question.

Also, there is the question of contradictions with the developing countries. And so the question arises as to whether the help to developing countries will help them or on the contrary, deepen their colonization of these countries. According to the press, present Japanese policy is to deepen their colonization of these countries. And then there is another aspect of this question. That is another big power wonders whether to bring in Japanese investors to help bring in raw material and help it develop some of its markets.

Dr. Kissinger: You mean your northern neighbor?

PM Chou: That's right. And so the negotiations are continuing with them, and so the future of Japan is in flux. As for us, we always hope that Japan, which has come through two World Wars and particularly after the lessons of the Second World War, would take the road of peace and neutrality. But that is merely our hope, and it is probably the hope of a substantial number of the Japanese people.

But if the Japanese government continues its policy of capitalistic competition, it is bound sooner or later to give rise to trouble. Because if one wants to develop, one should allow others to develop. So if their present policies in economic development are not changed, then the economic expansion will bring military expansion even if they use the name of self-defense. You are an expert in this field and also your colleague, Mr. Reischauer, saw this.

Dr. Kissinger: Although he is very critical of us now. (laughter)

PM Chou: He is using a different tone than yours.

Dr. Kissinger: He thinks we are losing Japanese friendship by my visit here in July.

PM Chou: That's not necessarily the case. It depends on how one interprets friendship. If the purpose is to provoke a Third World War, then it is development in another direction. But if the aim is to relax the tension in the Far East, then we should consider the issue of Japan. After the conclusion of the Second World War, although Japan had committed aggression against China for over 50 years, we have not adopted a policy of revenge. On the contrary, we adopted a policy of peace and friendship towards Japan, but for that one must have mutual respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity, nonaggression, non-interference, equality, and mutual benefit and peaceful coexistence. Even so can there be peace and friendship between our two countries. And this view is held among the broad masses of Japanese people as well as the politicians of Japan.

But the Japanese authorities are often encouraged by some other quarters to be more aggressive. That is because Japan was benefitted after the Second World War. It did not have to pay compensation, and it made war profits off of wars in other lands. And during the past 25 years and more it need not spend much on its own national defense.

The situation now is different. Its feathers have grown on its wings and it is about to take off. So with the development of the economy it is bound to spend more for defense in its Fourth Defense Plan, which I mentioned to you the last time. Once Japan does take the road of military expansion, it is hard to say now to what degree it will develop.

And so if we want to relax tension in the Far East we should explain views frankly on this question. We do not want to be hostile with Japan. We want peace and friendship. We are not without ground in saying this. Because not only China is not the China of the 30s or 40s; nor is Japan the Japan of the 30s or 40s, and great changes have taken place among the Japanese people. So if in dealing with this matter, if the expansionist policies of the Japanese government can be repudiated and a policy of peace encouraged, then this state of affairs can be improved. As for their own problems, their ultimate settlement must be brought about by them.

Dr. Kissinger: What does the Prime Minister mean by a policy of “peace and friendship?”

PM Chou: Well, that would entail not recognizing the Taiwan authorities but recognizing only the People's Republic of China; of giving up all ambitions against Taiwan and Korea as two wings of outward expansion; and respecting the independence and territorial integrity of the People's Republic of China. We are very clear about history. It is very interesting when we look at those politicians and statesmen who have come here that were former foreign ministers and prime ministers.

Dr. Kissinger: They overwhelm one with emissaries. PM Chou: Also you too?

Dr. Kissinger: I receive so many emissaries from Japan I don't know who speaks for whom.

PM Chou: You too have that experience.

Dr. Kissinger: And they have one common quality. They speak with Japanese press when they return. Is that your experience?

PM Chou: Yes, over 20 years and more. They have never stopped. (laughter) So we would like to hear your views with regard to Japan.

Dr. Kissinger: Mr. Prime Minister, I will give you our frank assessment. There is not a total unanimity of view in our government, but let me give you the White House view which over a period of time tends to dominate. If I can begin, according to my habit, with a philosophical point. If I can contrast China with Japan as a society, China by tradition has a universal outlook but Japan has had a tribal outlook.

PM Chou: They are more narrow. It is also quite strange. They are an island mass. Britain too is an island mass.

Dr. Kissinger: They are different because Japan believes that their society is so different that they can adjust to anything and preserve their national essence. Therefore, the Japanese are capable of sudden and explosive changes. They went from feudalism to emperor worship in two to three years. They went from emperor worship to democracy in three months.

PM Chou: Now they are going to again revert to emperor worship.

Dr. Kissinger: It depends on how they assess the balance of power in the world.

PM Chou: Have you seen the Emperor?

Dr. Kissinger: In Alaska, yes. I explained it to your Foreign Minister this morning. (laughter)

PM Chou: Very complicated.

Dr. Kissinger: The Chief of Protocol had a nervous breakdown afterwards. Very complicated. Not a very profound conversation, Mr. Prime Minister. I am not revealing any secrets when I tell you that.

PM Chou: I understand.

Dr. Kissinger: The Japanese have no sensibility for the attitudes of other people because of this cultural concentration on themselves. I say this because this peculiarity of Japan imposes special responsibilities on all who have to deal with them. You as well as us. I believe, and I have always believed, that those Americans who thought that it was possible to keep building up Japan and then they would pursue a policy we preferred with greater resources were extremely naive.

I agree with the Prime Minister that economic development produces its own imperatives. And I agree in part with the Prime Minister that the Japanese method of economic development illustrates its tribal character because its method has the objective of tying countries to its policy. So I have no illusions about Japan.

On the other hand, I believe also that those countries which believe from another perspective that they can tie Japan to their policy by opposite methods will suffer the same disillusionment. For example—before I get to this—I think there is in the present situation a great temptation for everyone, especially for the People's Republic and also for the Soviet Union. Japan has been made uncertain in its orientation by our meeting in July. Therefore, I have noticed that the Soviet Union has made a special effort to try to move it in its direction. And the objective consequence of some of the moves of the People's Republic could be to attempt to move Japan in its direction. For example, The People's Daily, in an editorial of September 18, warned Japan that the United States could betray her at any moment. It is my frank opinion that such competition can only encourage Japan's nationalism. On the one hand, it will give an impetus to the forces that have supported the old policy, but in the long term it will lead to a Japan that attempts to play a balance of power politics in the Pacific.

It is from this point of view that I would like to comment about the Prime Minister's statement that he would like to see neutrality for Japan. It is hard to know what neutrality for the third largest industrialized nation, with 120 million people, can mean. In history there have been only two kinds of neutrality: those who have been guaranteed by other countries like Belgium, or those who declared themselves neutral and protected themselves with their own strength, like Switzerland and Sweden. It is those countries which declare themselves neutral and protect themselves by their own military strength that always have large armies. Switzerland and Sweden have larger military forces for their size than any other country in Europe.

A Japan which defends itself with its own resources will be an objective danger to all countries around it because it will be so much more powerful. Therefore, I believe that its present relationship with the U.S. is actually a restraint on Japan. If we wanted to pursue a cynical policy, we would cut Japan loose and encourage it to stand on its own feet, because this would cause so much tension between Japan and China, and we could come between them. That would be very shortsighted. Either you or we would be the victim.

So it is important that we understand each other about Japan, and that we both show restraint vis-a-vis Japan. Those Americans who believe that Japan can be an obedient extension of American policy in the Pacific are naive. The Japanese have their own objectives, and they are made in Tokyo and not Washington. It is an illusion made by people for whom history started in 1945 who say it is the other way. But also it is dangerous for others to try to use Japan against the United States, because both these policies have a tendency to exalt Japan.

So let me repeat to you concretely what I have already said in other contexts about American policy. First, we are opposed to the nuclear rearmament of Japan, no matter what may be said by officials who have no authority to say these things. Besides, they have since maintained they have never said it.

Secondly, we are in favor of keeping the conventional rearmament of Japan to limits which are adequate for the defense of the four Japanese islands and for nothing else.

We will oppose the extension of Japanese military power to Taiwan, Korea, or elsewhere as I have pointed out to you in other meetings.

And we recognize that the problem of the economic development of Japan is one that concerns the whole world at this moment and not only Japan itself.

Those are our national principles, but to be effective I can only repeat that they require a restraint on all sides.

PM Chou: If you say you do not want a nuclear armed Japan, does that mean you would give Japan a nuclear protective umbrella because they can use that to threaten others?

Dr. Kissinger: They can? How?

PM Chou: Because they will feel they have as their allies a big power so that they can expand economically with their military forces following.

Dr. Kissinger: It is very difficult to talk about hypothetical situations, but in any military conflict which would be produced by an attempt by Japan to extend, I doubt very seriously that the nuclear umbrella would apply. The nuclear umbrella applies primarily to a nuclear attack on the Japanese islands. It stands to reason we are no more likely to use nuclear weapons for Japan than we are for ourselves; in fact, less likely. But the Japanese have the ability to produce nuclear weapons very quickly.

PM Chou: That's possible.

Dr. Kissinger: If we were to withdraw, their peaceful nuclear energy program gives them enough plutonium so they could easily build nuclear weapons. So the alternative is really a Japanese nuclear program which would be very much less desirable, and which we oppose.

PM Chou: Do you think you are capable of limiting the Japanese self-defense strength?

Dr. Kissinger: Mr. Prime Minister, I do not want to assert things of which I am not sure. The tendencies that he describes do exist in Japan. I believe that in our present relationship we have a better opportunity to limit the self-defense forces of Japan than if it can be claimed that Japan has been betrayed and therefore the nationalism reasserts itself. It makes no sense for the United States to have fought World War II to prevent the physical domination of Asia by Japan in order to encourage it 25 years later. It is my personal belief, because we have not addressed this question as a government, that as the Prime Minister suggests, if Japan should have a massive rearmament program, then the traditional relationship between China and the United States would reassert itself, and we would like to discuss very seriously the situation that would exist.

So to sum up, we will do our best to limit armament to defend the four islands, but failing that, we will do what we can with other countries to stop the physical expansion of Japan.

PM Chou: I could not quite understand this point, because at the present time another big power is trying to win over Japan and enable Japan's economy to have a bigger military. Therefore, why is it not good to put forward to the Japanese people that they should follow peace and neutrality?

Dr. Kissinger: Obviously, I do not mind Japan following a policy of peace. I believe that the objective result of what Japan will call neutrality will be heavily armed; it will be technically neutral but so was Japan before. Besides, that other power specializes in the shortsighted and hasn't brought off a big project in a long time. What have they to offer except petty irritation of their neighbors and of us?

PM Chou: Well, that power economically speaking may be able to satisfy some of the appetites of the Japanese, but not very big.

Dr. Kissinger: I don't think so.

PM Chou: Couldn't she even satisfy some of Japan's desires?

Dr. Kissinger: I frankly would doubt it. I think when they confront some of the Japanese economic methods they will pull back.

PM Chou: Maybe you know more about this than I do.

Dr. Kissinger: First of all, Japan would have to reorient its whole economic structure in order to do this on a large scale. And it would be extremely dangerous for the Soviet Union to whet Japan's appetites for Siberia.

PM Chou: That's true. That's what I mean. They would whet their appetite and that would take some time and also must risk something. And so the Japanese monopoly capitalists must consider something different.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. Both sides will play with it, but neither will be able to reorient themselves this completely, in my opinion.

PM Chou: That's right. Probably during a certain period of time, if the Soviet Union continues in this way, it will lose more. So under those circumstances why is it not good to encourage Japan to follow the plan of peace and neutrality? Because it shows no revenge, and every time we test nuclear missiles we say they will not be used for war, and so there is no reason for them to develop their appetites in this direction. I understand what you mean. Japan is a wild house without U.S. control, here, there and everywhere. Is it possible to control them with her economy to such an extent?

Dr. Kissinger: Not completely, but in military aspects, which concern you, there is more possibility than under your arrangements. As for the nuclear umbrella, we don't have to have a treaty with Japan to extend it. If we want to defend Japan in case of attack we can do it. In the nuclear age a country defends another not because of a treaty but because its national interest is at stake. So we don't need the treaty for ourselves. Japan is not doing much for us militarily. If we had aggressive designs in the Far East, we wouldn't need Japan. We wouldn't need our bases in Japan. We can do it elsewhere.

PM Chou: But that is not what Secretary Laird said in Japan. He was giving them encouragement.

Dr. Kissinger: Secretary Laird said he never made such statements, and he wouldn't tell a lie. (laughter) After my return to America, he officially said he never made such statements.

PM Chou: With regard to the question of Japan you have your view and we have ours. Let us see how it develops.

Dr. Kissinger: But we have certain parallel interests in Japan.

PM Chou: Yes, it would not be good to have a revival of Japanese militarism, but there is the question of Japan developing its economy to its present level. We cannot say that you haven't fattened Japan to its present extent.

Dr. Kissinger: It is essentially true. But now it's there, we must decide what to do about it on both sides of the Pacific. We cannot be fatuous optimists, and you also must look at the situation in the context of the present.

PM Chou: Japan had already been fed into such a fattened state and that was particularly emphasized by your President's speech on the 6th of July. That was a most realistic statement. The question now is that the broad masses of Japanese people demand the disbandment of bases on Japan. What do you think will be the role of these bases in Japan, including Okinawa?

Dr. Kissinger: Whenever the Japanese really want us to withdraw our forces from Japan, we will withdraw them. We are not doing this for ourselves primarily. But I don't think you should rejoice when that day happens, because some day you will regret it just as we today regret how we built up Japan economically.

PM Chou: That is two different matters. Because in withdrawing your forces that can only be done under an attitude of friendship to Japan and not hostility.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: You know you do not approve of the Soviet Union sending its forces into Czechoslovakia so how can you place forces on fcreign soil?

Dr. Kissinger: We did not send our forces into Japan. If the Japan government asks us to withdraw, we will of course do it. If Japan asks us to abrogate the defense treaty, then within one year we will withdraw them. They will not stay longer than they want. Japanese forces have nothing to do with America, but Soviet troops in Czechoslovakia are there to impose a government on the people of Czechoslovakia. So there is a complete difference.

PM Chou: In the past yours, too, was an occupation army but that was because of the war.

Dr. Kissinger: I told the Foreign Minister a joke about Czechoslovakia which he can tell you.

PM Chou: He didn't tell it to me. But the people of Okinawa don't look upon the situation in that manner because their administration is ruled by you.

Dr. Kissinger: Not after the reversion of Okinawa when it will be put on the same status as the Japanese islands.

PM Chou: [text not declassified]

Dr. Kissinger: [text not declassified]

PM Chou: [text not declassified]

Dr. Kissinger: [text not declassified]

PM Chou: [text not declassified]

Dr. Kissinger: [text not declassified]

PM Chou: [text not declassified]

Dr. Kissinger: [text not declassified]

PM Chou: So that is all about Japan this time, because we discussed it a lot last time. Anyway, you have fattened Japan a lot in these past years.

Dr. Kissinger: This is true.

PM Chou: Then about the South Asian subcontinent. There is a danger of a major crisis brewing out there. But it can be prevented. What is your view?

Dr. Kissinger: Our view is…

PM Chou: You know about the letter Kosygin sent to President Yahya? Dr. Kissinger: No, when?

PM Chou: October 7. Maybe you haven't learned about it yet.

Dr. Kissinger: All I know is that the Soviet Union claimed it urged restraint on both sides.

PM Chou: It was you who suggested both sides withdraw a further distance. Dr. Kissinger: As I told you.

PM Chou: Pakistan accepted, but it is not the method of the Soviet Union. But the Soviet Union is threatening Pakistan.

Dr. Kissinger: I have not seen the text of the letter.

PM Chou: We just learned about this recently. What is your estimate? You said on your arrival you thought there was danger.

Dr. Kissinger: My estimate is that at first the flood of refugees caused a problem for India. They had a reasonable complaint at the beginning that the flood of refugees would upset the balance in Bengal. Since then, and we have responded by making available—over half of all assistance given to the refugees in India comes from the United States—we have given nearly $300 million for the refugees.

PM Chou: How much did the Soviet Union? Dr. Kissinger: Much less. Less than $100 million. Maybe $50 - 60 million is my recollection. It's much less.

On the other hand, I read the book by Maxwell that the Prime Minister recommended to me last time, and it is our view, certainly at the White House, that the Indians are applying essentially the same tactics to that situation as they did to you.

PM Chou: That is their tradition.

Dr. Kissinger: It is our judgment that the Indians see in this situation no longer a legal problem of East Pakistan but an opportunity to settle the whole problem of Pakistan which they have never accepted. Their strategy in doing this is to force so abrupt a change in the situation in East Pakistan, and by such methods, that it will weaken the fabric of West Pakistan. And they are encouraged in this tendency by what they believe to be the support of some outside countries.

PM Chou: Quite a big encouragement.

Dr. Kissinger: As far as the policy of the United States is concerned, we are the only major western country that has not condemned Pakistan. It is only because of us, and I may say over the opposition of the pro-Indian element of our government, that the consortium hasn't cut off aid to Pakistan. And we will bring about now a $90 million debt relief for Pakistan. And we have in the form of relief made available $250 million of other funds.

We are totally opposed to Indian military action against Pakistan. I do not normally see ambassadors, but I have warned the Indian ambassador on behalf of the President that if there was an attack by India we will cut off all economic aid to India. We have told the Russians of our view, and they have told us they are trying to restrain the situation, but I am not sure that I believe them. We believe that there is a good chance that India will either attack or provoke the Pakistanis to attack by driving the Pakistanis into a desperate action in the next month or two. We told President Yahya that I would discuss this with you when I was here, and I simply want you to know we are totally opposed to it, and we are ready to listen to any proposal you will like to make.

We have urged President Yahya to withdraw his forces some distance from the borders and also to make some political offer in order to overcome the propaganda that is so systematically made against her and in order to support herein the United Nations and elsewhere.

Mrs. Gandhi is supposed to come to the United States November 4 and 5, and if she comes and if there is no war by then, the President will speak to her in the strongest possible terms. We would be very grateful for your views.

PM Chou: We will like to make a further study of this matter before telling you. Because we hadn't known until quite recently this letter from Kosygin to President Yahya which has the nature of an ultimatum.

Dr. Kissinger: Really?

PM Chou: I have not studied it because I just learned it some time ago. When Marshal Tito went to India he went as a mediator, but he was persuaded by Mrs. Gandhi.

Dr. Kissinger: I saw that.

PM Chou: As Madame Gandhi had already visited Moscow and also this visit by Tito, it may further add to her miscalculations. So maybe we can discuss tomorrow or the day after.

Dr. Kissinger: It will be helpful to determine our actions also.

PM Chou: We from the East and you from the West have the most to do with East Pakistan, and we understand best the traditions of India. After having read the book by Maxwell you also believe it is the traditional policy of India—she doesn't agree the Kashmir problem is solved and doesn't believe in the existence of Pakistan.

Dr. Kissinger: We believe she will try to destroy East Pakistan. We have no national interest in East Pakistan. We want it to reflect the will of the people. We have no interest whether it stays with Pakistan or not. We have made many proposals to India by which we will separate the problem of refugees from the political evolution of East Pakistan and which will not prejudge the situation. But India has kept making demands which they know President Yahya will not accept and which would force a solution in so short a time frame that it will have the effect of destroying the structure of West Pakistan also. That's the nature of the present problem.

PM Chou: And to add to that the desire of the Soviet Union to exploit the situation and contradictions in Asia, so as to give it a free hand in Europe. This is a very stupid way of thinking.

Dr. Kissinger: Gratitude is not the outstanding quality of India, as Moscow will learn. (laughter)

PM Chou: That's so because the Soviet policies have not been to really help the people gain national independence. Let's go to the Soviet Union. I would like to hear your views.

Dr. Kissinger: With respect to the Soviet Union, we have, of course, kept you scrupulously informed about all our activities. As you know, we had talked to the Soviet Union about a summit before my visit to Peking. And as I told you then, when certain conditions were met we would accept it. But I have kept you informed about those activities and those moves, the various attempts to see if we will go to Moscow first.

I must say the visit to Peking has not changed the direction of Soviet policy, but it has changed their manners somewhat. We have a number of concrete issues with the Soviet Union: the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks and various issues in Europe such as Berlin which has been settled. At the moment the Soviet Union is pressing very hard for our agreement to a European Security Conference.

PM Chou: In the final days of the negotiations on the West Berlin question the Soviet Union gave up very rapidly all the things they insisted on in the past. The concessions they made were bigger than those you estimated to us.

Dr. Kissinger: Estimated when?

PM Chou: Last summer. On the 16th of August you estimated that it would be probably the purely technical problems that would be settled on Berlin. But even before the settlement of these purely technical questions Kosygin went personally to Berlin and the result was a complete collapse. It went very quickly.

Dr. Kissinger: I meant to convey that the settlement was on the access procedures and matters of this kind. This is what is agreed to. I am not familiar with any other concessions. What other concessions does the Prime Minister think the Soviet Union made?

PM Chou: That's purely technical. That is the word you used. By their concession it was equivalent to their recognizing West Berlin as part of West Germany, which they haven't before. And they embarrassed East Germany; they will say they were excessive in giving promises to West Berlin.

Dr. Kissinger: It is true that the agreement was better from our point of view than we thought six months ago. But the basic reason in our judgment is that the Soviet Union has a great desire to free itself in Europe so it can concentrate on other areas.

PM Chou: Is it possible for them to free themselves?

Dr. Kissinger: It is a dilemma for the Soviet policy. They can settle the issue they have with us because we accept settlements when they are consistent with what we have always claimed. On the other hand, when tensions ease with the United States and with Western Europe the freedom of movement within Eastern Europe increases. That's the contradiction of the present situation. Now we recognize that when we make a settlement with the Soviet Union, say on Berlin, that this can have the objective consequence of increasing your problems.

PM Chou: That does not matter.

Dr. Kissinger: But we do not do it for this reason.

PM Chou: We understand.

Dr. Kissinger: And we keep you scrupulously informed. I probably should have given you the details of the Berlin Agreement before it was made, but your representative gets so much from me I don't want to strain his telegraphic abilities too much.

On the European Security Conference, the Soviet… we believe that the Soviet Union wants this to solve the contradictions in its Eastern European policy. When two sides meet each other as blocs, it can increase its hold on Eastern Europe and add to peace and the relaxation of tensions. When Foreign Minister Gromyko spoke to the President this was one of his chief topics of conversation, to get his support for a European Security Conference. We told him that we could not consider it until the Berlin negotiations were concluded.

And he also indicated a strong interest in a solution of the Middle East problem. And finally …

PM Chou: I will ask a question about the European Security Conference. Your idea is that independent states will take part or as blocs?

Dr. Kissinger: We want it as states. The Soviet Union prefers them to participate in blocs. We want a precise agenda. The Soviet Union has not yet put forward an agenda. In fact, we don't really know what the agenda could be. I think it's what the Prime Minister would call subsidiary questions, cultural exchange and trade. (laughter) We are using the formulations I am learning from the Prime Minister.

PM Chou: It is not our formulations. It is a question of our concern.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand that. Finally, Gromyko indicated a great interest in expanding American-Soviet trade without being specific, and we are sending our Secretary of Commerce there to see what they have in mind. We have not seen their proposal.

PM Chou: What is the possibility for solving the Middle East problem? You said you are not taking part directly in these matters.

Dr. Kissinger: In the Middle East? That's why it's not being solved. (laughter) It's being pursued at this moment with more energy than precision. (laughter) The trouble in the Middle East . … normally one says that a good settlement is one with which both parties are satisfied, but in the Middle East it is better to have a settlement where both parties are dissatisfied. There are some attempts at the moment to get secret talks started between the Egyptians and Israelis. The degree of their secrecy is shown by the fact I read about it in a newspaper today. We will know in about six weeks if there's any progress. If there should be any serious prospects I will let you know what they are. At this moment my own estimate is that it will fail.

Then Gromyko asked me to have tea with him alone while he was there. This is not known by anybody. He repeated all of the other things that I already told you and what he had already said to the President, but of no greater consequence. But he did also discuss U.S. relations with China. He said the Soviet Union would not object to improving our relations, but it would object to our colluding with China.

PM Chou: He used English directly with you?

Dr. Kissinger: English. We were alone with his Ambassador. I asked him what he meant by collusion, and if he could give me any concrete examples of what we might do to which he objected, but he only used vague formulations such as whatever threatens peace, and they would know it, but he didn't tell me. (laughter)

As for our own policies, I repeat the only way we can deal with you is on the basis of honor and therefore we will keep you informed about anything we discuss with the Soviet Union that might affect you. And since undoubtedly there will be certain figures that will attempt to make difficulties, you can assume whatever you hear from other sources on what is going on is not true.

We have refused in every agreement we have made with the Soviet Union, such as on accidental war, we have refused a clause that would make it applicable to other countries also. And in the negotiations on SALT we have refused a clause which would entitle each country to attack against any country that is planning provocative attacks. We have to rely on you to maintain the confidence of all this information.

As I told you last time, we are prepared to make with you any agreement in the field of arms control which we are also making with the Soviet Union. We understand that you will not participate in any agreement that has the consequence of,what you say, is lassoing you. But, for example, the agreement on accidental war involves no restriction on your military operations. It merely provides an opportunity for each side to inform the other about unexplained events. We are not urging it, but we are prepared to have the same agreement with you. We are not making it as a formal proposal but just want you to know we are prepared to do it.

PM Chou: That's an agreement on the prevention of accidental war.

Dr. Kissinger: That's correct, or on a direct communication link, if you are interested. Those are the two we have recently signed with the Soviet Union. If you want to read it, you can read copies I have of the two agreements. I repeat, this is not a formal presentation, but just to familiarize you with it. This is all I wanted to say about the Soviet relationships.

PM Chou: They didn't at all mention our boundary negotiations with them? Did they mention anything about the territorial claims?

Dr. Kissinger: They made a very oblique reference to it. (Chou laughs) But only that you make exorbitant claims. I refused to discuss it with him.

PM Chou: I thank Dr. Kissinger for telling us about the United States-Soviet relations. So long as an agreement is beneficial to the relaxation of tension and concluded on a basis of equality and beneficial to the people of the world, we think it is a correct agreement. If it is not beneficial, we will express our view on that.

The Berlin question has no direct relation to us. I would just like to ask a question. How was it that after the four powers had reached an agreement, that there was a squabble between the East and West with translation?

Dr. Kissinger: That is a peculiarity of dealing with the Soviet Union. As I expressed last time, in dealing with the Soviet Union as soon as an agreement was reached, there would be another negotiation on the wording of the agreement. That is why I asked you when we were here in July if you would publish the same text. There were really two squabbles. One was -the agreement was made in English; the official language was English. When it was translated into Russian, the Russians took the words that were settled in English and put them back into the original form.

PM Chou: And then they translated that into German.

Dr. Kissinger: No, that was settled, and the Russians accepted once more what they had already agreed to. Then their German allies started the same thing again when the Russian text was translated into German. By that point we needed a theologian to negotiate it. So all of the German disputes were settled except for two words. For those two words they didn't use German. They put down the English, French and Russian. (laughter)

PM Chou: It is not an important matter to try to get something from tac- tical maneuvers. It is a waste of time. Maybe they have a reason.

Dr. Kissinger: But they lose so much good will in the process, it's not worth it. You cannot obtain real gains by tricky maneuvers.

PM Chou: The two agreements Dr. Kissinger just mentioned with the Soviet Union are on accidental war and the hotline; but that does not arise for us because we are now in an experimental stage, and we have already said we will not be first to use these weapons. And we have already replied to the Soviet Union on attending a meeting on their proposal (five nuclear powers).

Dr. Kissinger: We notified them also.

PM Chou: It is a thing of the past. On those two questions there is no necessity for us, but if you would like to give us the text we will use it as a reference because we know nothing about this. Thank you for increasing our knowledge in this field.

The Soviet Union made a proposal in the United Nations about convening a world disarmament conference. They have just raised it.

Dr. Kissinger: They have raised it at the United Nations but not as a formal proposal to which we have had to reply.

PM Chou: Did that proposal include all countries, whether or not they are members of the United Nations?

Dr. Kissinger: I think so.

PM Chou: That's my impression too. It would involve countries like ourselves who are not members of the United Nations.

Dr. Kissinger: What is your attitude toward that?

PM Chou: I want to ask Dr. Kissinger's view because you know about this but perhaps you have not studied it either. Maybe it is an attempt to reply to our statement that if it's for nuclear disarmament it should be with all countries of the world, no matter what their size, and they are answering us with plans for a general disarmament conference. Maybe I am not accurate because I have not studied it.

Dr. Kissinger: This is one they have made before. Khrushchev made it every year. When it is approached concretely, it is very difficult to negotiate because how can one compare the military requirements in very different situations and with very different neighbors. And so our view is that it is not a very meaningful proposal.

PM Chou: That's right. Proceeding from that standpoint it is like firing empty cannon. It is even more unrealistic than firing empty cannon. It is fired by one side, and the other side need pay no attention to it. But in convening such a conference they will waste the time and energies of all countries. Armaments are being added daily so how can there be disarmament?

Dr. Kissinger: We will try to deflect the discussions into a specific regional basis so you have a standard of comparison and not on a global basis.

PM Chou: On the first day of your visit you mentioned a draft communique for your President's visit, an outline. If the visit is to take place starting from the 21st of February, that will be four months afterwards. I understand it is not an easy thing to work up a communique four months ahead of schedule. I don't know if Dr. Kissinger has a draft in mind.

Dr. Kissinger: I think we can agree on certain principles that are not likely to change in the next 3-4 months. On specific subjects like Vietnam, much will depend on the situation at that time and it will have to wait until the visit. But if we wait until the visit, we will be so much involved in the consciousness of the need to draft a communique, and so many people will be involved in drafting a communique, that it will be difficult to do the best of what we are capable. And, of course, whatever we do would be confined on our side to the President and would not be generally circulated so it would be possible to change it in the interval and during the visit.

PM Chou: Then is it possible for Dr. Kissinger to give us a very preliminary outline of what you have in mind so we can have it for our reference and see whether it will be possible to agree on the outline of principles? It will be very difficult to find the proper formulations during this visit.

Dr. Kissinger: It will probably not be easier when the President is here, when we are all busy with extraneous activities.

PM Chou: Do you have a preliminary outline?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. It should be considered very preliminary and very one-sided because it is what we put together without any consultation with you.

PM Chou: That doesn't matter.

Dr. Kissinger: We have tried to take into account some points you raised with me in July and also on this trip. I have omitted specific topics such as Korea and Vietnam, but I have some ideas of what we can say if we reach that point. If you would like two copies, I have two copies. (He hands over the first U.S. draft at Tab A.)

PM Chou: It's such a long one.

Dr. Kissinger: We are very flexible.

PM Chou: These are discussions that have not been too long, only 4 1/2 hours, because we started late today. We still have two more days. We will need still another plenary meeting with the other friends present and also one or two restricted meetings. There is nothing else for tonight. If you want to see a film, you can. Otherwise, a rest.

Dr. Kissinger: Maybe we could see the film of our last visit.

PM Chou: It's only a couple of minutes, but you may see it.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People. All brackets and ellipses are in the source text. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. Holdridge, Jenkins, and Hsuing joined the meeting after concluding their talks, published as Document 43. Attached at Tab A but not published is the text of North Korea's eight points. Also attached at Tab A is the first U.S. draft of the joint communiqué. See Document 56 for the text of the first draft.

45. Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 22, 1971 45. Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 22, 19711

Washington, October 22, 1971

October 22, 1971

IMMEDIATE

FOR: HENRY KISSINGER

FROM: AL HAIG

The President is now very concerned that you not arrive in Washington on Monday night. He wishes to be sure that you plan your return trip to arrive some time after Noon on Tuesday. I told him that this might be quite difficult for you to arrange since you did not control your own destiny at that end. He replied that in any event he wanted you to be aware of his wishes on this matter, and posed two options: 1. Either remain in Peking if you consider this appropriate so as to arrive in Washington not before Noon on Tuesday, or

2. Follow original schedule and remain overnight in Anchorage, departing at such a time that you will not arrive at Andrews before Noon and preferably later on Tuesday.

I was told not to give you any reason for this other than the fact that the President will not be in Washington on Monday and wants to be sure that he is available when you arrive from Peking. The real reason is because Rogers insists that your arrival from Peking just before the Chirep vote, now scheduled for Tuesday morning, would seriously jeopardize its outcome and in any event would be the subject of considerable criticism should the vote go against us.

We met this afternoon in the President's office with Rogers and Bush. This meeting indicated that chances for favorable vote on IQ afternoon, in Rogers' presence, and asked him to see Lanusse immediately to urge that he vote with us on the IQ.

Following the meeting this afternoon, the President and Bush were photographed in the Rose Garden discussing the vote and Ziegler issued a statement indicating Presidential support for Rogers' and Bush's efforts on Chirep. It was a testy afternoon here and I am not sure I haven't lost future utility due to the resistance on both the issue of your return and too much Presidential activity on Chirep.

I am sending you by separate message State's latest ploy on contingency actions should we fail on important question vote. I will need your guidance since it looks very worrisome in context of your Host's attitudes.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Also designated as immediate. No time of transmission or receipt appears on the message. For Haig's understanding of Rogers' position on Kissinger's return, see Document 49. For additional information concerning the Chinese representation issue at the United Nations, see Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII, China, 1969-1972, Document 167 and Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume V, United Nations.

46. Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 22, 1971 46. Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 22, 19711

Washington, October 22, 1971

BY WIRE

October 22, 1971

TO:

Henry A. Kissinger

FROM:B/Gen. A. M. Haig, Jr.

Haldeman noted Chapin's message that two alternative plans will be brought back covering the President's visit—one for five days, the other for seven. He asked me to reiterate to you that the President's strong preference is for a five-day visit with only one additional stop which would involve an in-and-out on the same day. I assured him that you were well aware of the President's wishes but that obviously you would have to consider Chinese attitudes.

He asked that I send this reminder in any event.

Best wishes.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A typed notation on the message indicates that it was sent to Kissinger in Beijing via wire. No time of transmission or receipt appears on the message.

47. Message From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Beijing, October 23, 1971 47. Message From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Beijing, October 23, 19711

Beijing, October 23, 1971

TO:

GEN HAIG

FROM: HENRY KISSINGER

TO BE DELIVERED OPENING OF BUSINESS

QV WILL ADJUST ARRIVAL TIME AS REQUESTED. IF THE REASON FOR DELAY IS CHIREP VOTE PLEASE CONSIDER IMPACT OF MY ARRIVAL FROM PEKING JUST AFTER WE HAVE BEEN DEFEATED. I CANNOT DELAY MY DEPARTURE FROM HERE AND WILL THEREFORE HAVE TO LAY OVER EITHER AT ANCHORAGE OR IN HAWAII. OUR DEPARTURE WILL BE REPORTED IN ANY EVENT AND THERE WILL BE SPECULATION ABOUT REASONS FOR DELAY IN ARRIVAL. AS YOU KNOW, I HAVE NEVER BELIEVED THAT MY VISIT AFFECTS THE CHIREP VOTE. WHATEVER IMPACT IT HAS HAD IS ALREADY ACCOMPLISHED, IT WILL NOT BE COMPOUNDED BY MY RETURN. IF THE ORDER STICKS, WE SHALL LAY OVER IN ANCHORAGE. IT INVOLVES A BRUTAL SCHEDULE FOR EVERYBODY WITH IN EFFECT TWO NIGHTS WITHOUT SLEEP. HAS THE PR IMPACT OF OUR LAYING OVER IN ANCHORAGE BEEN CONSIDERED? WE WOULD APPRECIATE GUIDANCE ON THIS.

2. AS FMR SAUDI AMENDMENT, IT IS MY CONSIDERED OPINION THAT Chou WILL CONSIDER IT INTOLERABLE AND DUPLICITOUS, AFTER EXTENSIVE EXPLANATION THAT DEFEAT OF OUR CHIREP RESOLUTION NOT EVEN IN PRC INTEREST. Chou IS WILLING TO TOLERATE OUR PRESENT COURSE ESPECIALLY TOWARDS PRESIDENT AND ROGERS IF WE WIN PRESENT CHIREP RESOLUTION, WE CAN GET BY WITHOUT UNDUE STRAIN. Chou HAS HOWEVER INSISTED AT EVERY SESSION THAT PRC WILL NEVER HOLD STILL FOR THE ELABORATION OF NEW LEGAL STATUS FOR TAIWAN. HE HAS CRITICIZED EVEN ALBANIAN RESOLUTION FOR LEAVING THIS OPEN. AN OFFICIAL U.S. EXPLANATION REPEATING THE JUNE FIASCO THAT LEGAL STATUS OF TAIWAN IS UNDETERMINED WOULD BE ALMOST AS BAD AN AFFRONT, TO DO SO SO SOON AFTER Chou MADE THESE POINTS EXPLICITLY TO ME CAN HAVE ONLY ONE OBVIOUS CONSEQUENCE. U.S. SUPPORT FOR SAUDI RESOLUTION SHOULD THEREFORE BE TAKEN IN FULL AWARENESS THAT IT UNDERCUTS ENTIRE BASIS OF PRESENT APPROACH TO PEKING AND ALL OF THIS FOR AN AMENDMENT WHICH IN MY JUDGMENT HAS NO CHANCE WHATEVER OF BEING ACCEPTED. IF WE CANNOT GET A MAJORITY FOR THE RELATIVELY SAFE IQ HOW CAN WE POSSIBLY GET ONE FOR THIS WHICH IS AN EVEN SHARPER VERSION OF DUAL REPRESENTATION. PLEASE MAKE THIS CLEAR TO THE PRESIDENT—IF NECESSARY, BY READING THIS PARAGRAPH TO HIM.

3. IN CASE ANYONE IS INTERESTED, THINGS ARE GOING STRENUOUSLY WELL. OUR HOSTS ARE TOUGH BUT STILL TREATING THE PRESIDENTS VISIT AS A SERIOUS EVENT.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The message indicates that it was to be delivered at the opening of business. Received at the White House at 5:21 a.m. A notation on the memorandum reads: “HAIG ONLY.” Haig underlined the sentence: “Chou has however insisted at every session that PRC will never hold still for the elaboration of new legal status for Taiwan.”

48. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 23, 1971, 9:05-10:05 p.m. 48. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 23, 1971, 9:05-10:05 p.m.1

Beijing, October 23, 1971, 9:05-10:05 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Chou En-lai, People's Republic of China

Chi P'eng-fei, Acting PRC Foreign MinisterM

Tang Wen-sheng and Chi Chao-chu, Chinese Interpreters

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, Senior Staff Member,NSC

PLACE: Government Guest House (HAK Sitting Room), Peking

DATE & TIME: October 23, 1971, 9:05 - 10:05 p.m.

GENERAL SUBJECT:

The President's Visit

(There was some informal discussion of a picture on the wall of a place near Vietnam and how it evoked the landscape of Vietnam.)

Dr. Kissinger: Mr. Prime Minister, when you mentioned the intelligence plane yesterday…

PM Chou: The number was wrong, not SR-2 - SR-71, It has the same sound in Chinese.

Dr. Kissinger: I understood what you were talking about. I wasn't absolutely sure whether or not you were perhaps mistaken, and therefore I checked in Washington. And I have found that your information was correct, although I am told the closest it came was 20 miles to Chinese territory.

PM Chou: [Interpreter gesturing to indicate meaning] In various places.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: Because it flew along the border, and came close to the Chinese border at various points, at various provinces. (He named them.)

Dr. Kissinger: At any rate, this was not a flight that was authorized from Washington. Perhaps Admiral McCain is not as harmless, as I said yesterday.

PM Chou: He sent some planes to have a look around the other places and also to have a look at places around the eastern part of the border. Of course, it was outside our present territorial sea, but our radars could see them.

Dr. Kissinger: Well, we have stopped this particular kind of flight until we have a full review of the program, when I return.

I also have one other piece of information which I wanted to tell the Prime Minister. We have a report that the Chinese Nationalists on the Taiwan General Staff are considering flying a R-104 reconnaissance aircraft over the mainland in order to disrupt our policy and our talks. We are trying to stop it, but I want you to know that if it should occur, it is without our permission and against our opposition. I don't even know what an R-104 is.

PM Chou: (laughs) It's a kind of reconnaissance plane anyway.

Dr. Kissinger: That's right. I don't think it's a high-altitude plane.

PM Chou: It's the kind that comes to harrass us sometimes. We can often distinguish between Chiang Kai-shek's planes and your planes, between the planes you fly and the planes you have given them to fly.

Dr. Kissinger: None of our planes fly into the mainland.

PM Chou: But if we know they take off from Taiwan, then, generally speaking, they are Chiang Kai-shek's planes.

Dr. Kissinger: That's correct.

PM Chou: There is only one day left so we must step up in our work, and that's how things always come out. Of course, it's not the announcement of your present visit—that's easy to deal with. We have a draft of the announcement we consider it possible to make, on your present visit after you leave. We can give it to you. It's very simple. But the task is very clear, that is, to decide the date of the President's visit. We are preparing to announce it as next February, but not to put in the specific date, to maintain security and for other reasons. You can either decide it yourself, or give us a reply after you go back and talk with the President.

Dr. Kissinger: We can do it in two stages; it's up to you. We can say something about my visit here which doesn't include a date, and then on a date which we mutually agree or we can announce the President's visit, that it will be in February.

PM Chou: That would be all right.

Dr. Kissinger: We could say, for example, the preparations for the visit have gone well, and we will announce the date later.

PM Chou: You probably have drafted it already.

Dr. Kissinger: We will look at yours and then see.

PM Chou: We will put them together. Maybe it won't be as good-as yours. (Dr. Kissinger handed over the U.S. draft.)

Maybe “arrangements” would be better than “plans.” Maybe you call your thick book the “plans.”

Dr. Kissinger: But if the Prime Minister thinks he can skip the thick book by changing a word, he underestimates our bureaucracy.

PM Chou: Perhaps you read them through, but I only glanced over the outlines.

Dr. Kissinger: I read them through because it may not look like this to you, but we reduced the number in a brutal fashion.

PM Chou: Therefore out of our regard for Dr. Kissinger's efforts with having cut down drastically the numbers, we haven't touched the numbers. There have been some small disputes, but I think they will be settled peacefully.

And because your security officers said it will be too troublesome for the President to stay overnight in three separate places, we are planning to omit the visit to Hangchow. Because in February the weather might not be so good there. Possibly snow might be there at that time of year, and you have enough snow in the United States. You don't have to come here for that. So there will be two places, Peking and Shanghai. So if we would like that, we can cut out one day and make it six, that is neither five nor seven, a conciliation between the two. One day in Shanghai and five in Peking.

Dr. Kissinger: I am prepared to raise the issue of Hangchow with the President because both you and the Vice Chairman said it is such a picturesque site, and I am prepared to raise the issue. Maybe the way we should leave it is if the President can stay seven days, we go to Hangchow, and if he can stay only six days we leave it at Peking and Shanghai.

PM Chou: All right.

Dr. Kissinger: But this is entirely up to you, Mr. Prime Minister.

PM Chou: There is no question on our side. It's the Secret Service people, because they say that if the President is going to stay overnight in a third place, they will have to have an increased group of people to prepare the place he is going to stay overnight. Otherwise the President can only be there during the daylight. Of course, it doesn't take long to get there—only a half hour's flight. If the President would like to go to Hangchow, he can go there in the daytime, and go back to Shanghai at night. That would make it easier for the Secret Service people. But there is a small villa beside the west lake at Hangchow, and maybe when Mrs. Nixon sees it she won't want to go back to Shanghai, and that will make the Secret Service people nervous.

Dr. Kissinger: Let us worry about the Secret Service. They are professionally nervous.

PM Chou: Of course in any of the places where we take the President we will guarantee the security.

Dr. Kissinger: The job of the Secret Service is to be obsessed with security, but the President is not obsessed with security.

PM Chou: That will make them even more tense.

Dr. Kissinger: Until this trip the President didn't know how many Secret Service agents he had with him.

PM Chou: But if he knew he probably would be dissatisfied with them, and criticize them. It would make their work more difficult.

Dr. Kissinger: That's true. What happened was that he criticized them and now they are angry with me.

PM Chou: So it is better not to tell him.

Dr. Kissinger: I will take it up with him. If they want to bring in another small group of Secret Service men, will that make it impossible for you?

PM Chou: No difficulty for us.

Dr. Kissinger: Then we can settle it.

PM Chou: What I am worrying about is the weather might not be so agreeable. It may snow or it may not. The latitude there is about 350. What city is that latitude in the United States?

Dr. Kissinger: I don't know.

PM Chou: It's farther south than Washington. Like Los Angeles?

Dr. Kissinger: No, it rarely snows there in America.

PM Chou: It doesn't snow in Los Angeles?

Dr. Kissinger: Never, but that is because the wind comes from the west.

PM Chou: So we can leave it at that.

Dr. Kissinger: That I will let you know through your Ambassador in Paris to see whether … … he can either go to Shanghai and fly to Hangchow and back to Shanghai, or spend two nights in Shanghai and one night in Hangchow. Is that your proposal? Or one night in Shanghai and one night in Hangchow.

PM Chou: Our proposal is to go directly from Peking to Hangchow and stay for the evening and go to Shanghai the next day, or not to stay over, but go in the evening to Shanghai. If it is a six-day schedule, then go directly on the fifth day to Shanghai.

Dr. Kissinger: On the seven-day schedule we would go to Hangchow, either during one day, or stay over, and then go to Shanghai.

PM Chou: Right. As for the draft communique for the President's visit, we have drafted one on the basis of your suggestions. We have also made some changes and are going to send it to Chairman Mao and then have to translate it so we will give you our draft tomorrow morning. You would like to look into it personally, or send a representative to discuss it?

Dr. Kissinger: I.

PM Chou: On our side it will be the Acting Minister, Chi.

Dr. Kissinger: You always get two cracks at me—your Acting Foreign Minister and yourself. One of you is too much for me. We will do it like the other one, and we will be very positive.

PM Chou: And as for some of the contents in our draft communique, there may be some contents that have to be left for some changes that may come up during the four months in between.

Dr. Kissinger: Of course. We didn't even submit anything on Vietnam.

PM Chou: But we would like to put in our stand in some places. To show to the world though there are great differences between China and the United States, we can still find common ground through peaceful negotiations. And we can say it's a kind of example to the world. And when we are discussing the draft communique for the President's visit then the other colleagues who came with you can see the oil refinery and chemical plant.

Dr. Kissinger: We will do it in the morning?

PM Chou: Yes, because in the evening…

Dr. Kissinger: No, that's fine.

PM Chou: You will have to make a sacrifice, and your assistant, Mr. Lord. It is a good thing the other members of your party are going to see it because the Secret Service can see if the road and other matters are all right. The last time when the Emperor came, I took him there. It took less than four hours; the road is quite smooth.

Dr. Kissinger: I have a complaint. They told us today we would be back at 12:00 and we got back at two minutes after 12:00. It's the first time you were not exactly on time.

PM Chou: From the Summer Palace?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. Usually you arrive here on the second you say you are going to. But I think this is a good plan.

PM Chou: So they can go and have a look and see whether it will or will not be convenient for the President to see that place when he comes.

Dr. Kissinger: And don't take everything they say absolutely seriously. If any questions come up, talk to me. I am not sure they have completely understood the legal aspects of sovereignty.

PM Chou: For instance, with the satellite station used for communication and the Boeing 747, and the airports, if we can buy it, we will buy it from you. If we cannot buy it, we will rent it from you.

Dr. Kissinger: I think from our point of view renting would be easier.

PM Chou: There are no difficulties for you or us.

Dr. Kissinger: So you will lease the ground station, and the 747 also? Or…our people are under the impression that you want to build a separate structure for it, and not have a 747.

PM Chou: That would only be useful if we could buy the equipment.

Dr. Kissinger: All right. So we will bring in the 747. I don't know whether there is any way of leasing a 747, or of leasing the equipment on one; we will work out an arrangement.

PM Chou: We heard that it would be possible.

Dr. Kissinger: To lease it? The ground station is easy. That we can work out a leasing arrangement with you on.

PM Chou: If we build houses and you bring equipment would it be possible for us to rent the equipment?

Dr. Kissinger: I am sure. I have to tell the Prime Minister something. The President and I will probably be the only two people who will understand why you should want to pay for something when we are prepared to do it for nothing. But I understand completely, and I admire it. But if they are a little slow in understanding it, forgive them.

PM Chou: There is no question, because they are used to managing the whole show, so they don't understand the reason. But gradually they will be able to understand.

Dr. Kissinger: May I go back, Mr. Prime Minister, to the question of announcing my trip. When should that be made?

PM Chou: You mean the announcement about your visit?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: When do you think?

Dr. Kissinger: We can do it either after I return or when I leave.

PM Chou: We can do it according to your convenience, because it is best that we should always do it in the way that would be convenient for the guest.

Dr. Kissinger: Then let me suggest that we do it when I return because then it is easier for me to answer questions about what it means. You don't have to meet the press. That would make it, to be safe, let's put it on Wednesday, Washington time.

PM Chou: In the morning or the evening?

Dr. Kissinger: We can do it either time.

PM Chou: You leave China on the 25th, then stay over in Alaska one day?

Dr. Kissinger: I will probably stay over in Alaska because we can use it to rest and because of the time change. I will not be back in Washington until Tuesday evening around 6:00, which is Wednesday your time.

PM Chou: Then maybe it could be issued the evening of the 27th your time, morning of the 28th our time. Is that wrong?

Dr. Kissinger: No, it's right. Our best press release time would be 4:00 or 5:00 in the afternoon, but that's a very bad time for you.

PM Chou: That doesn't matter.

Dr. Kissinger: Then shall we say 4:00 on the 27th?

PM Chou: 5:00 make it.

Dr. Kissinger: Make it 5:00. We always have the technical problem of the evening news; which if we don't release by 4:30 it will not be on the evening news.

PM Chou: You mean the evening newspapers?

Dr. Kissinger: Evening television.

PM Chou: That is all right, because if we release at 4:00 in the morning then it will be in the papers. All right, very good.

Dr. Kissinger: Or we can do it at 11:00 in the morning.

PM Chou: No, because for us 4:00 in the morning means it will be in that day's papers, but in the evening it won't be.

Dr. Kissinger: Okay, 4:00 Washington time, Wednesday.

PM Chou: In China, it will be 4:00 in the morning the next day. That way we always have a day's difference. Your announcement was on the 15th, ours on the 16th last time.

Dr. Kissinger: This text, or which text?

PM Chou: You look it over and we will discuss it tomorrow. How about the President's trip? When should we announce that? That is up to you to decide.

Dr. Kissinger: Let me discuss it with the President, and we will propose it in Paris. Toward the middle or the end of November, around the 15th of November.

PM Chou: The Acting Foreign Minister thinks the end of November would be better.

Dr. Kissinger: The only problem we have is that the press will begin to say again that there are great tensions between us, and that the trip is in great difficulty.

PM Chou: (laughs) Then wouldn't the end of October be better?

Dr. Kissinger: No, we can hold them for about two or three weeks with this announcement. (Chou laughs) Let's say around November 20th if that's easier for you.

PM Chou: You mean it will be too difficult for you at the end of November?

Dr. Kissinger: There are two problems. One is the speculation on why we are not announcing it.

PM Chou: And what would be difficult for you if we put it earlier, toward the end of October?

Dr. Kissinger: The end of October? Only that the President will probably…. We could do it in the first full week of November, just so that there is some separation between my trip and…. We want to leave some time so that it appears that the President has had an opportunity to consider it. But if you want it around November 10 for example, it's also possible.

PM Chou: We also can consider it maybe, and discuss it later, because we also have some of our own requirements.

Dr. Kissinger: The only problem is the President will be away between November 24 and December 1—he is going to California; there's a holiday. But I think we can find a date. We can do it November 22 for example, which is the end of November.

PM Chou: We will consider it and discuss it again tomorrow.

Dr. Kissinger: Certainly. That's easy.

PM Chou: So if we could finish with the draft communique for the President's visit speedily in the morning maybe tomorrow afternoon there could be another general meeting maybe with all of your staff. But if we take more time then maybe in the evening we can meet. But anyway we should meet.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. Maybe the Acting Foreign Minister would suggest a text for the announcement of the President's trip.

PM Chou: Yes, he can discuss it in that session.

Dr. Kissinger: The only problem is I am afraid it will be impossible in America not to give an exact date. Too many people will know; it will make it more mysterious if we don't give a date.

PM Chou: Do you have any draft?

Dr. Kissinger: No, for once, no.

PM Chou: You mean you would like to put the date in it?

Dr. Kissinger: No, not the one we now have; the one for the end of November. We will say the People's Republic and the United States have agreed that President Nixon's visit should start on February 21. We need say no more.

PM Chou: Alright.

Dr. Kissinger: On our side, on the long communique, no one will know except myself, Mr. Lord and the President.

PM Chou: And the mademoiselle.

Dr. Kissinger: Oh, yes.

PM Chou: And Mr. Ready, also, our old friend. He came last time; I remember you.

So you have to do some hard work tomorrow, and if there are some matters that call for my presence, our Acting Foreign Minister can call me. Then we'll have a final general meeting. That will be all right. So they can be free to see the oil refinery and chemical plant tomorrow. That is alright?

Dr. Kissinger: That is fine. One question we haven't resolved is the airplane to be used when the President travels in China.

PM Chou: Of course, the best thing would be to go in our airplane, because I will be accompanying him.

Dr. Kissinger: And you will not go in an American plane?

PM Chou: Because it's on our territory.

Dr. Kissinger: I will discuss it with the President. It has never been done before, but no American President has ever visited China before.

PM Chou: We will be responsible, and your Secret Service men can also have a look in our plane, because everything will be all right.

Dr. Kissinger: I have no question.

PM Chou: Of course, I think you will understand that.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand very well. We will find out in the discussion of the communique the point which the Prime Minister raised last time about an occasional envoy which would come to China to have these discussions, after the President's visit.

PM Chou: We agree to that suggestion.

Dr. Kissinger: If I may—the Prime Minister doesn't have to answer—I would like to say the reason we suggested Mr. Bruce is that of all our ambassadors, he is the one we trust most, and who is most oriented toward the President. It has nothing to do with Vietnam. It will not be until July anyway, and by then we hope the war will be over.

PM Chou: Yes, we hope the war in Vietnam will cease before the President's visit.

Dr. Kissinger: We want you to know that David Bruce is a fine gentleman whom we thought you would like best of all the possibilities. For selfish reasons, I would like to come back, but I cannot.

PM Chou: Because you have too many affairs to attend to.

Dr. Kissinger: We can exchange any practical matters as to….. We understand that meetings will be conducted like this time: restricted meetings between the President, yourself and me, and then meetings between the Acting Foreign Minister and the Secretary of State on other matters. That is how we will conduct it.

PM Chou: Right. Of course, a general session at the beginning.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, at the beginning and at the end.

PM Chou: And then during the meetings of your President with Chairman Mao it will be up to the President to decide who attends.

Dr. Kissinger: And you will be present?

PM Chou: Yes. We suggest two meetings can be held.

Dr. Kissinger: Good. That is very acceptable to us. And in meetings between you and the President I would be present.

PM Chou: But our Acting Foreign Minister will not because he will have to show his respect to your Secretary of State, and I can find other assistants.

Dr. Kissinger: Good. When I return, do you object if I give a background meeting with the press similar to the last one?

PM Chou: We don't have any objections. I read the text of the briefing you gave us through Paris.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, and I will do that again.

PM Chou: I heard they wouldn't let you go.

Dr. Kissinger: They kept asking more and more questions.

PM Chou: Yes, but if you give them a background briefing they perhaps will be satisfied.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. I can mention names of people who participated in the discussions because you mentioned it in your paper.

PM Chou: That's all right.

Dr. Kissinger: And I will only say we discussed concrete arrangements. I will not say we discussed specific topics, and when asked, I will only talk German philosophy.

PM Chou: (laughs) We heard that German philosophers always have to speak of whole systems, on a scale like that, so you will tire them out so much they will doze off.

Dr. Kissinger: They will think I am so profound that they won't realize I am not telling them anything.

PM Chou: They will be so tired they will let you off.

Dr. Kissinger: Two other things. We are going to conduct an underground nuclear test in the Aleutian Islands between October 28th and November 10. It will take only one day, only one test.

PM Chou: Between this span of time, you mean. Dr. Kissinger: Yes, only one explosion.

PM Chou: You are probably comparing with the Soviet Union which held a nuclear experiment in the Arctic Ocean.

Dr. Kissinger: I didn't know that—when?

PM Chou: Also on the land in a place near the Arctic Ocean.

Dr. Kissinger: It is a test warhead for a defensive missile, for the ABM.

PM Chou: These are much too expensive things. Some day maybe others can declare like we have done that they will not be the first to use them. That will end these things. That is for you to consider. We put forward the idea.

Dr. Kissinger: I just wanted you to know. Will you tell me before we leave about the situation on the Asian subcontinent? I would like to discuss that and also some other things, but after the draft communique for the President's visit. This should also be in restricted session.

PM Chou: Alright. That is all.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Brackets in the source text. The meeting was held in Kissinger's Sitting Room at the Government Guest House.

49. Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 23, 1971 49. Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 23, 19711

Washington, October 23, 1971

BY WIRE

October 23, 1971

To:

Henry A. Kissinger

FROM:B/Gen. A.M. Haig, Jr.

I have again discussed with the President your schedule and its possible impact on ChiRep vote. You should be aware that I strongly made the points which you raised when this was discussed the first time around, especially the point that your artificial stopover in Anchorage would generate speculation which would be far worse than adhering to original schedule. Rogers and Bush both took exception to my analysis, but especially Rogers. He stated that your arrival time in Anchorage would make it perfectly understandable that you would wish to have a rest before proceeding to Washington. His basic argument, which the President accepted, was that your arrival just before what has now become a critical UN vote would generate speculation about US/Peking relations which was bound to have an unsettling effect on fence-sitting nations. The President accepted this argument and overruled me on the issue.

Since that confrontation, the President has talked to me twice very much aware of my stated view and what he understands must be your concerns. He suggested such things as a stopover in San Clemente or a revision of your schedule to carry you to Hawaii for a day or two. I have taken the position that any artificial modification of your schedule upon returning from such an important mission would be surfaced for precisely what it is. I have also made the point that he has ordered this without firm evidence that the UN vote will, in fact, take place Tuesday morning although every indication points to it as of this writing. It could happen that an unforeseen delay would occur in the vote which means that you could still arrive just before it actually occurred. The President stated that he still wished to delay for 24 hours but agreed that if there were any unforeseen delay in the UN vote that you should proceed with your scheduled arrival here on Tuesday afternoon. A further complication in this issue has been the fact that Haldeman has been away for the weekend and there is no rational way to talk to the President except in person.

I believe I have now pieced together the reasons for the President's giving in to Rogers on this issue. Apparently, Rogers contacted him immediately after your departure and insisted that he be given the same privilege with respect to the Moscow advance that you had enjoyed on the Peking advance. When the President mentioned this to me, I stated that it would be an unmitigated disaster which could not be done under any circumstances. I am not sure that the President has yet turned Rogers down, but I know he intends to do so. I was instructed under no circumstances to mention Rogers' approach to you. I am confident that we have given in to Rogers on the issues of your return as a sop which will enable us to take a tougher subsequent stand on the Moscow question.

Throughout yesterday's meeting on the UN, it was very evident that Rogers is attempting to again assert himself es a dominant force. This was probably triggered by both the Chal Roberts and the Sherman stories in the Washington Post. In any event, the cheap gamesmanship has reached the high point of my memory.

If you wish, I will again raise with the President the issue of not delaying your arrival. As you know, I am in complete agreement with your own views and would, of course, do what you wish in any event. Two points were used as counters to my original arguments. One was that your return time had been fuzzed up in the original announcement so that this delay would not be the source of speculation. The second was that it would be very logical for you to wish to take a rest-break after such a tiring period.

When I spoke to the President privately about my concerns on delaying your arrival time he stated that he was aware of all of my arguments and yours, but pointed out that he was taking the action to protect you from charges which would emanate from State that your trip to Peking had been at the expense of Taiwan's seat. He stated that you should be aware that Rogers had continued to take the position that the timing of the trip to Peking has had a deleterious Impact on the vote and since the outlook is now bleak, it is very probable that should we lose, State would launch a campaign designed to place the blame on your shoulders. Unfortunately, in this context the President is exactly right, although I am equally convinced that the realities of the situation are that your visit has had, if anything, a favorable impact on the vote and, as a minimum, the pros and cons have cancelled each other out.

I have given to the President your most recent information on the head-to-head session, the conclusion of technical arrangements, the treatment of the UN vote and the status of Mrs. Nixon. He was most grateful and delighted with all that has been accomplished under the most tedious circumstances. I have also come down hard with State on their contingency thinking with respect to the Baroody plan and believe that it is turned off completely.

I will not raise with the President again the issue of your delayed return until I hear further from you. In the meantime, I am concerned that appropriate arrangements are made for your revised itinerary to include accommodations, etc. Please keep us informed.

Finally, the President has asked me to emphasise to you in light of all the foregoing the importance of avoiding any comment to the press in Anchorage or elsewhere about the nature of your trip until the United Nations vote is completed. lie intends to meet with you as soon as you arrive here.

Warm personal regards.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A typed notation on the message indicates that it was sent to Kissinger in Beijing via wire.

50. Message From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Beijing, October 24, 1971 50. Message From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Beijing, October 24, 19711

Beijing, October 24, 1971

EGA 020

00 WTE

DE WTE 10

TO THE WHITE HOUSE GEN HAIG

FM HENRY KISSINGER

1. THANK YOU FOR YOUR CABLES WHICH EXPLAIN A SITUATION WHICH IS NOW INTOLERABLE. NEVERTHELESS YOU SHOULD NOT RAISE DELAYED RETURN AGAIN. WE WILL STAY AT ANCHORAGE, CLAIMING NEED FOR SOME REPAIRS. SAN CLEMENTE WOULD GIVE US BETTER TIME BREAK BUT NO PR COVER.

2. PLEASE TELL PRESIDENT THAT AT PRIVATE SESSION LAST NIGHT CHOU AGREED TO GROUND STATION AND TO 747 AS LONG AS CHINESE CAN LEASE IT. HE SAID IT WAS A MATTER OF HONOR NOT TO LET GUEST PAY FOR SUCH SERVICES.

3. GAME PLAN FOR WALTERS IS EXACTLY RIGHT.

4. HAVE AGREED WITH CHOU THAT WE WOULD RELEASE BLAND COMMUNIQUE ABOUT MY TRIP ON WEDNESDAY AT 1600. TEXT WILL BE AGREED TODAY AND SENT TO YOU. MAKE SURE THERE IS NO LEAK.

5. HAVE ALSO AGREED ON DATE FOR PRESIDENT'S VISIT FOR WEEK OF FEBRUARY 21ST TO BE ANNOUNCED THE SECOND HALF OF NOVEMBER.

6. WITH RESPECT TO PAKISTAN, CHOU SPECIFICALLY TOLD ME LAST NIGHT HE WANTED TO DISCUSS IT PRIVATELY THAT HE WAS THINKING OVER POSSIBLE COORDINATED ACTION. A SEPARATE APPROACH BY US COULD BE CONSIDERED BAD FAITH. I STRONGLY URGE HOLDING THE STATE CABLES UNTIL I HAVE HAD THAT TALK.

7. ACCOMMODATIONS IN ANCHORAGE ARE BEING ARRANGED BY HUGHES. PLEASE FOLLOW UP AFTER WE HAVE LEFT HERE AND MAKE SURE WE HAVE GOOD COMMUNICATIONS.

8. HAS ANYONE CONSIDERED IMPACT ON SOVIETS OF GETTING TITO INVOLVED IN MIDDLE EAST?

9. PLEASE MAKE SURE THAT OUR COMMENTS AFTER CHIREP VOTE ARE RESTRAINED.

10. PLEASE TELL NANCY ABOUT DELAYED ARRIVAL.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. Secret; Sensitive. A stamped notation indicates that it was received in the White House at 12:33 a.m. on October 24.

51. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 24, 1971, 10:28 a.m.-1:55 p.m. 51. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 24, 1971, 10:28 a.m.-1:55 p.m.1

Beijing, October 24, 1971, 10:28 a.m.-1:55 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Chou En-lai, People's Republic of China

Chi P'eng-fei, Acting PRC Foreign Minister

Hsuing Hsiang-hui, Secretary to the Prime Minister

Tang Wen-sheng and Chi Chao-chu, Chinese Interpreters

Notetaker

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, Senior Staff Member,NSC

PLACE: Government Guest House, Peking

DATE & TIME: October 24, 1971, 10:28 a.m. - 1:55 p.m.

GENERAL SUBJECT:

General Philosophy and Principles, Communique

Dr. Kissinger: You can make decisions by a 2/3 vote.

PM Chou: That will not be done.

Dr. Kissinger: One point about the visit I would like to bring to the Prime Minister's attention. The Prime Minister may be aware of the fact that he (the President) will announce another statement about Vietnam around the 15th of November on troop withdrawals.

PM Chou: We heard about such an announcement before but nothing recently.

Dr. Kissinger: The statement will probably be made around November 8. We have not yet told our Cabinet.

PM Chou: Before it was to be held the 15th of November and now it will be before that, around the 8th or 10th?

Dr. Kissinger: About the 8th; we are not certain yet. That's why we wanted the announcement about the visit around the 20th, so that the two wouldn't seem related.

PM Chou: As for the announcement on withdrawal from Vietnam, that has been decided also?

Dr. Kissinger: It will be another increment.

PM Chou: It is not an announcement for the final date for total withdrawal.

Dr. Kissinger: We are hoping to negotiate that on the 1st or 8th, as I told the Prime Minister.

PM Chou: The 1st or 8th.

Dr. Kissinger: We have suggested the first, and I have been told that we will receive word whether the 1st or 8th is acceptable.

PM Chou: You mean that if an agreement is reached in your meeting about the total withdrawal of United States troops in Vietnam, then the President will announce that but if not, he will anyway announce a number of troops from Vietnam?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. I do not believe we can settle negotiations by November 8, but it is my judgment that if negotiations can succeed at all they should do so before the end of this year.

PM Chou: We hope that you will be able to succeed in the talks.

Dr. Kissinger: So do we.

PM Chou: It's a most urgent issue relating to easing tensions in the Far East.

Dr. Kissinger: We understand.

PM Chou: After you gave us the draft communique for the President's visit, we thought of various ways of dealing with it. One is to give you our draft. But there was also another idea because according to your original draft communique we saw you tried your best to speak in general terms and use as much common terms as possible. On the concrete matters you only dealt with bilateral relations, and you left off other items for the development of events.

During your President's visit, as I have said, we believe the main talks will be with Chairman Mao Tsetung. And as for what you put in your draft communique on the exchange of views between Chairman Mao Tsetung and President Nixon and the explanation of their stands and points of view, and as you put in your draft communique on world affairs too, that will have to be left to be seen. In this aspect the two leaders have not yet met and have not had contact yet either.

As for between us two, there have been a lot of exchanges both on your last visit and your present visit. And there is no question that no doubt on the matter of specific issues we have both made an exposition of our own points of view and stated our own positions. Of course, we have also found some common ground.

Therefore, the result is that our ideas regarding the joint communique for the President's visit is different from yours, opposite. We would like to put forward a position on specific issues. As for the general exposition of our views on international affairs and the international situation, and our stand and views and so on, if these are to be written in a joint communique then there is the question that the leaders, that is Chairman Mao Tsetung and President Nixon, have not met. But we can think of some possibilities now.

So after going back yesterday and studying your draft and also after reporting to Mao Tsetung, we feel there are difficulties in drafting such a communique at the present time. For instance, in your original draft there also were some general principles. In your draft we found there were some general principles and in this aspect we found you tried to put in common points, but we found that in reality there were some points in which we would not agree.

And we also found that there were some points in the draft communique, in the part on general principles, that we think when President Nixon comes to visit China he will have quite full discussions with Chairman Mao Tsetung on. During your previous visit I said something in regard to these aspects, but during this visit I have not said much about it.

Dr. Kissinger: What aspects?

PM Chou: The general approach to the international situation. (Kissinger nods) You used of course some of our terms, but the prospects for the future and the explanations for these terms are, of course, entirely different. Of course, in your draft you also used some of our terms, that is that “turmoil still exists in many parts of the world,” and that “the danger of military conflict remains.” But not only the danger of military conflict, but military conflict and wars exist in the world today. And your way of resolving this is to do it in accordance with general principles which you enumerate in the draft, to take steps to eliminate their causes, that is the causes of military conflict and turmoil. Last time when we met I mentioned that point, that there is great chaos in the world.

Dr. Kissinger: I remember very well.

PM Chou: And that since the Second World War local and regional wars have not ceased, and especially in the Far East, the situation in the Far East proves the situation. Why are there differences in our views in relation to this matter? Last time after you left, President Nixon made a statement in which he admitted the changes in the world. That is, before you came last time, your President made a statement in which he admitted changes in the world, and before you came this time, he made another speech in which he reiterated his views in his inauguration speech on a “generation of peace.”

What is the real situation? What does a generation of peace mean? Maybe it is like what Dr. Kissinger wrote about in a certain book which we know you are interested in, and that is the span of time of peace by Metternich. Of course, we notice you have not mentioned this for a long time. But that has made me go back to review the history of the French Revolution and the history of the American War of Independence. That was a time of great revolutions when feudal rulers were being swept away and the world was entering a time of bourgeois democracy. Of course, you are all very familiar with the American War of Independence. In that time three million soldiers in the United States under Washington resisted the British colonial policy and embarked on a war of independence. The war lasted eight years, and those were pioneers in independence, although the British at that time had a great empire and the sun never set on the British flag. At that time the British Empire was most proud, believing itself in a Victorian Age.

At that time there was only one country, France, and not even the strength of the whole country of France but only the part with Layfayette, who went to the United States to assist the revolution. And it was only because of this war of revolution that the United States made such great strides towards development in the 20th Century. Of course there was the Civil War which was before the developments of the 20th Century. This proves that a minority can be victorious over the majority and the weak over the strong and the little over the big.

But the present population of Cambodia is even more than the population of the United States in Washington's time, three million only. Why was it possible for the Americans in that time to be victorious? Because there was a new emerging force. And it applied tactics that were of a guerrilla style, which we mentioned last time. We mentioned last time that it was George Washington who had initial guerrilla warfare. Chairman Mao and the Vietnamese people had not appeared then. The Americans were the first to employ guerrilla warfare and be victorious in it, and this is a very good lesson to the people of the world.

We know that you wish that your President continue to be President of the United States to preside over the 200th Anniversary of America. If it should be said by a President that it was not easy for Washington at that time to win victory, and this is worth the pride of the people of America, then the many people in the world at present who wish to win liberation could also win on that example, to rely on one's strength. There is no reason why you should say it should not be done; and they should be supported. The last instance was the French Revolution.

The American Revolution was a war against colonialism while the French Revolution was against the oppressors of that time. The present national day of France is exactly the day when the Bastille —

Dr. Kissinger: I know.

PM Chou: During which the domestic oppressive rulers were over thrown. At that time Louis the XVI had strong military forces. The strength of the revolutionary fighters came from all parts of the country including the south, and their weapons were backward, but the result was that the Bastille was stormed successfully, that was on July 14, 1789. The results were great victories that began the French Revolution. And although during his later days Napoleon restored the Empire and met defeat following that on the battlefields of Spain and Moscow, the great victories of the French Revolution have become a brilliant page of victory in history.

And these two examples have been two examples acknowledged by all in regard to the history of the peoples of the world to win independence, not to mention the victories of the Paris Commune and the October revolution which furthered victories for the peoples of the world. But I only speak of the first two examples, of bourgeois revolutions, one against foreign aggression and the other against domestic oppression. Was Metternich able to obstruct all these developments? To speak of the factor of time, Metternich, we think, was only to maintain the role, indeed able to maintain office, for only 39 years. I'm not speaking of the time as Foreign Minister. As Prime Minister his period was only 27 years. He organized the Holly Alliance after the collapse of the Napoleonic Empire. From 1815 he began the Holy Alliance. The main three components of the Holy Alliance were Austria, Prussia and Russia. The great majority of all the feudal countries of Europe of that time joined in that Holy Alliance.

But by 1830 revolutions in Europe had begun to arise and the Holy Alliance in Europe had started to crumble. So by the time of 1848 revolutions in Europe had risen up in a great degree to effect the complete disintegration of the Holy Alliance.

No matter whether it was maintained for 15 years or 33 years, it was not able to destruct (obstruct) the development of revolution in Europe. It was the revolutions that promoted the progress in Europe. The result was that the western countries, in comparison to countries in the east, were able to make great progress in that era, while the Holy Alliance maintained by Metternich was only able to remain for 15 - 33 years. Of course, that may also be considered a generation of peace, but that peace was not dependable because the times were advancing.

As we are now discussing the present situation I would say that the turmoil in the world today was greater than after the collapse of Napoleon's Empire and after the French Revolution. That time it was only Europe. Of course, at that time Metternich by his policies had attempted to oppress the revolutions in Latin America to an extent, but now the turmoil is of a major character. At the present time, it is not only the people of Europe but Asia, Africa, Japan and America itself that have reason to ask for reform.

One instance that is different from that time—there are now nuclear weapons that didn't exist at that time, but nuclear weapons cannot be called an isolated era in itself. But isn't it the era of the people? Because without people nothing can be accomplished, and now hundreds of millions upon millions of people are awakening.

This awakening consciousness of the people is promoting changes in the world, or we might call it turmoil. And the oppressed nations, no matter where they may be, wish to win liberation as the American people did during its independence war. While the local strength is weak, they will inevitably become strong. For instance, how can it be conceived that the people in Angola, Mozambique, South Africa and Southwest Africa and Namibia are being enslaved and cannot win while the others' forces have the backing of NATO? But these people are bound to win liberation as the American people won several years ago.

That is not to mention other countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America in which nations are oppressed and submerged and their internal affairs interfered in. There the current of national liberation cannot be obstructed. It is also true that such liberation must be won by the people of that place and not by foreign forces. Although Layfayette assisted with a small force the American people won the war of independence through their own efforts. Of course, there was great moral support but the American people relied mainly on direct struggle. That is one current.

Another international current is the struggle against domestic oppressors, like the French people who opposed Louis the XVI at that time because while there is oppression there will be the struggle against oppression. Just like the French people, who had very poor weapons, were able to storm successfully the Bastille which was defended by armies of Louis the XVI who had strong weapons.

And for an example during the latter part of the 20th Century we can count China among them. Other instances involving the United States during the latter part of the 20th Century would be the peoples of Indochina—the peoples of Vietnam. I don't think that those lessons of history that have been taught us need be repeated, but they should be taken as reference. And therefore if the U.S. wishes to ease tension in the Far East, we should also take as reference these two instances. That is to return to the question of old friends. If too much account is taken of those, the old friends, then the course Metternich embarked on is bound to be repeated. Why did I say this today? Because since we are exchanging opinions it is better to be more straightforward. Because otherwise if the old friend, Chiang Kai-shek, is to be discarded then the next day will be Nguyen Van Thieu, and then next Park, Lon Nol/Sirik Matak, and Sato. These people will be chased off the stage of history by their own peoples. And if the hope of easing tension in the Far East is to be placed on such people, there will be no hope of easing tension because such people want to oppress the people where they are and expand to other regions. Because although your President may arm your partners through the Nixon Doctrine, the factor of weapons is only a temporary factor which can be used for a future period of time but those people will be inevitably defeated through the struggle of the people where they dominate. Even though the turmoil and danger of military conflict will be attempted to be eliminated in our formulation, that is the five principles of peaceful co-existence, and though the subjective attempt may be to establish a peaceful region or an era of peace, I don't think that will be possible, because, as I said last time and would like to reaffirm today, the oppressed nations want liberation and the view of history of the United States, it is, we believe, that people should be allowed to win liberation through their own efforts.

Of course, as I mentioned, I believe on the first or second day of your arrival here, when we say “down with imperialism” that is only an empty cannon. For our part it is an empty cannon but it also has a rallying effect. Of course, when we mention imperialism now it has a double character—not only the old but the new social imperialism. But if the nations of those areas wish to arise and drive out foreign oppressors then no one can obstruct that development. The more the oppression, the more the aggression and armed subversion, the more stiring of the people. They are bound to rise up and overthrow the foreign aggressors.

I also mentioned during our talks that we must thank after all first Japanese imperialism and then United States imperialism for the liberation of China. Because they gave impetus to the awakening conscience of the Chinese people, to their taking action and being unified on a broader scale than before.

What about the domestic oppressors, like those who oppressed the French people in the age of the French Revolution? I believe that the present awakening of the conscience of the people of the world is of a world character, that is broader than during the French Revolution in Europe. And if all those domestic local oppressors are considered old friends, then they will have to be discarded one after the other. And if President Nixon finds it difficult to believe after the Second World War that prestige should be at such a low level 25 years afterwards, then if support is to be given to such old friends, then 20-25 years from now there will be none in sight and defeat will be even more disastrous.

I believe in our talks Dr. Kissinger has mentioned a truce, that is that after the United States troops have withdrawn from Indochina they would pay no attention to what evolutions will take place there after they withdraw. Of course, that is done in a passive spirit, that you would no longer be able to pay attention to control of that area. You mentioned this time Indochina in a slightly different way, that is if agreement could be reached between the United States and Indochinese people, then beginning at the time when the peace was signed new elections would be held six months thereafter, and one month before that the local rulers would resign and elections would be held in accordance with the people of that area. That was slightly different from the original plan.

But there is one thing I cannot say anything about in a detailed way because you didn't give me the whole picture. We can say there are three possibilities. One is Vietnamization, that is if the aim of the peace that is signed is to continue to rearm the forces of Thieu.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand.

PM Chou: And if although the U.S. forces have been withdrawn the result of the elections is still Nguyen Van Thieu or his representative, then after a number of years revolution will arise again and the second question will arise—shall or shall not the United States go there to support its new friends? And the question will again arise of intervention in the affairs of others.

The third choice would be, in foresight of these events, to act in accordance with the fifth point of the seven put forward by Madame Binh, and for which you expressed appreciation last time. If that would be so, we would be able to make new progress and this new friend made under these circumstances would be more reliable.

If you take China as a case, the lesson of China is worth remembering. That is if Truman had at that time not taken measures to blockade the Taiwan Straits with the 7th Fleet, and not given military assistance to Chiang Kai-shek, but had continued the former policy, that is no interest in Taiwan territories, then Sino-U. S. relations might have been completely different these past 22 years.

Why am I mentioning this? Because we have a common point in wishing to ease tension in the Far East which will be conducive to peace in the whole world. And that will involve this matter: shall this generation of peace be based on hopes for the future or on old friends? This is a point of fundamental difference between us.

There is the possibility that after a lot of discussion you will maintain your position and I will maintain ours. And there also is the possibility that when your President comes to talk with Chairman Mao they will discuss more profoundly and with more foresight, but the conclusions will be the same. Of course, Sino-American relations are bound to be improved, but that will only be temporary and after a period of time with events the situation will change, maybe after 10-20 years, like the Metternich generation of peace. What good will come of that? In that we have not given impetus to the progress of the world. Of course, perhaps limited by your system, you are unable to make any greater changes while we, due to our philosophy, foresee such a thing.

And therefore if new events are to occur then new tensions will also arise.

For instance, as I mentioned in Indochina, if the United States forces and the other forces that followed it into Indochina do not withdraw completely, we will, of course, support the peoples of Indochina to pursue in their war of resistance to the end, and the result of that will be new tensions.

So with regard to this question, that is the question of the evaluation of the situation, if we do not put this clearly but fuss over it in ambiguous terms, we should say that the fundamental differences have not been stated clearly. That is if the draft communique is to be written as you have it, (reading from 1st draft at Tab A) that is:

“The two leaders acknowledged that the long-standing differences between the two countries not only in their bilateral relations but in their perspective of international problems would not quickly or easily be resolved. At the same time, the two sides agreed that the visit of President Nixon to China and the hospitable reception accorded him demonstrate that countries, irrespective of their social systems, can work together toward resolution of differences in the interest of international peace and security.”

Then the impression that is given to other people of the world will not be an honest one and we cannot agree. The Soviet Union would agree to such terms but not put it into effect. But on our side if we agree to do something we will truly do it.

Therefore we think that we should take this problem seriously and state clearly the fundamental differences between us because otherwise if we used such wording it would give an untruthful appearance to the world. We cited just now two instances, one is the war of independence which is war against foreign aggressors. That is one kind. One is resistance against domestic oppressors, like the French Revolution. The third, which was not mentioned and which we would like to put forward in our draft, is resistance to racial discrimination.

We have also thought of the matter that if we do not first state this to you clearly and just hand over a draft it will not be easy to reach agreement orally. I said I would like to have the Acting Foreign Minister discuss the draft with you, but because of these reasons I was compelled to come myself. Of course, what you say we think to be subversion, you think of as revolution. Our stands and explanations also differ. But the objective trend of the development of events is indestructible. It cannot be altered by the subjective will of men. And if we wish to ease the tension in the Far East we think this fundamental issue should be dealt with in clear terms.

Dr. Kissinger: Which fundamental issues?

PM Chou: The three instances I mentioned.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand. What does the Prime Minister mean by racial discrimination?

PM Chou: For example, Africa. As also the untouchables in India. That is also a form of racial discrimination. And also in America in the past there has been discrimination against colored people and in such matters, of course, we always sympathize with the oppressed.

Dr. Kissinger: But the Prime Minister, is under no illusion that we will tolerate any discussion of our domestic situation in a communique, no matter what he thinks of it?

PM Chou: But I don't think we should not oppose in general terms racial discrimination.

Dr. Kissinger: I will have to see your draft.

PM Chou: Of course, I have not dealt with the question of racial discrimination in detail today. I have only gone into detail on the first two instances. Therefore in the presentations of such views we think it is not possible to let our views with regard to easing of tensions in the Far East go unclear.

And so in view of such matters, if we were to put forward a draft communique at the present time the end result will be endless discussion or disputes. That is why I have come myself to discuss the fundamental issues, that is the assessment of the situation. Therefore, we think it is rather difficult to confirm a common draft on which we can agree. Therefore, rather than you and the Acting Foreign Minister going on in endless disputes, I thought it would be better for me to come to give you the fundamental issues myself.

Dr. Kissinger: Are you finished?

PM Chou: I am finished with this part dealing with the situation and prospects for the future, because you mentioned in the draft the review of world affairs between the President and Chairman Mao Tsetung.

Dr. Kissinger: You have raised two problems. The first is what we believe and the second is what can be said after the President's visit.

With respect to the first problem, the Prime Minister has expressed himself with his characteristic clarity, and it contained no surprises. I am fully aware of your point of view. You stated it eloquently the last time and you have repeated it in greater detail today. We respect you as a man of principle and we have gone to considerable lengths not to cooperate in any design that would create doubts about your basic positions. We have done nothing that would leave doubts about your basic positions.

Now I will not comment about the policies of Metternich. I have trouble enough discussing American foreign policy without discussing the foreign policy of the Austro-Hungarian Empire with the Prime Minister. (laughter)

PM Chou: That is also an historical lesson that is worth reviewing.

Dr. Kissinger: The lesson of history is that no peace is every permanent and no social system has ever lasted.

PM Chou: That's right. That's quite in accordance with our principles also.

Dr. Kissinger: Change seems to be the law of life.

PM Chou: The question is whether the changes will be in a forward or backward manner.

Dr. Kissinger: They have to be based on reality and that will define their permanent character.

PM Chou: That is, it will decide, in our view, the matter—decide whether it is forward looking or backward.

Dr. Kissinger: I agree with that as an abstract proposition. The only thing is that one country should not say that by definition everything it does is forward looking and everything the other country does is backward looking, because that would be conducting foreign policy like professors.

PM Chou: It is decided by whether the majority of the people support or do not support the policy.

Dr. Kissinger: I agree with that.

PM Chou: For instance, the war in Indochina is not supported by the majority, but the improvement of Sino-American relations is supported by the majority although there is a minority against it.

Dr. Kissinger: It is obvious that on many important points we have a different world outlook. As I told you at our first meeting, we are prepared to submit this difference to the judgment of the majority and future majorities.

PM Chou: Yes, both history and the press are merciless.

Dr. Kissinger: That is correct. Nor do I have trouble understanding that revolutions are always started by minorities nor do I have trouble understanding that the superiority of revolutions at the beginning is psychological, not physical.

PM Chou: That is, the aspect?

Dr. Kissinger: Correct. When the Prime Minister asked what do we mean by a generation of peace I would reply that we think peace has two aspects at least: a sense of participation by the people concerned so that they think the peace is just, and secondly, a sense of security so that they do not believe the peace is oppressive. It may be that you and we—it is a case that you and we have different views on different parts of the world on how to bring this about. I can only repeat that we are prepared to submit this difference to the judgment of history and we will not use force to settle it. We will treat you with respect and on the basis of equality.

PM Chou: I believe that will be so between our two countries. But the matter is that with regard to all countries we should not intervene in their affairs and we should support the national liberation of all peoples and not interfere, whether the country is big or small. Big countries should especially not interfere in the affairs of small countries. Especially, as put in your draft, no country should make efforts to establish hegemony and no major power should collude with any country, and we think that is especially true.

Dr. Kissinger: The Prime Minister claims his side is serious and does what it says. We claim the same thing for ourselves, and if we put something on paper it is with the intention of keeping it. I have tried to explain to the Prime Minister in the many meetings we have been privileged to have that on a number of issues he raised we were prepared to let the historical evolution be the ultimate judge. This is a professorial way of stating the doctrine of non-intervention.

At the same time it is not acceptable for us to be told that we must give up immediately all old friends. It cannot be abasis for a sound foreign policy that we begin our new relationship with you with acts of betrayal. You could not respect us for that. The Prime Minister knows very well, and his subtle understanding of history will no doubt make clear, that what has already started between us has unleashed forces in Japan, Taiwan and Korea that have their own momentum, and we were not naive to think this would not happen. We did this in full consciousness of what would happen.

What I have appreciated about our conversations until now is that between you and us we seem to understand what can be done immediately, what can be done over a longer period of tine, and that we would work within that spirit. We have paid a price already with many of our friends, and we know what the impact of what you and, I are talking about will be on many of our friends. We do not give them a veto over our policies, and we will not maintain them against the forces of history. But at the same time you could not respect us if we found this easy, and you must not attempt to push the process beyond what is possible.

Now the Prime Minister has pointed out the failings of our friends. And I have indicated that we have been prepared to separate ourselves from them on many important issues. We have never asked anything from you with respect to your friends. [to the interpreter—“Did you translate that we have never asked you to separate yourselves from your friends?” The interpreter further translates]. But it would be an amazing occurrence in history if your friends claimed for themselves what the Pope has for himself, namely, total infallibility.

PM Chou: We have never believed that. Even in our own ranks there is no one who has committed no mistakes.

Dr. Kissinger: And therefore while we have not asked you to do this and while we do not ask you if you have done this, we still believe some personal advice to your friends, at least with respect to your judgment of our sincerity, might accelerate the process which we both desire. The reason why the relationship between our two people has seemed to me so important is precisely because I respect your moral force. But also because our two peoples have it in their hands to contribute to the peace in the Pacific and in the world.

PM Chou: I would like to add something here. Although we do not wish to impose our views on others, we can as you just now mentioned, by our own action and influence, affect our friends around us. That is, by our own action and influence we can affect friends around us not to go to certain extremes. That's one point. The second is that we can through our own influence not allow another still greater power far away to feel easy in coming into the Far East for hegemony. But of course we cannot do anything about Japan, say, or the Indian Ocean because those are places where you are in control.

Dr. Kissinger: The Prime Minister has not dealt lately with the Indians or he would not say we are in complete control.

PM Chou: True indeed, and precisely we have no influence in that place. We cannot do anything about it. Nor do we approve of contending for hegemony in that area. Nor do we wish to join in that game. We are opposed to power politics and to superpowers. Of course, you can reply to us that you are not the only one. If you were the only one, no such question would arise.

Dr. Kissinger: In the Indian Ocean, Mr. Prime Minister, we suffer the illusion that we are supporting one of your friends against one of your neighbors that is attempting to achieve hegemony.

PM Chou: It is also your friend.

Dr. Kissinger: True, but we have many offers from India to contend with you and your neighbor and that is recommended by most of the bureaucracy, If we wanted domination on the Indian subcontinent, we would not support Pakistan because Pakistan cannot dominate the Indian subcontinent, as you well know.

PM Chou: Indeed, it is impossible for Pakistan to do so but it is also impossible for India to do that. What India wants to do as I have said last time during your visit is to get two big powers to contend for it in the Indian Ocean so it can make use of both. That's a most stupid policy.

Dr. Kissinger: But we are not participating in that. If any country achieves hegemony there other than India, it will be your neighbor and not the United States. (laughter)

PM Chou: We are clear about that.

Dr. Kissinger: To get back to the immediate point, and we can discuss India-Pakistan later.

We believe that the visit of President Nixon can be an historic occasion. But he is not coming here to be put into the dock and to be accused of a whole series of American misdeeds. That is not possible. “In dock” means in court. Mr. Lord thought it meant in ships.

PM Chou: We will not put him in ships.

Dr. Kissinger: But you cannot put him in court either.

PM Chou: Some believe two devils will meet. That is the view of some. And neither of them will be able to administer judgment on the other.

Dr. Kissinger: What is more important is that neither should attempt to make judgment on the other.

PM Chou: So if a trial is impossible, it is even more impossible to pass a judgment. The important thing is because our world outlooks are obviously different, the important thing is to exchange different views on the world and prospects. This is not a judgment on anyone, to make these views clear. There is no question that we would also be willing to hear your views on various matters.

Dr. Kissinger: We understand that Chairman Mao did not fight for 50 years to change his opinions because an American President is visiting China for six or seven days.

PM Chou: True. We want an exchange of opinions.

Dr. Kissinger: And we want an exchange of opinions that looks to the future.

PM Chou: So precisely because of that historical lessons should not go unheeded.

Dr. Kissinger: You can be sure we know your views already. We know that there are other countries with whom it is easier to draft communiques, though they do not always publish the same text. (laughter)

PM Chou: But it is easier to reach abstract agreements that will not be put into force.

Dr. Kissinger: That's exactly right, and that's why what we say will be more important than what may be said at other meetings that will take place during the next year. Let me say something about the communique.

PM Chou: Please.

Dr. Kissinger: On most of our visits we publish no communique at all. On this occasion we think it is desirable because there are many people who are hoping that our relationship will fail. I recognize that it is inconsistent with your position to publish a series of banalities that can be interpreted by everyone in his own way. We do not object, and I recognize that some of the drafting that was done in our proposal has than tendency.

Interpreter: Which tendency?

Dr. Kissinger: Towards the banal. We therefore do not object to your stating your view and we stating our view.

PM Chou: Then we can find some common points.

Dr. Kissinger: But it would be highly undesirable if the communique could be read as simply a vehicle for you to indict our position. If after the President comes back to America it can be said that he was humiliated by going to China, it will affect your relationship not only with this President but also with any possible successor. And therefore it is necessary that the theme of the communique be: here are two great countries with differences in their points of view and here is what they can do together or in parallel, or what they can agree on.

Now the question is how do we express it and when do we work on it? It is true that our two leaders have not met. But it is also true that the Prime Minister reflects the views of the Chairman and I reflect the views of the President. My concern is that if we wait until after they have met the pressure of the events that take place during that week, with 80 American newsmen constantly asking questions and various members of the bureaucracy present with their own suggestions, we will not be able to work as substantially as we can now when we can still speak openly and with plenty of time.

PM Chou: Yes, yesterday we heard you were chased twice by correspondents. Once in the Summer Palace, a North Vietnamese correspondent took quite a lot of pictures. We didn't pay attention at that time.

Dr. Kissinger: At the Summer Palace?

PM Chou: You probably thought he was Chinese, and we thought he was Chinese, but when we inquired we found out he was a photographer of North Vietnam. Then later in the afternoon you went shopping…

Dr. Kissinger: I foresaw what would happen and I left after five minutes.

PM Chou: I heard about that. It was proved later on that the foreigners in the store immediately mobilized the foreign correspondents in Peking.

Dr. Kissinger: That's why I left.

PM Chou: That was a very wise move.

Dr. Kissinger: They all concentrated on Miss Pineau who is slightly more attractive than I.

PM Chou: It is easier for her to deal with them. There is no way out for you.

Dr. Kissinger: That is true. Under the pressure of the visit when I must look after the President and cannot spend all my time as I can here, when there are a number of functions that must be performed and when there are others present, it will be much more difficult to do a communique that reflects our best positions than it is now when we can speak openly. Of course we understand if anything happens in the conversations between Chairman Mao and the President that we have not foreseen that everything will be changed.

Therefore, we would use the document as a general guidance only for the President and not show it to anybody except the immediate advisors of the President and no one in the bureaucracy. That is no one except in this room. And, of course, we would not tell anybody that we have a tentative working outline. That can be in nobody's interest. But if the Prime Minister is travelling with the President it will be very difficult to arrange meetings for extended discussions and if the Foreign Minister is with the Secretary of State, it will be very difficult technically to do it while I am here next time.

But it is up to you, Mr. Prime Minister. You said to a group of Americans the other day that if the visit succeeds that is fine, and if it doesn't that is fine also. We do not agree fully because we think it is in the interest of humanity for it to succeed. But our interest must be mutual, and there are many forces around the world who would like to see it not succeed.

PM Chou: I did not say it would be good or fine if it failed.

Dr. Kissinger: Or all right.

PM Chou: I said it would be fine if it succeeded and wouldn't matter if it failed also. You have to be prepared for another alternative, otherwise how could one exist? You can't just worry about success. Your President also has spoken about this eventuality.

Dr. Kissinger: We are also prepared for this alternative.

PM Chou: In such a spirit it may be more possible to make progress. But just as we have put it many times and you have in the draft communique, we do not expect too great a speed in the development of our relationship. Wonders will not happen suddenly.

Dr. Kissinger: I have stated my views with the same frankness as the Prime Minister stated his, and I now wonder how he recommends we proceed?

PM Chou: Let's take a short interval. (short break)

Dr. Kissinger: I have talked more with you on these visits than I have with my staff in two years.

PM Chou: It's good.

Dr. Kissinger: Thank you for sending me the text of your extemporaneous remarks. I know the President will be very pleased to have it and I will show it only to him.

PM Chou: Have you seen any film?

Dr. Kissinger: No. I am still hoping to get a copy to take home.

PM Chou: We will give you a copy of both your visit last time and this time.

Dr. Kissinger: It would mean a great deal to me.

PM Chou: We will be able to give a finished copy of film for last time and for this time photographs, but the film is not completed.

Dr. Kissinger: Maybe we can get it when the President comes or you can give it to your Ambassador in Paris.

PM Chou: The cameramen probably got more this time because your stay was longer.

We have considered this matter of the communique between your President and our side when he comes, and it appears there are a lot of places where we must make changes in your draft. And we have raised a number of questions and also new specific questions as well on Vietnam, Taiwan, Korea, Japan, India and Pakistan. In addition to making an estimate of the general situation, there are also a number of these specific questions. We can see that there are certain differences between the two sides. On some questions the differences are quite large, and we believe we need quite some time for work in drafting this communique. Of course, as Dr. Kissinger just said, if in the future meeting between the two leaders, in their future discussions, some problems are solved and some views changed, we will need a new document, which can be done easily.

Dr. Kissinger: That is easy.

PM Chou: We need not consider that now. The question now is how to consider such a document before they have met. So this is rather a complicated matter. If we were to mention all our points of view that is also possible but will take a period of time. I could cite an example. I will not talk in general matters for the time being.

Say, for example, the Taiwan question. It is easy for us to expound our position on that because we have done so on many occasions in the past. But there are two questions which should be raised. First is something the American side should say which would be of a decisive nature for normalization of relations between China and the United States. In our present exchange of views I raised a new question on this matter, that is to say, on the international arena there have already appeared activities aimed at creating an independent Taiwan. I have discussed it with you.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, Mr. Prime Minister.

PM Chou: And so the matter of crucial importance is for the U.S. to indicate it will not carry out or support any activities aimed at separating Taiwan from China. And then as you said, you would state that, “the United States acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Straits maintain there is but one China.” You should also say that the United States would encourage the Chinese to solve this internal matter by themselves through peaceful negotiations.

Dr. Kissinger: We are saying almost that.

PM Chou: If it is not solved, there is no possibility of normalization of relations.

Dr. Kissinger: We say that the United States “takes note of that position and will support efforts to reach an equitable and peaceful resolution of the ultimate relationship of Taiwan to the mainland.” We can strengthen “takes note of.” These two sentences support each other.

PM Chou: But if you do not make clear that you will not carry out or support any activities separating Taiwan from China, then one can have two interpretations of this sentence—“support efforts to reach an equitable and peaceful resolution of the ultimate relationship of Taiwan to the mainland.” This could be interpreted as Taiwan being returned to the Motherland or separated from China. Because if you do not say what you are opposed to, you cannot guarantee the return of Taiwan to the Motherland.

Dr. Kissinger: We have the problem of what I told the Prime Minister. What I have said to him is our policy on which he can rely, no matter what the communique says. So he can rely on the fact that we will not support an independent Taiwan. I am certain that the President will repeat this to the Prime Minister and, of course, to the Chairman.

The second question therefore is the question of the communique, which is not so much relevant for our policy but for public impression. Now we have attempted to draft this in such a way—in English these two sentences have a tendency to support each other. But we could perhaps strengthen the second section by instead of saying “takes note of that position”, saying “does not challenge that position.”

PM Chou: That's one question of wording.

Dr. Kissinger: It makes clear that we are not opposing it.

PM Chou: And then the second question is that of the withdrawal of armed forces and military installations from Taiwan. It's better for you to say it and not us. After you have completed your withdrawal from Indochina, you will withdraw all forces from Taiwan. If this is not said about your withdrawal, the impression among the Chinese people and the people of the world will be that the United States has invaded Chinese territory.

Dr. Kissinger: Let me first make clear that the Prime Minister understands what we said we would do so that he does not misinterpret our intention, and then we will go to the communique.

What I have told him is that in a reasonable period of time after the completion of the war in Indochina, we will withdraw that part of our force in Taiwan that was put there because of the war in Indochina, which is roughly two-thirds of the force on Taiwan. The remainder, which is in any event not a combat force, would be progressively reduced over a longer period of time. This is the understanding I think I have with the Prime Minister and before we get into words I want to make sure we understand each other correctly.

PM Chou: But this understanding should find expression in the communique too, not in such specific terms but in principle that all armed forces and military establishments should be withdrawn from Taiwan. Because if that is not mentioned in the joint communique, then people will become skeptical about normalization because how could there be normalization then? If the Chinese side put that forward as a demand and the U.S. side makes no reply, that's even worse, or if we put it forward and you do reply it would not be as good as if you put it forward on your own initiative. If this question is avoided altogether, then the broad masses of the people of the world would wonder what question has been solved after all.

Dr. Kissinger: We have two public opinions to consider next year. Yours, but in 1972—we will be frank with the Prime Minister—the only broad masses of the people of concern to the President has to be the American people. I am frank. Therefore it is difficult to be as explicit as you have in mind, though I repeat we will honor our commitment in action.

But let me see, Mr. Prime Minister, whether I can find a formulation that, without being as precise as our conversations, indicates a direction we intend to go. And maybe if we can meet again, go through other points, and I could submit it to you this afternoon for discussion, or if we take a break, after some time I will try to find a formulation that says something about U.S. military forces on Taiwan and the direction we want to go. I can see your point that without reference there might be some difficulty.

PM. Chou: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger: I would have to show it to the President, of course, but I will write out two or three sentences.

PM Chou: Because if we raise this question and you give no reply it would be a very bad impression.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand.

PM Chou: You admit we are exercising great restraint on the matter of Taiwan.

Dr. Kissinger: Very much so, and I admire it.

PM Chou: And what is more, we are agreeing that for the sake of normalization of relations between the two countries, we are not demanding an immediate solution for this in all aspects but that it be solved step by step. And so from this point alone it can be shown that in solving this crucial matter we do not proceed in undue haste.

Dr. Kissinger: I recognize this.

PM Chou: And so having exchanged some preliminary views we can study whether it is possible before you leave this time, whether it is possible to arrive at some preliminary common views. Today, being the last day of your visit, it is bound to be busy. It is always the case.

Dr. Kissinger: If we had stayed three days longer, it would be the same.

PM Chou: Have lunch now and a short rest.

Dr. Kissinger: Shall we meet again this afternoon?

PM Chou: Yes. Since I came personally I could not separate myself from this job. Since I have already joined this endeavor I am tying myself on this. I had wanted to escape from it today, but it appears not possible. If we can arrive at some results this time, it will save endeavors next time.

Dr. Kissinger: If we get jammed today we can put off our departure a few hours in the morning. That is not crucial. We can decide later this afternoon.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. All brackets are in the source text. The meeting was held in the Government Guest House. Attached at Tab A but not published is the draft communiqué.

52. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 24, 1971, 9:23-11:20 p.m. 52. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 24, 1971, 9:23-11:20 p.m.1

Beijing, October 24, 1971, 9:23-11:20 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Chou En-lai, People's Republic of China

Chi P'eng-fei, Acting PRC Foreign Minister

Chang Wen-chin, Director, Western Europe and American Department, PRC Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Hsuing Hsiang-hui, Secretary to the Prime Minister

Wang Hai-jung, Deputy Chief of Protocol, PRC

Tang Wen-sheng and Chi Chao-chu, Chinese Interpreters and Chinese Notetaker

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, Senior Staff Member,NSC

PLACE: Great Hall of the People, Peking

DATE & TIME: October 24, 1971, 9:23 p.m. - 11:20 p.m.

GENERAL SUBJECTS:

Communique, Announcements of Trips

PM Chou: We will continue with the discussion we had this morning.

Now we would like to put forward a very tentative and unofficial draft for the joint communique. It is mainly drafted by our side, with the exception of some similarities in the beginning. Most of it is an exposition of our point of view, also putting in some possible common points of view and also some of your points of view, and in other places we left it blank to put in your point of view. So we can only say to you it is not official, and is a tentative draft.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand.

PM Chou: So, we will just read it out, through translation.

Dr. Kissinger: Is there an English text you will be able to give us after it is read to us?

PM Chou: I will come to that. If Dr. Kissinger considers that this draft may be used for your study and you find that you need it, then we will give it to you. Because in this way, then, we express in a freer way our views. Please forgive me if I ask the Acting Foreign Minister to read it out, with the interpreter giving the translation.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: Thank you for giving me time for rest, like the opportunity which your President gave you when listening to the Emperor of Ethiopia. [laughter] I tried my best to say as few words as possible, but yet I couldn't do it.

Dr. Kissinger: You mean in the morning.

PM Chou: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger: I find our discussions really very useful, and I wish we had even more time.

PM Chou: It's a pity you couldn't stay longer.

(Chi P'eng-fei, Acting Foreign Minister, reads the first Chinese draft, attached at Tab A.)

Dr. Kissinger (after second paragraph): When you say “two sides,” you mean Chairman Mao and President Nixon?

PM Chou: Yes. Grammatically speaking, that probably has to be put in there.

Dr. Kissinger: A slight change. I just wanted to understand what you were including here.

Interpreter: (after last full paragraph on page one): We will just translate paragraph by paragraph.

Dr. Kissinger (during first paragraph of page three): He (indicating the Acting Foreign Minister, who kept trying to resume the reading in Chinese before the interpreter had finished speaking) is terribly eager. Did he draft it? [laughter]

Dr. Kissinger (during first paragraph of page four): What do you mean by “region"?

PM Chou: That is those who are in Indochina. When we say “region of Indochina,” it just means the three countries of Indochina.

Dr. Kissinger: Does this include the Chinese troops building a road in northern Laos?

PM Chou: That is foreign troops. But they are engineering corps. They will, of course, withdraw. They are considered to be foreign troops, but they are engineering corps, and not combat troops. But, of course, they are foreign troops.

(After full text has been read by Chi and translated): That's all.

Dr. Kissinger: Could we perhaps make some preliminary comments, or would the Prime Minister perhaps like to add something?

PM Chou: No, please.

Dr. Kissinger: Would it be possible for me to have a copy so I can refer to certain phrases?

PM Chou: We will give it to you later, because it's being retyped now. It's just being rushed out; it's rather incomplete. It's being retyped now.

Dr. Kissinger: All right, then I have to do it from memory. Let me deal with it in two parts, first with the basic concept and secondly with the execution of the concept.

I thought this afternoon a great deal about our discussion this morning. And I came to the conclusion that there is much merit in the Prime Minister's point of view that it would be better for both sides to state their views plainly and thereby produce perhaps a somewhat unusual communique which reflects the unusual nature of our relationship. So the basic idea that the Prime Minister put forward, that the communique take the form of each side's stating its position and then both sides stating their common positions is a good one, and one, I believe, acceptable to us. I will have to discuss it with the President, but this I am fairly sure about. Now we come to two questions: one, how is this to be actually carried out, and secondly, what topics are to be covered? Let me take the second point first for the consideration of the Prime Minister.

The Prime Minister has now a long list of a number of countries on which our views are stated, which tends to negate the general principle that we are not negotiating about third countries. Also, we don't want to offend any of your neighbors by leaving them out. [Chou laughs]

Seriously, the problem is that if we list some countries and not others it raises questions, and if we list all countries, it raises questions about what we are doing discussing so many third countries.

Now, let me turn to the substance as I remember it. I think the general point that I have made is supported by the fact that in the discussion of basic principles, the formulations that you have are not far from what we can accept, with, however, one proviso. Throughout all of this, the Chinese position is stated in its most intransigent terms. Now we recognize your necessities, both domestic and international, but we have our own necessities, both domestic and international. And we have to answer the question of why we came all the way to Peking to listen again to what we can read in the Chinese newspapers and what we have already heard in the many interviews the Prime Minister has given.

Of course, we are not asking you to change your views, but it must be possible to find more moderate formulations. And you have to understand that certain words have a different significance in America than they have here. I told you this morning that we are opposed to racial discrimination, but we cannot accept any phraseology that implies that we permitted a discussion of American domestic problems while we were in Peking. But I believe, if I had the text, that I could make suggestions whereby by the deletion of maybe two sentences the first part would be quite acceptable.

Now, let me turn to Vietnam. I frankly do not see how it can make any sense for the People's Republic to support a seven-point program which Hanoi has told us privately it does not want us to negotiate. And if we make public the secret negotiations we will both look ridiculous. On three different occasions Mr. Le Duc Tho told me, and I have the stenographic record, that we should discuss the nine points and not the seven points, and we have replied twice to the nine points. So, if you want to support points which your own ally is not supporting, that is your privilege, but it will make neither of us look very good.

But this is an editing problem, because no doubt you can find words to support the position of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam without referring to something they have themselves rejected in private talks. And if you want to maintain this phraseology now, knowing what the record enables us to make public, I will not object.

But, on the other hand, there are certain phrases which would be very offensive to the American public. When you call yourself “the reliable rear area of the just war,” or whatever the phrase is, you are saying no more than what I have read for years in your newspapers. So this is in no way surprising.

On the other hand, you have to understand that the American public has suffered a great deal in this war, and that the mothers of the soldiers who were killed there, and of the prisoners who are held there, will ask themselves why the President had to go 12,000 miles to be told all these things.

With respect to the eight-point program about Korea, I have already stated our views with respect to both its grammar and it use of adjectives. And therefore the objective tendency of this formulation is to sharpen differences, when in fact our positions are beginning to approach each other.

With respect to Japan, I do not see the People's Republic standing to make any comment about Okinawa, since this is a subject that concerns us and Japan—I mean in a document that is supposed to be signed by the President of the United States; of course, you are free to make any comment in your own statements.

And on the general points about Japan, we have had a full discussion, and the Prime Minister knows our views, But if he maintains that the People's Republic must state these views, we must state views that are so contrary that again it raises questions about what the purpose of the visit was.

With respect to the Indian subcontinent, I believe that the phraseology, with the deletion of perhaps one sentence, is essentially acceptable. I would therefore like to put to the Prime Minister … oh, Taiwan.

I believe also that the formulations with respect to Taiwan go further than it would be possible for us to say on this visit. I have told the Prime Minister exactly what can be expected from us, and I have told him that we would be prepared to extend some of the formulations we submitted to you. But we cannot go so far as you have proposed. Perhaps the best way to proceed would be for me, or for us, to draft tonight something that is possible and show it to you tomorrow.

PM Chou: Especially on Taiwan?

Dr. Kissinger: On Taiwan.

So what I would like to propose to the Prime Minister is the following. The basic approach, despite all my criticisms, is, I think, a useful one. But I believe that if this communique were published in this form, the impact on the United States would be exactly the opposite of what you intend. All of those who have sought improved relations with the People's Republic will be discredited because it will be said the President came 12,000 miles in order to be asked to sign a document containing the sharpest possible formulations against United States policy. There must be some way of expressing your principles which also maintains the self-respect of the American leaders. This problem is less acute in the section on general principles in which there are only two or three sentences that could be considered offensive, but it is acute in the specifics.

One other point, and I have to do all this from memory, it isn't possible to refer to understandings in a public communique—we will be spending the next two years explaining what the understandings were. With respect to our understandings, you have to rely on us to be far-sighted. It is not in our interest to try to trick you, and if we try to trick you, you will find it out very quickly, and everything we are trying to do will be destroyed.

We do not have to settle our differences; indeed we cannot on this visit, or maybe ever. But we do have to indicate that the visit marked some significant new beginning, or why else is it taking place? We must be able to answer the question of exactly what was accomplished, and what was accomplished cannot be only things that we must do in response to Chinese demands. There are many forces on the right, and curiously enough also on the pro-Soviet left and the pro-India liberal side, who would like nothing better than if this visit can end without any tangible progress either in mood or in content.

So I would say that I agree with the method of the Prime Minister; I think that the first section is approaching what can be said, but the remainder of the document needs reconsideration as to content, not so much as to method.

That is all I have to say, and the Prime Minister will forgive me that I did it from memory and without the document, and I may have been unjust in my quotations here and there.

There is one slight ambiguity which is unintended, which I want to call to the attention of the Prime Minister. At one point he says China has no intention of becoming a superpower. At another point he says no major country should collude with another against a third. So unless the Prime Minister is making a distinction between a superpower and a major power, this would leave China free to collude with another country against a third. I just wanted to point out the possibility.

PM Chou: We do differentiate between “superpower” and “major power.”

Dr. Kissinger: It's a minor point.

PM Chou: You see, we use “major power” incorrectly. It should say “big country.” It means big in size and population.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand your thought, but it is something someone reading it would pick up. It's a pure drafting problem, and I understand you. We have no problem between us.

PM Chou: The translation is incorrect. It shows how interpreters influence international events.

Dr. Kissinger: The other points I raised are serious.

PM Chou: I will not be in haste to reply to the other questions. I would like to express my true views. This morning I raised the question of Taiwan. On the question of Taiwan we put it in a most restrained manner. And it is great restraint, whether from the point of view of our propaganda or the demands of our people.

Dr. Kissinger: I don't object to your statement about your position. I believe it would be counterproductive to state our position in the form in which you stated it.

PM Chou: But you must express these questions in some way.

Dr. Kissinger: Oh, yes.

PM Chou: Of course, on this we made use of one of your formulations in acknowledging that “all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Straits maintain there is but one China.” That's one point of view.

Secondly, we will put it this way, that is the United States will encourage the Chinese to settle this internal question by themselves, through peaceful negotiations. This is what you have said all along, and your side expressed a willingness to do this.

Dr. Kissinger: The word “internal” will give us trouble at this stage.

PM Chou: Then international? No, we couldn't accept that.

Dr. Kissinger: Of course not. That's why we don't think … If we now say “internal” it will raise numerous questions. We will then be asked to say why you said “internal.” We will say we recognize the government in Taipei and it will get us into an interminable argument. The things that should matter to you are what I have said, and that the President will repeat. These are the measures that will guide our policy. What is in a communique is in itself only symbolic.

PM Chou: But these four points which we had formulated on the Taiwan question are crucial points, and if these are not indicated, then we will not know to what date in the distant future the promotion of the normalization of relations will be extended. We didn't mention the third point we wanted to express, that is you will not carry out or support any activities aimed at separating Taiwan from China and will not support two China formulas and so on, and the fourth point, the withdrawal of troops.

Actually, these measures, as we discussed, must go through a series of steps. But the United States side is bound to express its position on these matters. Otherwise, neither the Chinese people nor people of the world would know how our two countries will have relations, along what track we will proceed. You said this morning you want to find some formulation to express that.

Dr. Kissinger: On the military question?

PM Chou: The military aspect and not separating Taiwan from the motherland.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand that, but I have also told the Prime Minister two things: first, it's possible for us to do more than we can say, and secondly, it's possible for us to take more measures after next ye ar than during next year. I have made both of these points to the Prime Minister.

PM Chou: Well, that has been said between our two sides already, and when the President comes he will, of course, reaffirm that.

Dr. Kissinger: He will reaffirm everything that I have said.

PM Chou: That is the position you had already told us. But if this is not indicated in some form in the communique, then the people of our countries as well as the people of the world, will not know what is our orientation, what is the direction of our efforts. They will wonder why there is a normalization of relations, on what basis normalization will be established.

Dr. Kissinger: But you have said in your document what the requirements for normalization are.

PM Chou: That is so.

Dr. Kissinger: So lack of clarity is not one of the problems of this document; exactly the opposite.

PM Chou: [laughs] Generally speaking, you don't resort to diplomatic language, but here you are using diplomatic language.

Dr. Kissinger: This is true, and I have told you exactly why. What I would like to do on Taiwan—I don't object to your definition of your side. Let me draft tonight something for our side which includes a point about the military question, and show it to you in the morning. I understand your point about your principle, and I will go as far as I believe it is possible to go.

PM Chou: Only on the military aspect?

Dr. Kissinger: On the whole thing.

PM Chou: Of course, you are bound to withdraw from Taiwan and the Taiwan Straits. It's a question of time. We are not asking you to immediately withdraw, although we have the right to make such a demand, but we are not making it precisely because we understand the normalization of relations requires a process.

But there is this question which I raised this time, and you look upon as new: that is the question of Taiwan being undetermined so-called. On this question the United States must find some way of expressing its view. that you will not bring about a separation of Taiwan from China. We are not asking for you to undertake to stop all of your activities, because even if you did so, it may not succeed. We won't blame you for that. We just ask you not to support these activities.

Dr. Kissinger: I have already given the Prime Minister assurances on that. There are two questions. The first is what can we say now about things we have discussed, and I believe we can say something to indicate a direction, but we cannot say everything we have discussed.

The second point, which is perhaps insoluble, is that the average American, if he reads this document is going to ask why. The average American, not Huey Newton, or some who come through here, will find a whole list of propositions that will to him appear extraordinarily critical of the United States. With respect to which we are making a whole series of concessions, and he will ask why. What is it that has changed to make us give up long established position? I am not speaking of Taiwan above. If it were alone with general principles, that would be different. But if there is a whole list of other countries in the world and on top of that Taiwan, …

PM Chou: That is you talk about this by linking the topics together?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, the whole context. Standing alone this is different. I am not saying this only about Taiwan, but about the whole tone of the document which then ends with Taiwan. All that comes out in a slightly positive nature is that American representatives can come to Peking on an irregular basis, which is I am sure a pleasant thing for them, but is not reciprocal.

I am certain that if we sign this document we would find ourselves in the curious position that our own political opponents would accuse us of being soft on Communism, which would be an odd event for Richard Nixon. And this time I don't mean on the right. I am not speaking about Taiwan; Taiwan is the one that's easiest to fix in this document. The basic principles of Taiwan I think we can fix fairly easily. On other points together with Taiwan, it becomes very tough.

PM Chou: Well, on the question of Taiwan, you should think about a way to express yourself on these four points. Otherwise, it will be very difficult to make an accounting to our people.

As for your views on the other points, after you have seen our draft in writing, then you can put forward your views. But you should try to find some formulation to express these four points concerning Taiwan, and it may be possible your formulation would be even better than ours. For instance, your formulation that “all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Straits maintain there is but one China,” that is something you thought out. We could not have thought that out.

Dr. Kissinger: I think between 2:00 and 3:00 in the morning you probably could have.

PM Chou: Indeed, I admire you for thinking out such a formulation. (Miss T'ang says something in Chinese. )

Dr. Kissinger: She claims she thought that one up?

Interpreter: She says they copyrighted that, not from us …

Dr. Kissinger: But from whom?

Interpreter: First of all, the Premier says he cannot claim the copyright on such, nor could Miss T'ang.

Dr. Kissinger: How should we proceed now?

PM Chou: It's already 11:00. We should rest now, at least for your two assistants. Otherwise the calories we have consumed will be used up.

Dr. Kissinger: Does the Prime Minister prefer me in an exhausted state?

PM Chou: No, no, no. I will try to give you the English translation around 12:00.

Dr. Kissinger: Could the Chinese side reconsider some of the formulations that I have objected to, while I reconsider some of the formulations that we have discussed?

PM Chou: As we had already considered our formulations, we would need your opinion as a stimulant for our ideas.

Dr. Kissinger: I don't mean Taiwan. I have given you a list of things I objected to.

PM Chou: We will study them. Principally we would like to hear your views first.

Dr. Kissinger: My question was what is our work plan then for tomorrow?

Chou's Interpreter: At 9:00 the Premier will come to your guest house, and the same people, too.

Dr. Kissinger: All right. This is a rather long communique. How much time can the Prime Minister give to this problem tomorrow? I want to know so that I can set the departure of the plane.

PM Chou: It's only an initial, tentative draft. And so long as your views approach each other, then a further exchange can be done either through your sending another special envoy to Peking, or through Paris, or some other means. Because, as I had said to you before, Chairman Mao also considered that if it is not possible to agree on a communique, then we might consider not issuing any communique at all. But that might not be so good for your President after he has come and visited China, and yet no results are announced. But we had thought about that possibility. So, what we should do at this time is try to reach a general agreement on a tentative draft, and then we must see how events develop. Some points we may be able to affirm.

Dr. Kissinger: This could take us the better part of tomorrow.

PM Chou: That's right. At least three hours.

Dr. Kissinger: Probably more. Shall we set the departure for 5:00?

PM Chou: Yes. You mean leave Peking at 5:00?

Dr. Kissinger: Or maybe 6:00?

PM Chou: Maybe 5:00 would be all right. Or 6:00.

Dr. Kissinger: Let's say 5:00 and we can put it off an hour if it is necessary.

PM Chou: All right.

Dr. Kissinger: I think it is very important to get an outline. It is very difficult to send a special envoy here who knows enough about our discussions to talk to you intelligently. Of course, I could meet somebody in Paris or elsewhere.

PM Chou: That will take time then.

Dr. Kissinger: Exactly.

PM Chou: It will be best if we can arrive at some outline at this time.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: On the main points.

Dr. Kissinger: Once we have an outline, then we can exchange drafts.

PM Chou: That's right. Then we can have an exchange through our channels, because there will bound to be some considerations on the wording. And when your President comes, you can still discuss this then.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, but I have the impression that the Prime Minister will be somewhat occupied.

PM Chou: I will find some time.

Dr. Kissinger: And also, now my deputy is taking care of the President, but when the President is here, I must take care, of his business, too.

But I think we understand each other, and I think you understand what my problems are with this draft. And we will take a look at it, and perhaps you can take a look at it also.

But you have said you still have two matters.

PM Chou: That is on the short announcement about your visit.

Dr. Kissinger: Oh, yes.

PM Chou: There's practically nothing different at all in the two drafts. Dr. Kissinger (to Winston Lord): There are two drafts?

Interpreter: That is, our revision of your draft.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, that's all right.

Interpreter: It's basically the same.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, yours is better English.

PM Chou: You are probably praising your schoolmate.

Dr. Kissinger: It's because I studied Kant.

PM Chou: We'll type it out again.

And then the second point is about the time of the President's visit. Take a look at it, please. That is actually more or less what you said early last night. Maybe you think there is something to be added?

Dr. Kissinger: It sounds all right to me. I will ask the President if he has any big problem with it, but let's agree to this.

PM Chou: Certainly, you ask your President.

Dr. Kissinger: May I keep both. I like to have the Chinese.

PM Chou: As for the time for the announcement, we prefer within the last ten days of November.

Dr. Kissinger: Either the 20th or the 22nd.

PM Chou: It will be announced … the announcement will be (He becomes aware of the draft handed to Kissinger. ) We have laid bare our thinking to you in a working paper of ours. We have given you our notes on what you said the other day. We have given you secret papers.

Dr. Kissinger: What date do you prefer?

PM Chou: Anyway, some time within the last ten days in November. You can consider the specific date after consulting your President, or we may tell you our preference after we consider the date.

Dr. Kissinger: All right, through Paris. We probably prefer it before the 24th, because the President will go away. It's no big problem.

PM Chou: On Thanksgiving?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. All right. We will propose a date.

PM Chou: You prefer the time always to be 1600 in the afternoon for the release, Washington time?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. The time will always be 1600 Washington time. All right. So we will propose a date to you within the next few days, within a week.

I have one technical matter. Our technical people are under the impression that you have agreed that a technical group may visit China after this announcement has been made, say in December.

PM Chou: Led by General Haig?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. And he knows my thinking very well. Will you announce my departure from here? I think you are free to do so.

PM Chou: Yes, but as for the announcement itself, that will be in the same wording, on the 27th for you and the 28th for us.

Dr. Kissinger: At 4:00 in the afternoon for us. You didn't give me the text. It's another confidential document.

PM Chou: That is not a confidential document. That is especially for you.

Dr. Kissinger: But if it's not confidential, the New York Times won't print it. [Chou laughs.]

Dr. Kissinger: All right. It might be a little safer to meet at 10:00, to give us an opportunity to get this retyped.

PM Chou: All right.

Dr. Kissinger: Good.

PM Chou: Anyway, on the last day one must work very hard.

Dr. Kissinger: Will we have a general session tomorrow, or finish this?

PM Chou: First this one, and then the general meeting.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. All brackets and ellipses are in the source text. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People. Attached at Tab A is the first Chinese draft. See Document 56 for text of the draft.

53. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 25, 1971, 10:21-11:00 a.m. 53. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 25, 1971, 10:21-11:00 a.m.1

Beijing, October 25, 1971, 10:21-11:00 a.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Chou En-lai, People's Republic of China

Chi P'eng-fei, Acting PRC Foreign Minister

Chang Wen-chin, Director, Western Europe and American Department, PRC Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Hsuing Hsiang-hui, Secretary to the Prime Minister

Wang Hai-jung, Deputy Chief of Protocol, PRC

Tang Wen-sheng and Chi Chao-chu, Chinese Interpreters and Chinese Notetaker

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, Senior Staff Member,NSC

PLACE: Government Guest House, Peking

DATE & TIME: October 25, 1971, 10:12-11:00 a.m.

GENERAL SUBJECT:

Communique

Dr. Kissinger: It took longer to draft than we thought (referring to revising the draft communique). We just finished an hour ago.

PM Chou: No sleep?

Dr. Kissinger: We did it in shifts. He (Mr. Lord) worked last night and I got up this morning at 6:00. How should we proceed, Mr. Prime Minister?

PM Chou: I will first listen to you.

Dr. Kissinger: Mr. Prime Minister, we redrafted your tentative draft that you presented to us yesterday. Let me tell you what we attempted to do before I read it. We recognize that it would not be worthy for either of our countries to write a communique with the usual banalities. We also think that it would be better, as the Prime Minister suggested, that each side states its position plus the things it agrees on.

At the same time, since we are at the beginning of what we hope will be a move toward friendship, it is important that the public does not get the impression that all the leaders did was to repeat standard positions and use this as a platform to say standard things to each other. So we have tried to reduce somewhat those passages that we found objectionable as I explained to you last night.

On Taiwan, we have redrafted the section which you saw in our draft and attempted to take into account some of the points the Prime Minister made to us last night or in slightly elliptical language. So let me read our proposed tentative draft. Is that agreeable?

PM Chou: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger: (Reads second U.S. draft at Tab A.)

(After first paragraph.) Actually it's your first page. I would be glad to read it, but it is your first page. The same technical part. Do you want me to read it? I would be glad to.

PM Chou: No need to.

Dr. Kissinger: Who was at meetings and what was visited.

PM Chou: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger: Exactly as you had it last night.

(Referring to first paragraph on page two.) We took out “great turmoil exists”, but I will not man the barricades on that phrase.

(Referring to paragraph starting on page two and ending on page three.) I am sure this can be shortened a little, this paragraph.

(Referring to third subparagraph of first full paragraph of page four.) That repeats something we have already said.

(Referring to last sentence of second full paragraph on page seven.) If we agree on this it will be the first time that the State Department spokesman of the President will be disputed in the press. I am accepting it. I just want to pay tribute to the diplomatic skill of the Prime Minister.

PM Chou: We did not think about that at all because you said it would no longer be repeated.

Dr. Kissinger: I will read the American position and then I will explain it. (Referring to sentence that begins on page seven and ends on page eight.) This is a change in your draft. Before we said we “took note of it;” now we say we “no longer challenge it.”

(Referring to second full sentence on page eight.) Since we have said earlier that tensions are related to Indochina I think it is clear what we mean.

PM Chow: (Referring to third full sentence on page eight.) Abandon your concern for interest, profits? You mean a concern for a peaceful solution?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: Will you please repeat?

Dr. Kissinger: “This would be done without the abandonment of United States interest in a peaceful solution.” It has nothing to do with interest. If the word “interest” bothers you, we can change it. We want no ambiguity. That is a drafting problem.

(Referring to second full paragraph on page eight.) This is later than in your draft.

(Referring to last full sentence on page eight.) My secretary was so moved by this sentence she typed it twice. (Chou laughs.)

PM Chou: (Referring to the second to last paragraph. ) You changed that.

Dr. Kissinger: So it ends on a positive note. (Rereads the paragraph.) (Dr. Kissinger hands over the draft to Prime Minister Chou.) We have attempted, Mr. Prime Minister, to draft a communique that takes into account the necessities of both sides. I believe that it would be a very unusual communique if we could agree to it. It would be more honest and more honorable than any other communique that I have seen in the relations between two countries. It states our differences without being offensive, and it tries to state a positive direction without raising false hopes. And, therefore, it could begin a new historical period, not only in the relations of our peoples but the peoples of the world.

But I am sure that the Prime Minister will have suggestions to make further improvements.

PM Chou: I hope so. So I won't say so much at the present moment. You spent a whole night working on it. I hope that you will give us time now to translate it and make a study of it. And we will try to give a reply to you two to three hours hence.

Dr. Kissinger: All right. About the departure, so that we are not under pressure, we could leave—it is up to you—as late as 9:00 tomorrow morning and arrive in Washington at 4:00 the next day which is about what we are planning to do. It is a little hard on the crew but for once, for an important occasion. If you would like that, we would be prepared —

PM Chou: We agree. I shall see that they have a good rest tonight. First of all, they should have a good afternoon nap and a film to relax them, and then an early sleep. If it is possible, could you give us another copy? (Dr. Kissinger gives the Chinese another copy.)

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. And set the departure for 9:00 tomorrow morning.

PM Chou: And have a nap after your meal. Did you type (last night) Miss Matthews?

Miss Matthews: No, Miss Pineau did.

Dr. Kissinger: I notice that on the last day the Chinese side always disappears and returns at irregular intervals.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. All brackets and ellipses are in the source text. The meeting was held at the Government Guest House. Attached at Tab A is the second Chinese draft of the communiqué; attached at Tab B is the third U.S. draft of the communiqué. See Document 56 for text of these drafts.

54. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 25, 1971, 9:50-11:40 p.m. 54. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 25, 1971, 9:50-11:40 p.m.1

Beijing, October 25, 1971, 9:50-11:40 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Chou En-lai, People's Republic of China

Chi P'eng-fei, Acting PRC Foreign Minister

Chang Wen-chin, Director, Western Europe and American Department, PRC Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Hsuing Hsiang-hui, Secretary to the Prime Minister

Wang Hai-jung, Deputy Chief of Protocol, PRC

Tang Wen-sheng and Chi Chao-chu, Chinese Interpreters and Chinese Notetaker

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, Senior Staff Member,NSC

PLACE: Government Guest House, Peking

DATE & TIME: October 25, 1971, 9:50 P.M. -11:40 P.M.

GENERAL SUBJECT:

Communique

Dr. Kissinger: I didn't have an opportunity to thank you this morning, Mr. Prime Minister, for arranging for the showing of the film of our visit in July. It brought back very pleasant memories, and in addition I thought it was very well done.

PM Chou: It was quite short, however.

Dr. Kissinger: It was short, but I thought very well done. The background music was nice and the pictures were well selected.

PM Chou: This time they probably took more shots.

Dr. Kissinger: I would think so.

PM Chou: You went to the Altar of Heaven today, and took a walk there.

Dr. Kissinger: That's right. It is very impressive.

Mr. Prime Minister, we have had only two hours to look over your document and therefore our reactions are not as detailed as they should be. (Second Chinese draft is attached at Tab A.) I understand what you attempted to do in this document. You attempted to put all the positions of each side together at the beginning of the document, and then to state the other material afterwards. The practical result: of this is that of an eight page document; one page deals with technical aspects, four pages deal with disagreement stated in rather strong terms, and only two can be said to have any constructive aspects. I am talking about the English version, of course.

PM Chou: There seems to be quite a difference in pages between English and Chinese. The Chinese in our typed text is five and a half pages, but when it is printed in official documents it is four pages.

Dr. Kissinger: But the proportion will not change.

PM Chou: Not necessarily, because the first page will still be filled with protocol aspects because the names are not in it yet; that will take one page in Chinese. Then the views of each side take up less than two and a half pages, and then common views take one page. Then there is the Taiwan question, and the final part is about the resolution of problems. So in our version out of five and a half pages, two and a half deal with disagreements. Probably in the Chinese the ideas are expressed in a more concentrated way and in English it takes more words.

Dr. Kissinger: My problem is that the President will read the English version.

Let me make a philosophical comment, before I make specific comments. Ever since this Administration has come into office the President and I have attempted to start a new direction toward the People's Republic. And this is why for us the visit in China marked in many respects the high point of what we have attempted to do in our foreign policy. We started this when improving relations with the People's Republic of China was not at all a popular course.

Now what fills me with some melancholy is the impression I have that for your own reasons you are under necessity to state our disagreements in the sharpest and most provocative way possible. All the drafts we have submitted have attempted to emphasize areas of agreement. Now I understand the pressures and the convictions that push you into an opposite direction. You did not go through what you have done for 50 years in order to alter your beliefs in anticipation of a President's visit. But we have an important decision to make, and the decision is whether we are starting a new period or engaging in a tactic in a struggle. I am speaking with great frankness. We are trying to begin a new era.

Now, for example, to ask the President of the United States to sign a document with the first sentence of the first substantive paragraph saying people of the world want to make revolution is rather strong medicine. Similarly, I have explained to the Prime Minister previously that. we did not start the war in Vietnam—that is, this Administration did not start it, and we are trying to end it. Indeed, we are hoping it will perhaps be ended by the time the President comes here. But for him to be asked to sign, if the war should go on, the Chinese determination to help to the end the struggle of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia where American soldiers are being killed is rather painful. We are not asking you not to support them, and the Prime Minister knows that we have asked nothing with respect to Vietnam and will take no advantage in any respect in our negotiations towards Vietnam. But the President will have to answer to the American people. So we are not trying to affect your actions. I am speaking now of your words. I could give other examples. We are not challenging your views; we are just challenging your expression.

So now a word about Taiwan. I am clear about what our understanding is. And we have repeated it on many occasions to the Prime Minister, and I am certain the President will repeat it when he is here. But I also told the Prime Minister at our first meeting that we could do more than we can say. The formulation which I have given the Prime Minister, while it doesn't go as far as he wishes me to go, goes far beyond what any other American administration could even have conceived. I don't mind telling him that I have gone beyond my instructions in offering the formulation of not challenging their views, and in respect to military measures we will take. And it may be that I can convince the President that some of the proposals of the Prime Minister on the issues of Taiwan are acceptable. I am not optimistic on that score. I think I can convince him of what I have proposed here.

But I do want to repeat to the Prime Minister what I have said on at least three occasions before. One, within a reasonable period of time after the end of the Vietnam war, we will withdraw that part of our force on Taiwan which is related to the war in Vietnam, which is about 2/3 of the force on Taiwan. After that withdrawal is completed we will continue the withdrawal. And we will do nothing to encourage a separate Taiwan movement. So that the one sentence that the Prime Minister wants to put into the communique is agreeable in substance but would be self-defeating if it is stated in writing now.

I am afraid that if we accepted this draft we would be condemned in America for accepting a rather extreme formulation of the Chinese position, and in return we will have withdrawn all forces on Taiwan and been permitted to sign the five principles for coexistence which have been on the table for sixteen years.

What we have done in the limited time available is to take your document and take out those sentences we find most offensive. And we have restored one or two sentences which are of some symbolic significance in the U.S. but have no enormous operational consequence, such as the phrase that both sides have a responsibility to reduce the danger of military conflict. This should not be too painful for you.

On Taiwan, I believe that I will have trouble enough convincing the President of the formulation I have given you, but nevertheless I am prepared to go to the President, especially on the sentence about a separatist movement, to see whether we can find a formulation that meets your needs. I don't want to hold out much hope to you and I'm not sure it's necessary, because I think our understanding should mean more to you than the statement and the statement is very definite.

In practice this means that we have accepted 85 percent of your draft. (Dr. Kissinger asks Mr. Lord to hand over a copy of the long version of the two alternate drafts that had been prepared. This third U. S. draft is attached at Tab B.) I don't know if I should inflict a reading of this on the Prime Minister at this hour.

PM Chou: Yes.

Interpreter: I will translate it to the Prime Minister.

Dr. Kissinger: The first page we can skip. We accept it without change.

PM Chou: You make some change in wording?

Dr. Kissinger: One that I forgot to tell you has to do with the psychology of the President. He wants to be in a position where he is working every part of the day and not just sightseeing.

PM Chou: So that was added.

Dr. Kissinger: So I added the phrase that he continued his discussions (referring to last paragraph on page one). I am assuming that by the time you are travelling together you will be still speaking. (laughter) So it was true. I won't explain the changes. They are self-explanatory.

[The interpreter reads new U.S. version to the Prime Minister.]

Dr. Kissinger: (interrupting) There is one sentence we took out which I don't object to putting back in. That is “all foreign troops should be withdrawn to their own countries.” [at the middle of page three in Chinese draft].

(Interrupting at another point) This is from the original draft.

Interpreter: It is a matter of the Chinese, not the English.

PM Chou: The long English sentence makes it difficult to put it concisely into Chinese.

Dr. Kissinger: (Interrupting) When you read the part on Pakistan…

Interpreter: I am there now.

Dr. Kissinger: …use the word “international” before “problems”. Otherwise it might read as criticism.

PM Chou: (Interrupting) What is the significance of the phrase “both wish to reduce the danger of military conflict” (referring to second paragraph of page five). I am not clear. Is it that the two sides should be careful of violations of borders or air violations?

Dr. Kissinger: Both sides should exercise restraint in relations so as to lessen the danger of bilateral conflict, and where they have a common interest, to reduce the danger of conflict elsewhere. It is really another version of the statement not to use force or the threat of force.

PM Chou: That is already included in the principle mentioned above, following the five principles of coexistence. That is, disputes should be settled on this basis without using force. That is a principle, but here you mentioned the two sides.

Dr. Kissinger: This is a more active form that they should show restraint in actions with each other, including the point the Prime Minister used.

PM Chou: Well, the places where there is contact between the two sides, one is the Taiwan Straits, one is our border with Indochina, another is from the air; and then another possibility will be Korea and there is an armistice agreement there already and it is a question of turning it into a more permanent arrangement. I notice that you took out the sentence from our former draft that we would try to find a more permanent arrangement.

Dr. Kissinger: Let's see what else there is in the draft. I don't think this sentence will break up negotiations.

PM Chou: That's true. I just want to make sure what you have in mind here because originally I was thinking of leaving it as it was.

Dr. Kissinger: What I have in mind is that we have an interest to show restraint towards each other, and where we can do some influencing to try to lessen the dangers of conflict—such as in the Asian subcontinent.

PM Chou: That is, either direct or indirect.

Dr. Kissinger: That is right.

(The interpreter finishes translation.)

Dr. Kissinger: Seven pages.

PM Chou: A little less.

Dr. Kissinger: Six and a half.

PM Chou: Dr. Kissinger said while discussing the Taiwan question a while ago, something about a formulation on the separation of Taiwan. It is not here in the draft.

Dr. Kissinger: I haven't found it yet. I would like to discuss it with the President first, and if I find one, I will send it through our usual channel. But what is more important is to have our promise that we will not do it.

PM Chou: I would like to say why we made those changes, and it was somewhat difficult, from last night. Last night Dr. Kissinger said that you were for drafting so that each side states its position; and then state the common ground on which each side is found, that is, in order to show that our two sides are taking a positive approach in pushing things forward.

And Dr. Kissinger said that there appeared to be some ambiguity: while both sides said they would not negotiate on behalf of any third party there are common points on certain questions. That is why after studying those points in common there does appear to be a contradiction.

For instance, the Indochinese question. In our repeated public utterances we have always said when we talk about forces withdrawing from Indochina we talk about the people from outside; and let the three peoples of Indochina settle their problems for themselves. But in your formulation which you handed over to us you mentioned all foreign troops should withdraw from each country, and that the people of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia should settle their problems for themselves free from foreign interference. And as Dr. Kissinger said yesterday, we should proceed from a practical approach. That is, only on those points on which we are really in agreement should we say so. If it appears we are, but in reality we aren't, then we cannot really explain ourselves; and if a third country asks about it, it will be a dishonest communique because we cannot explain it.

Dr. Kissinger: I thought about it, and it does give the impression that the People's Republic and the United States are trying to exercise a sort of condominium and settle these issues. This is true even where we agree, like on the Indian subcontinent where we genuinely agree, and on Indochina where we can only make formulations that are dishonest. I understand what you did, and I respect this.

PM Chou: And it is true that probably only on the question of the subcontinent are our views more close. But indeed if we are to do so, it will make India feel we are working together to threaten her.

Dr. Kissinger: I agree.

PM Chou: So there are disadvantages for putting our views on the various regions separately.

Then again for Japan. It is possible that with regard to Japan's future some of our views are approximate or even are the same, but if we put it together it will be difficult to find common wording. You will persist in honoring your treaty agreement while we must always show opposition to the treaty, and there will be no agreement there. And it is also a similar question with regard to the Korean question. That is why we try to put the propositions of the two sides all together.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand what the Prime Minister is doing, but if he reads over the formulations the practical result is that it concentrates all disagreements into the first two-thirds of the communique, and when I think of the explanation I will have to give to the press, which I will have to do, they will say you came 12,000 miles to do this? But I think we can handle the version we gave you.

PM Chou: This method you agree to was of concentrating the views of our two sides. But while doing this it cannot be said that you cannot find any common ground on our two sides expressed in these two concentrated portions. Because otherwise if you cannot find any common ground at all on the general statements in the beginning, you cannot arrive at the end of the communique with regard to the principles of international relations and the four points. This shows that even in general statements in the beginning one can find common points. Otherwise it will not be possible to promote the normalization of the relations of the two countries. So this is not an absolute thing.

Then let us cite an example. You delete a lot of our sentences; probably the most serious among these were the words “revolution.” But you mentioned many times yourself about the word “revolution.” You said Lon Nol's was a revolution, and I didn't want to debate with you. It depends on how one interprets the word “revolution.” But this is a question that can be solved easily. Suppose the word “revolution” be changed to the word “progress.”

Dr. Kissinger: “and the people want progress"? Certainly. Do you want that here?

PM Chou: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger: Certainly.

PM Chou: If the people of different countries don't approve and want to use another word, we cannot restrict them from using it.

Dr. Kissinger: In their own countries? I am talking about what we and you say together. We cannot object to what you or your friends say unilaterally.

PM Chou: So that is what I want to say first of all. It is not that we cannot find common ground in the general statements. And then in your general statement you reverted to some of your original formulations; and deleted quite a lot of ours.

Dr. Kissinger: In our general statement?

PM Chou: Yes. Of course, you restored the sentence that all foreign troops withdraw to their countries. It is a principle. It's a question of time. And we are not saying at what time. It is a matter of principle.

Dr. Kissinger: We have put back only one sentence in ours. We have taken out one that you left in in our position and put in one that you took out. If you like that sentence of ours that we took out and that you left in, we will put it back in.

PM Chou: Miss Matthews is even laughing at that.

Dr. Kissinger: I am just trying to be agreeable.

PM Chou: That's right. We will talk about those general statements later. What we have is that we found common ground. And in the section on international relations you added that which you had originally (page 4 of U.S. draft, at Tab. A), that is, “countries irrespective of their social systems, have a common interest in working toward a resolution of international differences in the interest of all mankind.” This is a sentence which we should study, to find a proper formulation.

Dr. Kissinger: All right.

PM Chou: Then concerning the principles guiding both sides (page 5 of U.S. draft), there was three and now there is four, i.e., the one about reducing the danger of military conflict.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: The really important question is to say something more on Taiwan because that really affects the relations of our two countries. You know we are not asking you to immediately withdraw forces.

Dr. Kissinger: I think we understand each other on substance.

PM Chou: Substance is one thing, but you must take into account our necessities with our people, just as we have to take into account your necessities. At the same time, you should be aware that negotiations between the Taiwan authorities and the Motherland are not so easy.

Dr. Kissinger: You didn't say you were conducting them.

PM Chou: No, it is not easy. Not only to you but also to some other American friends. That is because we know about the temperament of Chiang Kai-shek. So it will not be an easy thing to negotiate with the Taiwanese authorities, although you would say have peaceful relations with them. On the one hand it is wished that the Taiwan area will remain tranquil, but at the same time we must not give up our sovereignty over it.

On our side we only mentioned principles and did not go into specifics. That is, you expressed that you support efforts to reach an equitable and peaceful resolution of the relationship of Taiwan and the mainland. And then some people might make such an interpretation of this sentence, that is what is meant by equitable, to mean to let the people on Taiwan exercise a plebescite for so-called self-determination.

Dr. Kissinger: This attempts to say that all Chinese say there is only one China and the U.S. doesn't challenge that and will support a peaceful resolution of the effort. I think the three sentences point in one direction. Would you prefer if we dropped the word “equitable"?

PM Chou: Of course, it would be better.

Dr. Kissinger: Right. I have to tell the Prime Minister that I am operating on my assessment of what the President will accept. But what the President approved was the first draft which we have long since left. I have a rather good estimate of what the President's thinking is, working so closely with him, but I want to be sure that if we change something after we get back that you will not think that I have misled you.

PM Chou: It doesn't matter because between now and the President's visit, it is four months and you can tell us.

Dr. Kissinger: Then with that qualification, let us drop “equitable.” I am quite sure the President will go along with it.

PM Chou: We want to avoid the possibility of guessing on the part of certain people. Because this state of affairs is bound to appear in the UN—either two Chinas or one China, two governments. That would be a temporary phenomenon. You admit it, and so do we. Some people are saying that Dr. Kissinger came to China for the UN.

Dr. Kissinger: I know.

PM Chou: Because the President's personal representative also visited Taiwan at this time, Mr. Reagan.

Dr. Kissinger: Mr. Reagan is not equivalent to me.

PM Chou: We know that because we have contact with you, but some other people say this.

Dr. Kissinger: We have next year a particular political problem which I have been candid with you about. We do not want the China lobby to connect together with the radical left and have to fight both simultaneously, and also the pro-Soviet and pro-India groups.

PM Chou: It is easy to deal with the pro-Soviet people because they are revisionists.

Dr. Kissinger: Not in our domestic affairs, because there is no tradition of dealing with China but there is with the Soviet Union. So Governor Reagan tells you nothing about our foreign policy. He tells you something about our domestic policy.

PM Chou: Your President needed a visit by Governor Reagan for the present moment. We understand that.

Dr. Kissinger: And for the policy I am pursuing here in Peking.

PM Chou: That is why he had to send someone to Taiwan to console them.

Dr. Kissinger: And that is why it would be better next year not to radicalize too many people when the trend is being established.

PM Chou: Chairman Mao has talked to Edgar Snow and expounded on that question. First, because your President is in office, so because he is in power, he is able to solve problems. Just to deal with your opposition is to talk empty words, and should they come into office, maybe what they say won't happen at all.

Secondly, your President is known as a chieftain of anti-communism, so he dares to do that. So although you may say so much and we may say so much, what counts will be what is done in regard to specific questions.

For instance, in talking about principles. One principle is that all foreign troops should be withdrawn back to their own countries. But we know how difficult it is in practice for foreign troops to be withdrawn into their country. The easiest was for China; after the war in Korea, in 1958, all Chinese volunteers withdrew back to China. In fact, Chairman Mao thought it was done later than it should have been. You mentioned the question of the engineering corps building the road in Laos and the antiaircraft corps. If you solve Indochina through peaceful negotiations, these people of ours will be withdrawn in a day's time. With no war, we don't need antiaircraft defenses, and all we need is our ordinary workers to finish the road.

Dr. Kissinger: Of course, it is not self-evident to me why you have engineering troops in another country.

PM Chou: It is not the engineering corps. Those building the road are workers. We have forces protecting them from air attack.

Dr. Kissinger: But they are building in a foreign country without permission.

PM Chou: No, because that is upon the request of the official administration of the neutralists. We have already built two sections of the highway for them. We will return as soon as we have finished. We do not want to fight there. You cannot find our people engaged in the war there. We have not undertaken that obligation. That we have stated. So it will be very easy for us to withdraw our antiaircraft units.

But it is not so easy to withdraw your forces, and for the Soviet Union it will be even harder. When will they withdraw from Mongolia? Do you know when?

Dr. Kissinger: I don't think ever.

PM Chou: Exactly. The principle is one thing, but putting it into practice takes a long time. But one should set an example. So it really takes time to bring about a relaxation of tension. Then there is the question of Taiwan, that is not separating Taiwan from the motherland.

Dr. Kissinger: But it is not easy.

PM Chou: If we think about a formulation, would you consider it?

Dr. Kissinger: Of course. I would be grateful, particularly if you are elliptical.

PM Chou: The formulation you have here creates a difficulty for us, “progressively reduced.” I think that there are some points of advantage in leaving some so as to not let the Japanese send in their forces.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, while it is in our power. You will know if we are encouraging it, and we will strongly oppose it.

PM Chou: The public, when they see this, will think you are not completely withdrawing your forces. So I would like to think about a formulation. We are in no hurry, but the direction should be made clear.

Dr. Kissinger: It has for us the advantage of a certain ambiguity which is a disadvantage for you.

PM Chou: That is right. But in actual practice we are not opposed to your acting like that because so long as you still have forces on Taiwan you will have the responsibility of not letting Japanese armed forces go in. As a sovereign state we cannot publicly say that.

Dr. Kissinger: Of course.

PM Chou: But objectively speaking for you to keep forces on Taiwan to prevent Japan from sending its forces into Taiwan is beneficial to the relaxation of tension in the Far East. If Japan puts forces in to bring about a so-called independent Taiwan, that will be the beginning of the end for peace in the Far East. It will be the end of the relaxation of tension. For the Japanese armed forces to bring about a so-called independent Taiwan would be the same as the independence of Outer Mongolia if done by the Soviet Union. That is the seed of unrest in the Far East. We are not afraid to point out the dangers.

Dr. Kissinger: We will give it no encouragement and we will oppose it, and I am sure the President will repeat this to you and Chairman Mao.

PM Chou: So on this part let us think over what kind of formulation will be best. Of course, we can say only that it will be finalized in February. It's better if we can think of some formulation now than then.

Dr. Kissinger: The circumstances of a Presidential trip, the strangeness of the country, and with others along, this will make it harder. In fact, this type of exchange will be difficult. Anything we can settle before the trip would be better.

PM Chou: That is one thing. The second thing is that you said you couldn't come again before the President comes. Otherwise they would say why is Dr. Kissinger coming for a third time, and there is obviously a question unsolved. Isn't that the case?

Dr. Kissinger: I think so.

PM Chou: So between now and the President's visit someone else may come as a liaison?

Dr. Kissinger: No one sees our protocols, so it is difficult. General Haig knows them, but he is a better soldier than a negotiator. I have complete confidence in him, but this is not his strong point. He would be the best in the interval. Later on, Ambassador Bruce, after Vietnam is no longer a problem for you. But if we send any special envoy now it will attract attention.

PM Chou: That's true.

We will consider the wording again. It appears we will have to work deeptinto the night tonight. For me, I am accustomed to it, but perhaps your assistants are not.

Dr. Kissinger: Mr. Lord is.

PM Chou: You can sleep for a few hours.

Dr. Kissinger: You will let us know when you are ready?

PM Chou: Yes. We must try to solve this tonight, at least in general terms.

Dr. Kissinger: General Haig can help on the paragraph on Taiwan, but not on the whole document.

I also have a number of other questions, but I will raise them after this.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. All brackets and ellipses are in the source text. The meeting was held at the Government Guest House. Attached at Tab A is the second Chinese draft of the communiqué; attached at Tab B is the third U.S. draft of the communiqué. See Document 56 for text of these drafts.

55. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 26, 1971, 5:30-8:10 p.m. 55. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, October 26, 1971, 5:30-8:10 p.m.1

Beijing, October 26, 1971, 5:30-8:10 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Chou En-lai, People's Republic of China

Chi P'eng-fei, Acting PRC Foreign Minister

Chang Wen-chin, Director, Western Europe and American Department, PRC Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Hsuing Hsiang-hui, Secretary to the Prime Minister

Wang Hai-jung, Deputy Chief of Protocol, PRC

Tang Wen-sheng and Chi Chao-chu, Chinese Interpreters and Chinese Notetaker

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, Senior Staff Member,NSC

PLACE: Government Guest House

DATE & TIME: October 26, 1971; 5:30 - 8:10 a.m.

GENERAL SUBJECTS:

Communique, Prisoners, Announcements of Trips, Technical Matters

Dr. Kissinger: We, of course, have not had the time to study this (the third Chinese draft attached at Tab A) in all its details, but let me give you a quick reaction. I recognize what you have attempted to do here, and I think it is in a positive direction.

I have made two attempts, Mr. Prime Minister. One is to shorten somewhat the statement of our differences for the reasons that I have already given you. And the second is to attempt a redraft of the Taiwan section which, however, puts me into the difficulty that the Prime Minister must understand that I am literally operating on my own. And I do not want to mislead him. I am 95 percent sure that I can convince the President of the formulation I gave you. I am less sure of my ability to convince him of what I will discuss with you now, and if under these circumstances the Prime Minister will not discuss it, I will have to stick with the old formulation of the Taiwan issue, just on my new paragraph on Taiwan.

PM Chou: Since you have not been authorized to make any changes on the Taiwan formulation, then will you bring back our formulation and ask for the views of the President on that, or ask somebody to come back before the President does with your views, or wait until the President comes?

Dr. Kissinger: Let me do this. Let me show the Prime Minister what I have done here and see what the Prime Minister thinks of this, because I know that your formulation will not be acceptable.

PM Chou: I don't know whether your new formulation is more or less like your old one or close to ours.

Dr. Kissinger: It's an attempt to incorporate what I think may have a possibility of being accepted in Washington. Why don't I read it to you?

PM Chou: Let us try.

Dr. Kissinger: Shall we do that first before we go to the other part? (Chou nods.)

“The United States side acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Straits maintain there is but one China and that Taiwan is a province of China. (That's your sentence.) The United States Government does not challenge that position. It emphasizes its view that the Chinese people should realize their objective by peaceful negotiation. It will support peaceful efforts to reach a resolution of the problem, and will not use its military presence in the Taiwan Straits to produce additional obstacles to a peaceful solution. The United States accepts the ultimate objective of the withdrawal of its forces from the Taiwan Straits, and pending that will progressively reduce them as tensions diminish.”

PM Chou: You mean withdraw its forces from the Taiwan Straits?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: Just the Taiwan Straits?

Dr. Kissinger: Oh, no, from Taiwan. That is the early hours that produced that. No devious desire in mind. I would be prepared to discuss this with the President if the Prime Minister thinks it has more merit than the draft I discussed with him yesterday.

PM Chou: May I see it?

Dr. Kissinger: Excuse the typing. (Hands it over)

I don't care about this clause, “additional obstacles.” This is a formula to find a way to take care of two Chinas and to take care of Japan.

I have delayed my departure for an hour, incidentally.

PM Chou: It appears to be necessary. Would you also put forward your other views?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. The other views are really fairly simple. Where it says “in the area” to make it consistent, why don't we say “as tensions in Asia diminish?” Then you and I know we are talking about Vietnam.

Interpreter: (Repeats what Dr. Kissinger just said.)

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, because then the Prime Minister will understand what this refers to. This is our way of understanding what we have said on Vietnam. Now, the rest of my changes, Mr. Prime Minister, are an attempt to shorten somewhat the contentious part of the material. I can accept your page two. I propose deleting the sentence that starts at the bottom of page two with the word “the”, up to “all foreign troops.”

Chou's Interpreter: What line please?

Dr. Kissinger: Seven, through “subversion.”

Interpreter: To delete that?

Dr. Kissinger: It repeats a point you have already made on the previous page. I am proposing a similar cut in our section for symmetry. The only other deletion I would urge is where it deals with Vietnam, that is to say, that “China expressed its firm support to the seven-point program” and to omit the phrase “its firm support to the struggle.”

In this connection, I might tell the Prime Minister for his own personal information that I have just received word from the North Vietnamese that we are going to resume negotiations toward the middle of November in our secret channel, with Le Duc Tho, and maybe this whole thing will then no longer be necessary.

That is the only suggestion I have in the statement of your principles. The rest is acceptable. Then, on page four, from the point of view of symmetry, I would propose deleting the second sentence, the one that begins with “The United States side believes” through “or misunderstanding.” The sentence that begins with “The United States believes that the effort to reduce tension is served” through “misunderstanding.” And on the next page—I am trying to shorten our statement a little bit—where we talk about Indochina, we can leave out the phrase “to which end it had made a series of proposals.” In other words we would just say its primary objective has been a negotiated solution, but just leave out the next line where it says that it had made a series of proposals. This is to shorten it and also to remove any suspicion on the part of Hanoi that you have taken a position on the secret negotiations.

The only other suggestion I have is that you have inadvertently dropped one sentence from our position, which you had in the previous draft: “The relation between the United States and the Republic of Korea was freely. entered into by both sides, and the existing commitments would be honored.” This is a statement of our view. It was on page 5 of your old draft.

These are all my changes. We can accept the remainder.

PM Chou: What you have posed before us is a difficult subject. Because in the statements of the two sides we have maintained the principal contents of the American statement, such as “peaceful competition,” “individual freedom,” and you put in the American way of putting it about striving for freedom and progress which is different from our interpretation of it, and we didn't make any objection to it. There is no question but that our two sides have very deep differences on the interpretation of these conceptions. And then in the part about the peoples and nations, in the first part, you agreed that we may say “where there is oppression, there is resistance” and you agreed to our formulation of struggling for freedom and liberty. But then when we express our support for this, you do not agree. It is hard to understand.

Dr. Kissinger: I am really trying to shorten the document. If the Prime Minister wants to maintain that sentence which I have to tell you will be extremely annoying to most Americans, but if he wants to maintain it, then the alternative is to take out the sentence which begins with “it must be recognized” up through “impermissible.” My primary concern is to shorten it a little bit; and that is repeated anyway.

PM Chou: Well, actually, in the morning, this is yesterday morning, in the discussion of this, one of the sentences you suggested to be deleted was this. Originally your version was different.

Dr. Kissinger: If you want to keep this sentence, let us propose dropping the other sentence. I am not dropping both, just one or the other to shorten it somewhat. And I have tried to take out an equivalent amount of our own position.

PM Chou: This is only a very initial draft, and just before you leave to continue to consider the various wordings is rather difficult. I think there shouldn't be much difficulty here because they are of the same nature. I don't know about the number of words, but as for the Chinese, the American statement is longer than the Chinese.

Dr. Kissinger: I am also cutting the American statement. I am trying to cut the statement of differences. I am not saying you are unfair; I am saying the whole document gives an overwhelming impression of enormous differences and if we can both take out half a page between us of sentences that are repeated, it would help the balance of the document.

PM Chou: Well, as for possible repetitions of wordings, that I admit. There are such repetitions. But in the American statement also there are a number of repetitions.

Dr. Kissinger: That's why I'm trying to cut it.

PM Chou: If we were to rewrite the whole document we could make it more concise. But that is not the main point. We have proposed in the documents places of common ground, and where there is no common ground we keep in the Chinese statement that which you can't accept and you keep in the American statement that which we can't accept. As for the number of words in the actual Chinese text, the American statement is still longer.

Dr. Kissinger: That doesn't bother me. For instance, the sentence I am now proposing to delete, “the people” through “impermissible”—that doesn't bother us. It's no problem to us from a substantive point of view. And it is, in any event, repeated by the next sentence, that all nations “should be equal,” and by the sentence that says that the Chinese side supports the struggle of “oppressed people” for “freedom and liberation.”

What I am trying to avoid is that out of a nine-page document, the first five pages are disagreement. And therefore, I have taken out some lines from yours and some lines from our side.

PM Chou: That is the first part. In the second part, concerning the question of Indochina, in our draft we have two sentences, and you have three; then you remove one of them, one sentence which we think is correct (to delete) because we did not take part in the Vietnam negotiations.

Dr. Kissinger: I accept this, and I am willing to remove our part if you remove the part that bothers us.

PM Chou: But if we remove our wording to reaffirm support for the people of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia in their struggle to realize their goals, then it will not be possible to express a relaxation of tension in the Far East. We had already deleted that part about supporting to the end the struggles of the Indochinese people, because we hope before your President comes we will have settled the war in Vietnam, and even if it had not been settled, we hope that it would be substantially settled.

Dr. Kissinger: I happen to know what the Declaration of the Joint Summit Conference of the Indochinese people says, and if you are supporting this, you are supporting their struggle.

PM Chou: Well, from that point of view, that is indeed so.

Then, with respect to your reference about the Republic of Korea, that was not a matter of inadvertence on our part. We deliberately deleted that because to our people it would be quite irritating to have that there.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes but … we don't insist that we say anything about Korea on either side.

PM Chou: But that's not possible, because you know we bear certain responsibility in being a member of the negotiating patties in the Korea question.

Dr. Kissinger: Well, we can drop in our statement about the relations between the United States and the Republic of Korea the fact that they were freely entered into, and simply say that the existing commitments would be honored. But if you support the eight-point proposal, we have to say something. But we can leave out the phrase “they were freely entered into” which I can understand is irritating.

PM Chou: Dr. Kissinger still wants to try to arrive at an initial agreement today.

Dr. Kissinger: No, no, but if the Prime Minister feels that he must express his views on his side, we must be free to express our views on our side. If the Chinese side expresses support of the eight points of the Democratic Republic of Korea we have to say something about our relationship to the Republic of Korea.

But I do admit the more we can settle today, the better it will be. It will be harder next time I am here, and it's complex through Paris.

PM Chou: But some can be done through Paris.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, but on this one, this is not negotiable for us …

PM Chou: Then maybe we can …

Dr. Kissinger: … this one sentence about the Republic of Korea.

PM Chou: … on the document as a whole. I wonder if it is possible for Dr. Kissinger to come again, or to wait for settlement when the President comes?

Dr. Kissinger: If I come once again, there is going to be the most unbelievable speculation.

PM Chou: But you know, as you will be leaving China precisely at the time when the vote on Chinese representation is being taken in the United Nations, there will also be difficulties for us with the countries that are supporting us.

Dr. Kissinger: Mr. Prime Minister, do you know that I have been accused of exactly the same thing on our side?

PM Chou: That is precisely why I say that if we are to solve this question about the initial draft of the communique we must put ourselves in the shoes of the other. Of course, this will still be only an initial draft. And even if we do agree, when your President comes we will still be able to make changes.

Dr. Kissinger: Oh yes, this is without question.

PM Chou: That will be because the situation has changed. If it has not, for any of us to say there must be changes, that will be to create deliberate trouble.

Dr. Kissinger: Of course, as far as we are concerned, no one outside the White House will know that such a draft exists, much less that we discussed it, and we have never had a leak from the White House. So, as far as our bureaucracy is concerned, we would simply pretend that this is going to be done when we come here.

PM Chou: As for your formulation of the Taiwan question, there is still some distance from our stand. Your wording on the Taiwan formulation is not as explicit as our formulation.

Dr. Kissinger: No.

PM Chou: But even ours wouldn't express time limits.

Dr. Kissinger: But it attempts to move from our formulation to your direction.

PM Chou: You are quite clear about the explicitness of our formulation on Taiwan.

Dr. Kissinger: Oh, yes.

PM Chou: Of course, your authorization is limited on this question; you may not be able to decide on it now.

Dr. Kissinger: On your formulation?

PM Chou: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger: But it is my firm conviction, apart from my authorization, that it is extremely unlikely that it will be accepted.

PM Chou: But you know that the crucial question of the normalization of relations between China and the United States is on this Taiwan question, so if we do not make clear the future of this, how can we begin normalization? So then the whole question begins again.

Dr. Kissinger: The Prime Minister knows what we would do, and I have the impression this is considered by him to be in a positive direction. Therefore our problem is to find a formulation which enables us to navigate between our various necessities, domestic and international.

PM Chou: For instance, on your formulation there are some superfluous words which complicate the situation.

Dr. Kissinger: Like what?

PM Chou: I cannot give you a very affirmative commentary …

Dr. Kissinger: I understand.

PM Chou: But just to make some comments. You say, “The United States Government emphasized its view …”

Dr. Kissinger: “Stated?”

PM Chou: That is to say, your side “emphasized its view that the Chinese people should realize, etc… .” If you changed the word “objective” to “position” … And the second sentence, there is no need for it, ”… and will not use its military presence in the Taiwan Straits, etc.”

Dr. Kissinger: This was done to meet a point of the Prime Minister's.

PM Chou: That means not to participate in any activities aimed at separating Taiwan from the mainland.

Dr. Kissinger: Nor to encourage any activities to separate Taiwan from mainland. And also to meet the point the Prime Minister made so eloquently last night that our forces are a guarantee against the introduction of Japanese forces. But I am prepared to drop the sentence if the Prime Minister would like it dropped.

PM Chou: As for the sentence before that, “it emphasized its view… etc.” If you change the word “objective” to “position” that will make things clear.

Dr. Kissinger: It's bad English, but if it pleases you … “objective” is a better word in English than “position,” but it's no problem for me. I don't mind being accused of using bad grammar. It's no problem.

PM Chou: We had that thought for quite some time on our formulation of the Taiwan question. And …

Dr. Kissinger: I could … excuse me. Why don't you finish.

PM Chou: That is, “it hopes the settlement of the Taiwan question consistent with this position will be achieved through peaceful negotiations.” Of course, that is then more clear, though it is not saying the whole thing out, yet it expresses in a more clear way the hope of the American government and grammatically it's better.

Dr. Kissinger: The trouble is that we disagree, not that we don't understand each other. We understand each other very well. The Prime Minister seeks clarity, and I am trying to achieve ambiguity.

PM Chou: But the Chinese people will be dissatisfied with something that is ambiguous.

Dr. Kissinger: And we have got trouble if it is too clear.

PM Chou: Actually, our wording is not so different from yours; actually our versions are not already so clear. Please think it over.

Dr. Kissinger: Mr. Prime Minister, if we complete everything else, we can leave the Taiwan thing for the other channel. We could simply send you a paragraph. I speak to you more frankly than to any other foreign leader. For us, no agreement on Taiwan is going to do any good for large elements of our bureaucracy, and our public will oppose it. Therefore, it requires careful management on our side. What is particularly difficult in your formulation—because I notice in many regards it's quite close to what I gave you—is the phrase “finally withdraw.”

PM Chou: But isn't that saying in your version, “ultimate objective of the withdrawal of its forces"?

Dr. Kissinger: There's a nuanced difference.

PM Chou: You are bound to withdraw in the end; otherwise how can it return to the Motherland? Think it over. And what is more, we said that you will progressively reduce and finally withdraw, and there is no time limit to it. And I believe that when your President comes, if he undertakes such an obligation, it will have a very favorable effect for the political future of your President, not a bad one. Because, as you said, this was something created by Truman, not something of your President or his party.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, but as I said yesterday, that is not the problem. The problem is the combination of various forces that are looking for a symbol around which to rally.

PM Chou: Well, suppose you bring your formulation back with you. When the President comes, there will be seven days, and he will meet Chaiiman Mao twice, and I am sure in the meeting it will not be difficult to settle it when it comes to a matter of a few words. We spent almost one hour trying to find a formulation.

Dr. Kissinger: It would be good negotiating tactics, Mr. Prime Minister, to say that you are being unreasonable, but I realize that is not true. I realize you have made major efforts to take our concerns into account. You have behaved toward us with great honor. But those of my colleagues in America who have not had the privilege of meeting you, and those who have a vested interest in destroying our policy, will look at it with a different perspective than I who has had an opportunity to hear your position.

But we can probably not settle the Taiwan draft now. Let me take this back. You have one suggested alternative which you can perhaps think about. I will work with the President to see whether we can come up with a draft either accepting this or modifying it, and we will attempt to treat you with the same honor with which you have treated us. We can pass some drafts back and forth through our channel. Of course, we are already coming closer. And then if it isn't settled, we can settle it perhaps when the President comes here.

PM Chou: Yes, I believe that if it cannot be settled, then by the time the President comes it could be, because we have to take into consideration your various difficulties. On the sentence before that (the first sentence on page 8 of Tab A), we fully agree to it. There is no question about that, that is on the formulation that “the United States acknowledged that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Straits maintain there is but one China and that Taiwan is a province of China.” That solves the question of a split, because Chiang Kai-shek on the other side of the Taiwan Straits also considers there is only one China.

And then the second part of it is you express the hope the settlement of the Taiwan question consistent with this position will be achieved through peaceful negotiations. So in this way you are not restricted by any specific condition, such as that we will have to liberate Taiwan by suchand-such a date. We don't say that.

And so, as for the part on the withdrawal of the United States armed forces, we originally mentioned the forces will be withdrawn after you had withdrawn all your forces from Indochina. That is what you told us. But now we don't mention it. So in the formulation there is no time limit, and of course this will be connected with relaxation of tension in the Far East. But we don't put this explicitly down. So we took into account your difficulties by not making a clear time limit. So this formulation has taken into account difficulties on both sides, especially yours.

Dr. Kissinger: Again, I recognize that you have attempted to be just, and I said to my colleague last night that if you could convince your colleagues in Hanoi to approach us with your spirit, we could settle the war in two afternoons.

PM Chou: But it cannot be so, because every country has their own characteristics.

Dr. Kissinger: I understand.

PM Chou: And that is why I appreciate the sentence that suggests that neither side will negotiate on behalf of any third party. And then you deleted that part of your formulation about having made a series of proposals to that end. You did right that way.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, because we have no interest in complicating your position.

PM Chou: So as for the formulation on Taiwan, suppose you bring it back and discuss it with your President, and if there are no big differences between your views and our formulation then it might not be necessary to communicate on it through our channels before the President comes.

Dr. Kissinger: One point I have never raised is that we need a peg to hang on this statement of withdrawal. We can do it by saying, “as tensions in Asia diminish”. Another is if you state unilaterally, not as a joint statement, your intention to settle this question peacefully. Then we can say that “in view of this statement” the U.S. will progressively reduce its forces.

PM Chou: That's a thing of the future.

Dr. Kissinger: What do you mean?

PM Chou: Because at the present time the Taiwan regime is still usurping our seat in the United Nations. They claim to represent it now.

Dr. Kissinger: But I don't understand what that has to do with it.

PM Chou: It is related. Think it over. How would they approve of us declaring that we want to effect the peaceful liberation of Taiwan?

Dr. Kissinger: How would Taiwan … ?

PM Chou: Chiang Kai-shek.

Dr. Kissinger: He won't approve anything you do anyway.

PM Chou: But particularly if we were to say that this formulation is better—it's more or less like yours.

Dr. Kissinger: Well, I think I understand your point of view. It's too important an issue to be settled here at the table. I will take it back. You have two versions of our position. We have your version which we can study. I will either tell you through our channel that things are fairly close and we will settle it when the President comes, or I will send you another formulation through the channel, or I will send a formulation with General Haig. And let's leave it at that. Or if everything fails, maybe I will come back a few weeks before the President comes because we really should avoid too much controversy while he is here.

PM Chou: We persist in our formulation. So when you … it is not possible to reach an agreement here today. When you go back, please report to your President our view, and the situation that only such a formulation is acceptable.

Dr. Kissinger: That I have to understand clearly. You are saying it is either this formulation or nothing else?

PM Chou: When we compare it with your formulation, yours is not so clear. For us it is not so completely clear either. Although the direction is clear, the time has not been limited. So when you go back, if it's only a matter of one or two words, then that can be done through our channel. Otherwise, it would be better for Your Excellency to come again, or wait for your President to come.

Dr. Kissinger: You don't want to discuss this in the channel?

PM Chou: As you said, in a complicated matter like this we couldn't make ourselves clear through our channel. It would be much better for you to come back, because we have dealt with the backgrounds of our two sides, and all this background knowledge is known by you and by us, but not by the other diplomats.

Dr. Kissinger: Right. All right.

PM Chou: For us we are also running a risk here. That is, we are placing our reliance on your President, continuing to remain in office, and Your Excellency continuing to be his assistant. But we cannot speak on behalf of the American people. We don't know whether they will choose you or not. So even after your President comes, and even if he undertakes such an obligation, if he is not voted into office for the next term, we don't know whether it will be put into implementation.

As I told you last night, when Chairman Mao spoke to Edgar Snow, he was sure your President will be able to resolve this question. And Life Magazine made that quite clear in the article written by Mr. Snow, and that was quite authoritative. And yesterday we were discussing the Taiwan question. We have already told you all of our thinking on this matter.

Dr. Kissinger: I know.

PM Chou: If we are to wait another six years, we may wait another six years, but then we will liberate by another means, not this means. You understand.

Dr. Kissinger: We are not asking you to wait six years.

PM Chou: Precisely because we have confidence in your taking a responsible position.

Dr. Kissinger: I think you believe we are serious about that which we said we would do. Our problem domestically is as follows: If we accept a formulation that has the consequence of exciting all the traditional supporters of the President, and if as a result of that he is defeated, and if therefore the China lobby has proved its political strength, then it will not be possible to carry out what we have told you we will carry out, and what we will carry out.

PM Chou: The China lobby is of no great strength now. It is different from what it was ten years ago.

Dr. Kissinger: Not by itself, but the combination of the conservative element and them is of some strength.

PM Chou: But the crucial question here is not our problem, but the problem of Indochina, the question of the withdrawal of troops from Vietnam.

Dr. Kissinger: But that we can handle.

PM Chou: If you can handle that question, then the Taiwan question is a small matter.

Dr. Kissinger: No, not domestically. I have not haggled with you about the substance of what we are going to do. It is odd that we should spend so little time on substance, and so much time on words. We do not differ in substance.

PM Chou: Precisely because both sides have their difficulties with regard to the wording which is to be used. That's why we must be careful, and we have been taking into account your difficulties on the wording.

Dr. Kissinger: If I were bargaining, I wouldn't keep saying you have been fair. We have an objective problem here. But I think we cannot go further today. I will take this back. If we have a concrete formulation I may ask General Haig to bring it. He has my complete confidence. You may not want to discuss it with him, but he can at least bring it to you. And he knows about this, but not, of course, in the detail you and I do. And if we have not agreed before the President comes, then maybe I will find some way of coming for a day or two, two or three weeks before he comes.

PM Chou: So let us put it at that then.

Dr. Kissinger: But we will approach it with the attitude of having a constructive outcome.

Now, let me go back to the rest of the document. It is probably impossible for you to believe how hard it is for Americans to understand your particular approach to problems. I understand it. But when we prepared our technical presentation, for example, all my colleagues thought I was mad because I said, “give the Chinese all the facts of our internal considerations and give them a minimum position and they will treat you fairly.” All my colleagues said let's give them a maximum position, and then compromise; let us not give them anything in writing; and let us then just start talking to them. (Chou laughs.) I had to go to the very top to get an order that everybody had to put his requests in writing so we could let you study everything we knew.

Therefore, I understand that your approach is principled. When I was recommending some cuts in the beginning, it wasn't in order to make a substantive point. It is really that I am afraid that when the President reads this document and sees the first five pages list nothing but disagreements he will say, “what is it really that we are trying to do here?” He has never seen a document like this before. This is why I recommended some cuts on your side and on our side, leaving aside the Vietnam sentences because that may be taken care of anyway. We can wait and it may be settled, or we can do it when we come. But if we could cut one of the sentences, either on page two or three, plus our sentence on page four, so to compress it.

PM Chou: Well, I will then suggest a formulation for the linking of these two sentences. You suggested that “It must be recognized… , etc.”, that sentence be deleted?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: And then this is maintained, that is “the Chinese side stated that it firmly supports the struggles of all the oppressed peoples and nations for freedom and liberation”, and then following after that would be “and that the people of all countries have the right to choose their social systems according to their own wishes and have the right to safeguard the independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of their own countries and oppose foreign aggression, interference, control and subversion.” Let's put these two sentences together in order to prevent repetition.

Dr. Kissinger: How will that save space?

PM Chou: It does save space.

Dr. Kissinger: Will you read the sentence?

Interpreter: “The Chinese side stated that it firmly supports the struggles of all the oppressed peoples and nations for freedom and liberation and that the people of all countries…”

Dr. Kissinger: Oh.

Interpreter: ”… have the right to choose their social systems according to their own wishes, and the right to safeguard the independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of their own countries and oppose foreign aggression, interference, control and subversion.”

Dr. Kissinger: That's all right. Will you get one of your genius interpreters to put that into good English. I find it depressing that your interpreters write better English than English writers. These documents are beautifully written—I don't mean it as a joke—with great clarity. I will delete in our section the sentence on page four which begins with “The U.S. side believes”, through “misunderstanding.” This is just to save space; I don't object to it.

PM Chou: We don't either. It has little to do with us. It has to do with your relations with the Soviet Union. So you may either put it in or not; we don't care.

Dr. Kissinger: Let me discuss it with the President. I will delete on the Indochinese question the phrase “to which end it had made a series of proposals.” Will just say its “primary objective has been a negotiated solution.”

PM Chou: Then we must—here you have three sentences concerning Indochina—we must maintain our sentence of support for the peoples of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia …

Dr. Kissinger: I will take out the sentence, then, that “its primary objective has been a negotiated solution.”

PM Chou: That is, you hope that we will not use the sentence to support the struggle of the people of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia to attain their goal?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

PM Chou: You are placing some difficulties before us. Do you think it will be good to let that northern neighbor of ours stick their hands into this situation? Isn't that so?

Dr. Kissinger: I understand your problem and your desires. I believe you genuinely want a peaceful settlement of the war.

PM Chou: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger: You don't think you are expressing support in supporting the Joint Declaration of the Summit Conference of the Indochinese Peoples?

PM Chou: Yes, but there is still a shortcoming there, because in general terms it is necessary for us to express our support to the peoples of the three countries of Indochina. I suggest for, the sake of deleting some words to delete the seven-point proposal for the peaceful settlement of the Vietnam question. Let us just say the seven-point proposal put forward by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam. Because this is clear, and words will be saved. We would hope you will settle it. We would hope you will be able to settle your problems with Vietnam.

Dr. Kissinger: Why don't we leave this open, seeing how the negotiations go? For example, it may be totally irrelevant for you to support the seven-point proposal by the time the President gets here.

PM Chou: But the sentence before that will still be of use.

Dr. Kissinger: If we have an agreement in principle with Hanoi, then the sentence before that is no problem to us. The sentence before that is a problem to us if American prisoners of war are still being held in large numbers in Vietnam, if American soldiers are still being killed, and if an American President has to come 12,000 miles to be told that they are supporting this, even if they are doing so.

PM Chou: But your President is not to be held responsible for the beginning of that war. Your President is to put an end to that war.

Dr. Kissinger: I know, but it has become a very emotional problem, which goes beyond rational discussion in America at this moment.

PM Chou: Well then, suppose we just say “firm support to the struggle of the peoples of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia” and stop there, and leave out the words “for the attainment of their goal.”

Dr. Kissinger: Well, that will help a little. It's the “struggle” part that is the problem.

PM Chou: (laughs) There is this question; you don't like the word “struggle.” We don't believe in the word “peace” so very much, but there are a lot of words “peace” in this document. We don't believe that it will be so easy to attain world peace. But we do admit that the sentiments of the people of the world want peace if they are not oppressed. Yet, at the duck dinner the day before yesterday, I explained why we went to Chungking for the negotiations after the war.

Dr. Kissinger: I read the essay of Chairman Mao on the Chungking negotiations with great care.

PM Chou: So, although we don't believe it is so easy to attain world peace, nevertheless … in fact, we often say we struggle for peace. It's our philosophy of struggle.

Dr. Kissinger: As a philosopher, I agree more with you than with the sentimentalists who use peace as a slogan. Few great changes of history have occurred on the basis of abstract argument. So if we were discussing world outlooks, I would have no problem with that point of view. The problem here is a serious domestic one, which is for the President to answer the question of what were you doing going 12,000 miles to be told, if the war is still going on, to be told this. If it is not, you believe the struggle will continue. I believe it too, but the domestic question for us will be quite difficult.

PM Chou: Let us for the time being delete the words “for the attainment of their goal” and still keep the word “struggle” and then see what we do about it when the President comes.

Dr. Kissinger: If the Prime Minister can find a word like “progress” which substituted for “revolution.”

PM Chou: We must think it over. Put it there for the time being.

Dr. Kissinger: For example, for the “aspirations.”

PM Chou: You mean “the aspirations …” To use that word, people may know it was your word, to take care of some necessities.

Dr. Kissinger: Maybe here, but not in America.

PM Chou: You have too low an estimate of the American people.

Dr. Kissinger: No, but they don't know your particular vocabulary. And they have never had to struggle as you have had to.

PM Chou: (laughs) They are engaged in struggles.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, but not of the same character.

PM Chou: Mr. Chang suggests another word—that is support for the “efforts.” That might be better?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. He hasn't wasted his time in England.

PM Chou: He also spent some time in the United States, so he knows your thinking.

Dr. Kissinger: Let us take this tentatively and reconsider it when the President comes here, or if I come here, in light of my negotiations with the North Vietnamese. But tentatively, let us say “efforts.”

Then the only other thing left is that we have to say something about existing commitments to the Republic of Korea. We will delete the phrase “were freely entered into” which we understand is difficult. This is just our statement.

PM Chou: That's all right.

Dr. Kissinger: Now, just to make sure we understand each other, should I ask to have typed up what we understand the correct version to be so there is no misunderstanding?

PM Chou: Would you kindly read out again that part on the Republic of Korea.

Dr. Kissinger: (referring to page five of Tab A and earlier U. S. draft) “The existing commitments between the United States and the Republic of Korea would be honored.” We leave: this in the sentence: “The United States would support all efforts of the Republic of Korea to seek a relaxation of the tension and increased communication in the Korean peninsula.” The one that says, “were freely entered into by both sides” is deleted. Now, if the Prime Minister is agreeable … Oh, I need his (interpreter's) version of that other sentence. May I raise a number of other … . You have your own problems?

PM Chou: No, it is all settled.

Dr. Kissinger: So we will just give you the text, leaving the one paragraph on Taiwan in your formulation, but we will underline it to say it must be discussed with the President. It's not agreed.

PM Chou: That is so.

Dr. Kissinger: I have convinced your interpreter.

PM Chou: There are several sitting here who were in the United States.

Dr. Kissinger: He was a fellow chemistry student. I studied chemistry. I got brilliant grades and understood nothing. I did it by memory.

PM Chou: That is one of the troubles of schools sometimes.

Dr. Kissinger: I never understood why things happened. Can I raise some of the practical problems?

PM Chou: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger: We have to change the date of the announcement we can release tomorrow; we have to say from October 20 to October “26”, rather than October “25.”

PM Chou: That's right.

Dr. Kissinger: So we will do this and have to make sure you do this too.

PM Chou: Your visit was from the 20th to the 26th.

Dr. Kissinger: To the 26th. Otherwise everything stays the same.

PM Chou: The time of the announcement will still be the same?

Dr. Kissinger: The 27th at 4:00 Washington time in the afternoon. Again, just to confirm, you will announce today that I have left?

PM Chou: This evening, but only a simple release, saying that you viewed some places of interest, not saying where you went. You can disclose that after you go back to the United States, cite those places that you visited.

Dr. Kissinger: No, it's better not to. If you don't mind, I can do it, or you could do it, after your announcement. You see, when I arrive in Washington tonight our time, I will be greeted by a lot of newsmen, and I will say I must report to the President, and I will say nothing until we release the announcement. Then I will give a background briefing at 4:00 tomorrow afternoon our time when we make the announcement, and on that occasion I might mention the places we have visited.

PM Chou: So for us, we will just release tonight something saying you have left China after engaging in some talks, and viewing some places of interest, without citing specific places. Maybe we will cite those of our people who will see you off at the airport, the Vice Chairman, the Acting Foreign Minister.

Dr. Kissinger: Certainly, that is fine.

PM Chou: And we will be sending our Acting Chief of Protocol, Mr. HAN Hsu, to accompany you to Shanghai together with our navigator and interpreter so as to help at the refueling in Shanghai.

Dr. Kissinger: You are very courteous.

When I am asked tomorrow what we discussed, what does the Prime Minister recommend that I say?

PM Chou: It is better for you to decide that. Think it over yourself on what you think you should say. We had talks, that is certain.

Dr. Kissinger: I will say that we discussed technical arrangements, and we began discussing in a general way the agenda.

PM Chou: All right.

Dr. Kissinger: If they ask me was there any discussion of Japan or Taiwan or Vietnam, I will say I will not go into the substance. (Chou nods. ) And then, if I am asked about a communique, I will say that we don't have one. And I will send you the briefing through the regular channel as soon as I can get it to Paris.

PM Chou: And then we can coordinate with you on that.

Dr. Kissinger: Right. My understanding is that we will propose to you a date for the announcement of the President's visit, and that it will be around November 22. If the correspondents ask me when will the visit be announced, I will say in a few weeks.

PM Chou: Good.

Dr. Kissinger: But I will make a proposal to you within a week or ten days about our proposed date for the announcement which will be around November 22.

PM Chou: That's more or less alright. Anyway, no later than the 24th.

Dr. Kissinger: Between the 20th and the 24th. But I have to check our schedules when I get back, and if it makes no difference to you, I will let you know.

PM Chou: If we find something as a reason why the dates are not convenient for us we will tell you about it.

Dr. Kissinger: It is not a big problem. My understanding is that you have agreed to some of the technical people, headed by General Haig, to come after that announcement, after December 1.

PM Chou: That is so. How do you spell General Haig's name?

Dr. Kissinger: Like the general who was so bad in World War I, H-A-I-G. But he's very good, and he has my complete confidence. He's less complicated than I, but he knows everything on our work.

PM Chou: And he will bring some technical people with him?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, and he will keep them under strict control. He's a firmer personality than I.

I wanted to raise one other question with the Prime Minister if I could, which I also did last time, which concerns the American prisoners in China.

PM Chou: Do you mean the two special agents?

Dr. Kissinger: Those two and then the two pilots. But they are two separate cases.

When I was here last time, Mr. Prime Minister, I knew only that you held these prisoners, but I did not know the facts, because I could not inquire for obvious reasons. I have now inquired, and I find that Fecteau and Downey did engage in activities that would be considered illegal by any country.

PM Chou: That's right.

Dr. Kissinger: Therefore, our plea to you has nothing to do with the justice of the case. In fact, we concede that you have a correct legal case. But if, as an act of clemency, you could consider that they have been punished sufficiently, it would make a very good impression in the United States.

PM Chou: According to our legal procedures, if a criminal in our prisons behaves himself well, that is if he confesses to his crime, then we can lessen the sentence.

Dr. Kissinger: I don't know whether they have confessed.

PM Chou: They have all confessed. And it is possible in about two months time we may consider lessening the sentences of some of them who have behaved themselves well. As for who that will be we will tell you later. In the early part of this year we already released an old man, Walsh.

Dr. Kissinger: I am aware of that. We would do our best to see to it that anyone you release would not engage in any propaganda against the People's Republic when he returns.

PM Chou: Well, Walsh didn't behave badly.

Dr. Kissinger: No, Walsh did not behave badly.

The two pilots, to the best of my knowledge, are victims of the war. They made an honest mistake in flying over Chinese territory, unless I am totally misinformed.

PM Chou: It is indeed true, they did fly into our air space. Otherwise, we could not have shot them down.

Dr. Kissinger: No, but to the best of my knowledge, it was unintentional and therefore is a different case from Fecteau and Downey.

PM Chou: But we have to deal with them in a different light, because the war in Vietnam has not yet ended, and if we released them before it ended, it might give some bad impressions.

So it might be possible that we could release the spies earlier, although their crimes were heavier. They have been in prison a long time. One has almost served out his sentence. Maybe first we will solve the question of one of the two.

Dr. Kissinger: It would mean a great deal to the American people. And we would treat it as an act of clemency, and not as something we have a right to request, and any public explanation we would make would be in that framework.

The only other thing… I have only two other things, Mr. Prime Minister. First, I wanted to thank everybody who has made this visit so memorable and so useful.

PM Chou: That's what they should do, and such work will still be done in the future.

Dr. Kissinger: Not only you, but all of your associates, interpreters, drivers, everybody behaved with extraordinary courtesy and efficiency. All of my doubting colleagues who questioned me before we came now know that they are dealing with men of principle. (Chou nods)

Now, I have only one other personal thing to say to you, Mr. Prime Minister. A friend of mine, who is a collector of Chinese art, before I left sent me something which he wanted me, as a token of the pleasure Chinese art has given him, to bring back something from America to China. It is something in the form of a lotus flower, which he tells me means peace and serenity in traditional China. And so I have taken the liberty of bringing this with me. It is a totally unofficial gift which indicates the feeling of the American people for what China has meant to so many of them. It is not worth a great deal, but it is a symbol of the attitude with which all of us will come on our journies next year to improve relations between our peoples and to move from hostility to friendship.

PM Chou: You friend's name? You?

Dr. Kissinger: No. I can tell you his name. It's Governor Rockefeller of New York, But he did not particularly want it to be from him personally.

PM Chou: Please convey our thanks to Mr. Rockefeller. It's not possible for us to give him a return gift this time, but when General Haig comes we will ask him to take back a return gift, and since Governor Rockefeller likes Chinese art, we will select a piece of Chinese art and ask General Haig to take it back to him.

Dr. Kissinger: He didn't want me to mention his name.

PM Chou: But it is good that you did, because we know he is a friend who wants to be a friend of China.

We will have to dispense with the general meeting?

Dr. Kissinger: And to whom should we give our understanding of the communique? We will get it retyped, just so there's no misunderstanding.

PM Chou: I think Mr. Lord can ask (one of our people) to take it for us, and we will get it.

Dr. Kissinger: All right, and if there's any problem you could tell us before we leave, and if not, then through Paris.

PM Chou: And when will the plane be taking off?

Dr. Kissinger: We have set it for 10:00, but we had better make it 10:30.

(There were then some closing pleasantries. Both sides typed the agreed draft version and exchanged it. There were only minor typographical/punctuation discrepancies which were quickly cleaned up just before departure from the Guest House. The final agreed tentative draft is attached at Tab B.)

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, HAK visit to PRC, October 1971, Memcons-originals. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. The meeting was held at the Government Guest House, Attached at Tab A is the third Chinese draft of the communiqué. See Document 56 for text of the draft. At Tab B is the final agreed tentative draft, which is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969-1972, volume XVII, China, 1969-1972, as an attachment to Document 165. The final version of the draft is in ibid., Document 203.

56. American and Chinese Drafts of the Joint Communiqué, Beijing, October 22-26, 1971 56. American and Chinese Drafts of the Joint Communiqué, Beijing, October 22-26, 19711

Beijing, October 22-26, 1971

First U.S. Draft 10/22 - 8:00 P.M.

DRAFT JOINT COMMUNIQUE

The Visit

President Richard Nixon of the United States of America visited the People's Republic of China at the invitation of Premier Chou En-lai of the People's Republic of China from ____________ to ____________.

President Nixon met with Chairman Mao Tse-tung of the Chinese Communist Party on ____________ for a (____________ hour) review of world affairs (and met with Chairman Mao Tse-tung again for further talks on ____________). President Nixon held extensive discussions with Premier Chou En-lai on the normalization of relations between the United States and the People's Republic of China, as well as on other matters of interest between the two countries.

Accompanying President Nixon on his visit and participating in many of his talks were U.S. Secretary of State William Rogers and Assistant to the President Henry A. Kissinger. In addition to Premier Chou En-lai, taking part in the talks on the Chinese side were ( ). President Nixon, Premier Chou En-lai, and the members of their two delegations had a wide ranging exchange of views. Their talks were detailed, frank and at all times friendly.

(Also taking part in the talks on the Chinese side were:)

(Also taking part in the talks on the U.S. side were:)

President Nixon, in addition to visiting Peking and viewing cultural, industrial, and agricultural sites in the vicinity of the capital city, also toured ____________ and ____________ where he viewed similar places of interest. In all of these places he met with a warm and friendly reception and in turn expressed the friendship of the American people for the Chinese people.

General Principles of Bilateral Relations

The two leaders acknowledged that the long-standing differences between the two countries not only in their bilateral relations but in their perspectives of international problems would not quickly or easily be resolved. At the same time, the two sides agreed that the visit of President Nixon to China and the hospitable reception accorded him demonstrate that countries, irrespective of their social systems, can work together toward resolution of differences in the interest of international peace and security.

Aware of what divides them but equally conscious of their responsibilities toward all nations to cooperate in building a just and lasting peace, the President and the Premier agreed to conduct their international affairs on the principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, non-aggression, non-interference in the internal affairs of others, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. They undertook to approach the elimination of the differences between their countries through peaceful negotiations, and, pending final resolutions, to renounce the threat or use of force in settling matters at issue between their two countries.

They recognized that there were also significant specific areas of mutual interest between their two countries. Both wish to reduce the danger of military conflict. And each seeks better understanding and mutual benefit through all forms of increased international contact including trade as well as cultural, scientific and technical exchange. They agreed that the broadening of mutual areas of interest would contribute to their shared objective of working toward the normalization of relations. Each would continue to seek out additional areas of cooperation with the other.

The President and the Premier declared that neither of their countries seeks hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region, and that each is opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony.

Both President Nixon and Premier Chou En-lai emphasized that neither was prepared to negotiate on behalf of any third country or to enter into agreements or understandings directed at other states. At the same time they agreed that progress toward the normalization of relations between their two countries in itself represented progress toward a secure and lasting peace and was therefore in the interests of all countries. The two sides agreed that it would be against the interests of the peoples of the world for any major power to collude with another against a third, or to behave in such a way as to suggest that it had an exclusive sphere of interest.

General View of the World Situation

During the talks, both sides noted with regret that turmoil still exists in many parts of the world and that the danger of military conflict remains. They expressed the hope that, on the basis of the principles enumerated above, potential conflicts could be averted and that steps to eliminate their causes could be initiated. To this end, President Nixon and Premier Chou En-lai clarified their positions with respect to a number of areas where they might contribute toward a more peaceful environment.

Premier Chou En-lai and President Nixon also clarified their respective positions concerning Taiwan. Premier Chou En-lai stated that Taiwan is an integral part of the People's Republic of China, and that the future of Taiwan is therefore an internal matter. President Nixon stated that the U.S. acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Straits maintain there is but one China. The United States Government takes note of that position and will support efforts to reach an equitable and peaceful resolution of the ultimate relationship of Taiwan to the mainland. Premier Chou En-lai observed that the People's Republic of China has not chosen force of arms as a means of resolving the issue.

Bilateral Relations

President Ninon and Premier Chou En-lai expressed awareness that the objective of achieving restoration of full relations between their two countries would require time and patience on both sides. They resolved that efforts to reach this goal would continue, building upon the gains achieved during President Nixon's visit to the People's Republic of China. They agreed therefore that negotiations on outstanding issues would be carried on by means of further periodic visits to Peking by senior representatives of the United States Government, who would remain for the length of time necessary to clarify the positions of both sides.

The President stated that the United States Government was prepared to conclude with the People's Republic of China any arms control agreement that it has concluded with other major powers.

Pending the normalization of relations, President Nixon and Premier Chou En-lai agreed that a number of concrete steps would be taken to maintain contacts and to improve the understanding between the Chinese and American peoples and between the United States of America and the People's Republic of China. These steps will include: — The facilitation of exchanges between the American and Chinese peoples of a scientific, technical, commercial, cultural, educational, and personal nature.

— The facilitation of the travel of newsmen to each country on a reciprocal basis, including the early establishment of resident press bureaus in each country.

— The two sides agreed to reduce obstacles to mutual commerce, and the President specifically declared the intention of his Government to ease further some U.S. trade restrictions.

The President and the Premier were gratified to have this opportunity, after so many years without contact between the leaders of their two countries, to discuss world problems and to present authoritatively to one another their respective views on a great variety of issues. Both leaders are convinced that such an exchange of views has in itself contributed to a better understanding and a reduction in tension between their two countries.

The President expressed his appreciation for the gracious hospitality shown him and his party by the Government and people of the People's Republic of China.

First Chinese Draft 10/24 - 9:30 P.M.

JOINT COMMUNIQUE (Tentative Draft)

President Richard Nixon of the United States of America visited the People's Republic of China at the invitation of Premier Chou En-lai of the People's Republic of China from __________ to __________, 1972. Accompanying the President on his visit were (Mrs. Nixon,) U.S. Secretary of State William Rogers and Assistant to the President Dr. Henry A. Kissinger.

President Nixon met with Chairman Mao Tsetung of the Communist Party of China on __________ and __________, and the two sides held conversation for ____ hours and had an exchange of views on Sino-U.S. relations and world affairs.

During the visit, talks were held between President Nixon and Premier Chou En-lai. The two sides held extensive, earnest and frank discussions on the normalization of relations between the United States of America and the People's Republic of China, as well as on other matters of interest to both sides.

Also taking part in the talks on the Chinese side were:

Also taking part in the talks on the U.S. side were:

President Nixon and his party visited Peking and viewed cultural, industrial and agricultural sites, and they also toured __________ where they viewed similar places of interest.

During their meetings and talks, the leaders of China and the United States reviewed the international situation in which important changes are taking place and great turmoil exists and expounded their respective positions. The Chinese side pointed out that wherever there is oppression, there is resistance. Countries want independence, nations want liberation and the people want to make revolution—this has become the irresistible trend of history. It must be recognized that the people of ail countries have the right to choose their social systems according to their own wishes and settle the affairs of their respective countries as independent and sovereign nations. The peoples' revolutionary struggles are just, and they deserve sympathy and support and absoultely permit of no foreign intervention. The Chinese people firmly support the struggles of all the oppressed people and nations for freedom and liberation and against oppression and racial discrimination and firmly support the people's struggles to safeguard the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of their own countries and oppose foriegn aggression, interference, control and subversion. All foreign troops should be withdrawn to their own countries. All nations, big or small, should be equal; big nations should not bully the small and strong nations should not bully the weak. China will never be a superpower, and it opposes hegemony and power politics of any kind. The U.S. side declared that … … … …

There are essential differences between China and the United States in their social systems and foreign policies. However, the two sides agreed that relations between states should be conducted on the principles of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all states, non-aggression against other states, non-interference in the internal affairs of other states, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence, and that on this basis, international disputes should be settled without resorting to the use or threat of force. It would be against the interests of the peoples of the world for any major country to collude with another against other countries, or to behave in such a way as to suggest that it had an exclusive sphere of interest.

The two sides stated that neither was prepared to negotiate on behalf of any third party or to enter into agreements or understandings directed at other states.

The leaders of the two countries held that the Indochina question, especially the Viet Nam question, is the most urgent question for the relaxation of tension in the Far East. The Chinese side stated that the Chinese Government fully supports the seven-point proposal for the peaceful settlement of the Viet Nam question put forward by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam and the Joint Declaration of the Summit Conference of the Indochinese Peoples, that the Chinese people pledge themselves to provide a powerful backing for the peoples of Viet Nam, Laos and Cambodia, that Chinese territory forever remains the reliable rear area of the three Indochinese peoples and that the Chinese people are prepared to undertake the greatest national sacrifices and firmly support the three Indochinese peoples in fighting to the end for the attainment of their goal. The U.S. side stated … … … … … The two sides agreed that the basic principle guiding the settlement of the Indochina question is: All foreign troops must withdraw from the region of Indochina, and the peoples of Viet Nam, Laos and Cambodia should be left to settle their own questions by themselves free from foreign interference.

The two sides noted that eighteen years have already elapsed since the signing of the Korean Armistice Agreement, yet the Korean question remains unsettled. The Chinese Government fully supports the eight-point programme for the peaceful unification of Korea put forward by the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on April 12, 1971; the U.S. troops should withdraw from south Korea completely; it is impermissible to introduce the Japanese militarist forces into south Korea; and the “U.N. Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea” should be abolished. The U.S. side stated … … … … …

The Chinese side expressed its firm opposition to the revival and outward expansion of Japanese militarism, maintained that the United States should withdraw all its troops and all its nuclear and military bases from Japan and return Okinawa unconditionally, and held that an independent, democratic, peaceful and neutral Japan may have such armed forces as are necessary for its self-defence. The U.S. side stated: ___________________.

The leaders of the two countries expressed deep concern over the tension in the south Asian subcontinent. The two sides opposed the interference in the internal affairs of Pakistan from any quarters by exploiting the situation in East Pakistan. The two sides hoped that India and Pakistan could resolve their differences through peaceful negotiations. All attempts to disturb peace and use armed force are contrary to the interests of the people of this region and should be condemned.

The two sides reviewed the long-standing serious disputes between China and the United States and agreed that the Taiwan question is the crucial question obstructing the normalization of relations between the two countries. The Chinese side reaffirmed its position; The Government of the People's Republic of China is the sole legal Government of China; Taiwan is a part of Chinese territory which has long been returned to the motherland; the liberation of Taiwan is China's internal affair in which no other country has the right to interfere; and the U.S. troops must withdraw from Taiwan. The Chinese Government firmly opposes any activities which aim at the creation of “one China, two governments”, “two Chinas”, “one China, one Taiwan”, an “independent Taiwan” or advocate that “the status of Taiwan remains to be determined.” The U.S. side state: The United States acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Straits maintain there is but one China; the United States will encourage the Chinese to settle this internal question by themselves through peaceful negotiations; it will not carry out or support any activities aimed at separating Taiwan from China and will withdraw the U.S. troops and military installations in Taiwan after it has completed the withdrawal of all the U.S. armed forces from Indochina. The two sides held that the settlement of this crucial issue between China and the United States and the normalization of relations between the two countries are not only in the interests of the Chinese and American peoples but also conducive to the relaxation of tension in Asia and the world. The two sides are resolved to work for the attainment of this goal and have reached an understanding on certain steps that are to be taken. While effecting these steps, the U.S. Government will send senior representatives to Peking at unfixed intervals for concrete consultations.

The two sides agreed that pending the normalization of relations between the two countries, the Governments of the two countries would respectively take measures to facilitate the exchange of visits between the two peoples and their contacts in the scientific, technical, journalistic and cultural fields.

The two sides were gratified to have this opportunity, after so many years without contact between the leaders of their two countries, to present frankly to one another their respective views on a variety of issues. The two sides hoped that the gains acheived during this visit would open up new prospects for the relations between the two countries.

President Nixon and his party expressed their appreciation for the gracious hospitality shown them by the Government and people of the People's Republic of China.

Second U.S. Draft 10/25 - 10:15 A. M.

Second U.S. Draft

10/25 - 10:15 A.M.

DRAFT JOINT COMMUNIQUE

President Richard Nixon of the United States of America visited the People's Republic of China at the invitation of Premier Chou En-lai of the People' s Republic of China from __________ to __________, 1972. Accompanying the President on his visit were (Mrs. Nixon), U.S. Secretary of State William Rogers and Assistant to the President, Dr. Henry A. Kissinger.

President Nixon met with Chairman Mao Tse Tung of the Communist Party of China on __________ and __________. The two leaders held conversation for ____ hours and had an exchange of views on Sino-U.S. relations and world affairs.

During the visit, further talks were held between President Nixon and Premier Chou En-lai. The two sides held extensive, earnest and frank discussions on the normalization of relations between the United States of America and the People's Republic of China, as well as on other matters of interest to both sides.

Also taking part in the talks on the Chinese side were:

Also taking part in the talks on the U.S. side were:

President Nixon and his party visited Peking and viewed cultural, industrial and agricultural sites, and they also toured __________ and __________ where they, continuing discussions with Chinese leaders, viewed similar places of interest.

During their meetings and talks, the leaders of China and the United States reviewed the international situation in which important changes are taking place and expounded their respective positions. The Chinese side stated its views as follows: Wherever there is oppression, there is resistance. Countries want independence, nations want liberation, and the people want justice. It must be recognized that the people of all countries have the right to choose their social systems according to their own wishes, and settle the affairs of their respective countries as independent and sovereign nations. Foreign intervention is impermissible. The Chinese people firmly support the right of nations to safeguard their independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and oppose foreign aggression, interference, control and subversion. All nations, big or small, should be equal; big nations should not bully the small and strong nations should not bully the weak. China will never be a superpower.

The U.S. side declared that peace in Asia and peace in the world required efforts both to reduce immediate tensions and to eliminate the basic causes of conflict. The U.S. side believes that the effort to reduce tension is served by improving communication between countries that have different world outlooks so as to lessen the risks of confrontation through accident, miscalculation, or misunderstanding. Such an effort requires that countries treat each other with mutual respect, not with censure, and with a willingness to compete peacefully letting performance be the ultimate judge. Equality means that no country should claim infallibility and that each country will be prepared to re-examine its own attitudes for the common good. The U.S. side believes that the effort to erase the fundamental sources of conflict is served by building a just and secure peace, just because it fulfills the aspirations of peoples and nations for freedom and progress; secure because it removes the danger of foreign aggression. The U.S. supports individual freedom and social progress for all the peoples of the world, free of outside pressure or intervention.

There are essential differences between China and the United States in their social systems and foreign policies. However, the two sides, aware of what divides them but equally conscious of their responsibilities for world peace, agreed that: — countries, irrespective of their social systems, have a common interest in working toward a resolution of international differences in the interest of all mankind;

— relations between states should be conducted on the principles of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all states, nonaggression against other states, non-interference in the internal affairs of other states, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful co-existence. International disputes should be settled on this basis, without resorting to the use or threat of force;

— it is against the interests of the peoples of the world for any major country to collude with another against other countries, or to behave in such a way as to suggest that it had an exclusive sphere of interest.

With these principles of international relations in mind the two sides stated that: — both wish to reduce the danger of military conflict;

— neither seeks hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region and each is opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony;

— neither is prepared to negotiate on behalf of any third party or to enter into agreements or understandings directed at other states;

— progress toward the normalization of relations between the two countries is in the interests of all countries; and

— broadening of mutual areas of interest would contribute to their shared objective of working toward the normalization of relations.

The leaders of the two countries discussed the Indochina question. The Chinese side stated that this issue, especially the Vietnam question, is the most urgent question for the relaxation of tension in the Far East. The Chinese Government fully supports the seven-point proposal for the peaceful settlement of the Vietnam question put forward by the Provisional Revolutionary government of the Republic of South Vietnam and the Joint Declaration of the Summit Conference of the Indochinese Peoples. The U.S. side stated that the peoples of Indochina should be allowed to determine their destiny without outside intervention, that its constant primary objective has been a negotiated solution of the Indochina conflict to which end it had made a series of proposals; and that in the absence of a negotiated settlement it envisaged the ultimate withdrawal of all U.S. forces from the region consistent with the aim of true self-determination for each country of Indochina.

The two sides agreed that the basic principle guiding the settlement of the Indochina question is: All foreign troops should withdraw from each of the countries of Indochina, and the people of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia should be left to settle their own questions by themselves free from foreign interference.

The two sides noted that eighteen years have already elapsed since the signing of the Korean Armistice Agreement, yet there is still no permanent legal status for the Korean peninsula. The Chinese Government fully supports the eight-point program for the peaceful unification of Korea put forward by the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on April 12, 1971; declares that all foreign troops should withdraw from South Korea and not be replaced by any other foreign forces; and states that the “UN Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea” should be abolished. The U.S. side stated that its relations with the Republic of Korea were freely entered into by both sides and that existing commitments would be honored. The U.S. would support all efforts of the Republic of Korea to seek a relaxation of the tension and increased communication in the Korean peninsula.

The United States and the People's Republic of China agreed to offer any assistance to the two parties in Korea to reach a mutually acceptable peaceful solution and to consult with interested parties with a view toward replacing the 1953 armistice with an agreement formally ending hostilities.

The Chinese side expressed its firm opposition to the revival and outward expansion of Japanese militarism, maintained that the United States should withdraw all its troops and all its nuclear and military bases from Japan and held that an independent, democratic, peaceful and neutral Japan may have such armed forces as are necessary for its self-defense. The U.S. side stated that it placed the highest value on its friendly relations with Japan and that it would continue to honor its mutual defense treaty obligations. It was pointed out that these arrangements contribute effectively to the common goal of preventing a resurgence of traditional conflicts.

Both sides agreed that Japan is of cardinal importance to peace in Asia and that niether side should try to complicate the other side's efforts to improve relations with Japan.

The leaders of the two countries expressed deep concern over the tension in the south Asian subcontinent and took the position that an armed conflict would be disastrous for the peoples of the area. The two sides therefore urged India and Pakistan to resolve their differences through peaceful negotiations. All attempts to disturb peace, use armed force, or interfere in another country's internal affairs are contrary to the interests of the people of this region, and should be condemned.

The two sides reviewed the long-standing serious dispute between China and the United States regarding Taiwan. The Chinese side reaffirmed its position: The Taiwan question is the crucial question obstructing the normalization of relations between the two countries; the Government of the People's Republic of China is the sole legal Government in China; Taiwan is a part of Chinese territory which has long been returned to the motherland; the liberation of Taiwan is China's internal affair in which no other country has the right to interfere; and the U.S. troops must withdraw from Taiwan. The Chinese Government firmly opposes any activities which aim at the creation of “one China, one Taiwan,” “one China, two governments,” “two Chinas,” and “independent Taiwan” or advocate that “the status of Taiwan remains to be determined.”

The U.S. side stated that the U.S. acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Straits maintain there is but one China. The United States Government does not challenge that position. It will support efforts to reach an equitable and peaceful resolution of the ultimate relationship of Taiwan to the mainland. With respect to the U.S. military presence on Taiwan, the U.S. side stated that the U.S. forces would be progressively reduced as tensions in Asia diminished. This would be done without the abandonment of United States interest in a peaceful solution.

The two sides agreed that pending the normalization of relations between the two countries, the governments of the two countries would respectively take measures to facilitate the exchange of visits between the two peoples and their contacts in the scientific, technical, journalistic and cultural fields.

The two sides agreed that the U.S. Government will send a senior representative to Peking at irregular intervals for concrete consultations to further the normalization of relations and carry forward negotiations on outstanding issues of common interest.

The two sides were gratified to have this opportunity, after so many years without contact between the leaders of their two countries, to present frankly to one another their respective views on a variety of issues. The two sides expressed the hope that the gains achieved during this visit would open up new prospects for the relations between the two countries. They believe that normalization of relations between the two countries is not only in the interest of the Chinese and American peoples but also contributes to the relaxation of tension in Asia and the world.

President Nixon and his party expressed their appreciation for the gracious hospitality shown them by the Government and people of the People's Republic of China.

Second-Chinese Draft 10/25- 7:15 P.M.

JOINT COMMUNIQUE (Tentative Draft)

President Richard Nixon of the United States of America visited the People's Republic of China at the invitation of Premier Chou En-lai of the People's Republic of China from _______ to ________, 1972. Accompanying the President on his visit were (Mrs. Nixon,) U.S. Secretary of State William Rogers and Assistant to the President Dr. Henry A. Kissinger.

President Nixon met with Chairman Mao Tsetung of the Communist Party of China on ____________ and ________________. The two leaders held conversation for ____ hours and had an exchange of views on Sino-U.S. relations and world affairs.

During the visit, further talks were held between President Nixon and Premier Chou En-lai. The two sides held extensive, earnest and frank discussions on the normalization of relations between the United States of America and the People's Republic of China, as well as on other matters of interest to both sides.

Also taking part in the talks on the Chinese side were:

Also taking part in the talks on the U.S. side were:

President Nixon and his party visited Peking and viewed cultural, industrial and agricultural sites, and they also toured __________ and _________ where they, continuing discussions with Chinese leaders, viewed similar places of interest.

During their meetings and talks, the leaders of China and the United States reviewed the international situation in which important changes are taking place and great upheavals exist and expounded their respective positions.

The Chinese side stated that wherever there is oppression, there is resistance. Countries want independence, nations want liberation and the people want to make revolution —- this has become the irresistible trend of history. It must be recognized that the people of all countries have the right to choose their social systems according to their own wishes and settle the affairs of their respective countries as independent and sovereign nations. All progressive actions which are in the interest of the people of one's own country and are supported by the people deserve sympathy and support and absolutely permit of no foreign intervention. All nations, big or small, should be equal; big nations should not bully the small and strong nations should not bully the weak. China will never be a superpower and it opposes hegemony and power politics of any kind. The Chinese side stated that it firmly supports the struggles of all the oppressed people and nations for freedom and liberation and firmly supports the peoples' struggles to safeguard the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of their own countries and oppose foreign aggression, interference, control and subversion. All foreign troops should be withdrawn to their own countries. The Chinese side strongly expressed its firm support to the seven-point proposal for the peaceful settlement of the Viet Nan question put forward by the Provisional Revolutionary Govern- ment of the Republic of South Viet Nam and the Joint Declaration of the Summit Conference of the Indochinese Peoples and its determination to support to the end the struggle of the peoples of Viet Nan, Lees and Cambodia for the attainment of their goal; it firmly supports the eight-point programme for the peaceful unification of Korea put forward by the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on April 12, 1971 and the stand for the abolition of the “U.N. Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea”; it firmly cpposes the revival and outward expansion of Japanese militarism and firmly supports the Japanese people in their just struggle to build an independent, democratic, peaceful and neutral Japan; it firmly opposes anyone exploiting the situation in East Pakistan to interfere in Pakistan's internal affairs, provoke armed conflicts and undermine peace in the south Asian sub-continent.

The U.S. side stated that peace in Asia and peace in the world required efforts both to reduce immediate tensions and to eliminate the basic causes of conflict. The U.S. side believes that the effort to reduce tension is served by improving communication between countries that have different world outlooks so as to lessen the risks of confrontation through accident, miscalculation or misunderstanding. No country should claim infallibility and each country should be prepared to re-examine its own attitudes for the common good. The U.S. side believes that the effort to erase the fundamental scurces of conflict is served by building a just and secure peace, just because it fulfills the aspirations of peoples and nations for freedom and progress, secure because it removes the danger of foreign aggression. The U.S. supports individual freedom and social progress for all the peoples of the world, free of outside pressure or intervention. The U.S. side stated that the peoples of Indochina should be allowed to determine their destiny without outside intervention; and that in the absence of a negotiated settlement it envisaged the ultimate withdrawal of all U.S. forces from the region consistent with the aim of true self-determination for each country of Indochina. The relations between the United States and the Republic of Korea were freely entered into by both sides and the existing commitments would be honored. The U.S. would support all efforts of the Republic of Korea to seek a relaxation of the tension and increased communication in the Korean peninsula. The U.S. placed the highest value on its friendly relations with Japan and it would continue to honor its mutual defense treaty obligations. The U.S. urged India and Pakistan to resolve their differences through peaceful negotiations; all attempts to disturb peace, use armed force or interfere in another country's internal affairs are contrary to the interests of the people of this region and should be condemned.

There are essential differences between China and the United States in their social systems and foreign policies. However, the two, sides agreed that relations between states should be conduoted on the principles of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all states, non-aggression against other states, non-interference in the internal affairs of other states, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. International disputes should be settled on this basis, without resorting to the use or threat of force. It would be against the interests of, the peoples of the world for any major country to collude with another against other countries, or to behave in such a war as to suggest that it had an exclusive sphere of interest.

With these principles of international relations in mind the two sides stated that: — progress toward the normalization of relations between China and the United States is in the interests of all countries;

— neither seeks hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region and each is opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony; and

— neither is prepared to negotiate on behalf of any third party or to enter into agreements or understandings directed at other states.

The two sides reviewed the long-standing serious disputes between China and the United States. The Chinese side reaffirmed its position: The Taiwan question is the crucial question obstructing the normalization of relations between the two countries; the Government of the People's Republic of China is the sole legal Government of China; Taiwan is a part of Chinese territory which has long been returned to the motherland; the liberation of Taiwan is China's internal affair in which no other country has the right to interfere; and the U.S. troops must withdraw from Taiwan. The Chinese Government firmly opposes any activities which aim at the creation of “one Chinas one Taiwan”, “one China, two governments”, “two Chinas”, an “independent Taiwan” or advocate that “the status of Taiwan remains to be determined”. The U.S. side stated: The United States acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Straits maintain there is but one China; the United States Government does not challenge that position. The United States will support the settlement of the question of the unification of Taiwan and the mainland through peaceful negotiations and will not carry out any activities aimed at separating Taiwan from China. The United States will withdraw its troops and military installations in Taiwan after it has completed the withdrawal of all the U.S. armed forces from Indochina.

The two sides agreed that pending the normalization of relations between the two countries, the Governments of the two countries would respectively take measures to facilitate the exchange of visits between the two peoples and their contacts in the scientific, technical, journalistic and cultural fields.

The two sides agreed that the U.S. Government will send a senior representative to Peking at irregular intervals for concrete consultations to further the normalization of relations and carry forward negotiations on issues of common interest.

The two sides were gratified to have this opportunity, after so many years without contact between the leaders of their two countries, to present frankly to one another their respective views on a variety of issues. The two sides expressed the hope that the gains achieved during this visit would open up new prospects for the relations between the two countries. They believe that the normalization of relations between the two countries is not only in the interest of the Chinese and American peoples but also contributes to the relaxation of tension in Asia and the world.

President Nixon and his party expressed their appreciation for the gracious hospitality shown them by the Government and people of the People's Republic of China.

Third U.S. Draft 10/25 - 10:00 P.M.

10/25 - evening

DRAFT JOINT COMMUNIQUE

President Richard Nixon of the United States of America visited the People's Republic of China at the invitation of Premier Chou En-lai of the People's Republic of China from ________ to ____________, 1972. Accompanying the President on his visit were (Mrs. Nixon), U.S. Secretary of State William Rogers and Assistant to the President, Dr. Henry A. Kissinger.

President Nixon met with Chairman Mao Tse Tung of the Communist Party of China on __________ and _________. The two leaders held conversation for ________ hours and had an exchange of views on Sino-U.S. relations and world affairs.

During the visit, further talks were held between President Nixon and Premier Chou En-lai. The two sides held extensive, earnest and frank discussions on the normalization of relations between the United States of America and the People's Republic of China, as well as on other matters of interest to both sides.

Also taking part in the talks on the Chinese side were:

Also taking part in the talks on the U.S. side were:

President Nixon and his party visited Peking and viewed cultural, industrial and agricultural sites, and they also toured ________ and _________. where they, continuing discussions with Chinese leaders, viewed similar places of interest.

During their meetings and talks, the leaders of China and the United States reviewed the international situation in which important changes are taking place and great upheavals exist and expounded their respective positions.

The Chinese side stated that wherever there is oppression, there is resistance. Countries want independence, nations want liberation and the people want progress—this has become the irresistible trend of history. It must be recognized that the people of all countries have the right to choose their social systems according to their own wishes and settle the affairs of their respective countries as independent and sovereign nations. All nations, big or small, should be equal; big nations should not bully the small and strong nations should not bully the weak. China will never be a superpower and it opposes hegemony and power politics of any kind. All foreign troops should be withdrawn to their own country. The Chinese side strongly expressed its firm support to the seven-point proposal for the peaceful settlement of the Viet Nam question put forward by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam and the Joint Declaration of the Summit Conference of the Indochinese Peoples; it firmly supports the eight-point programme for the peaceful unification of Korea put forward by the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on April 12, 1971, and the stand for the abolition of the “U.N. Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea”; it firmly opposes the revival and outward expansion of Japanese militarism and firmly advocates an independent, democratic, peaceful and neutral Japan; it firmly opposes anyone exploiting the situation in East Pakistan to interfere in Pakistan's internal affairs, provoke armed conflicts and undermine peace in the Asian subcontinent.

The U.S. side stated that peace in Asia and peace in the world required efforts both to reduce immediate tensions and to eliminate the basic causes of conflict. Countries should treat each other with mutual respect and with a willingness to compete peacefully, letting performance be the ultimate judge. No country should claim infallibility and each country should be prepared to re-examine its own attitudes for the common good. The U.S. side desires to work with others to build a just and secure peace: just because it fulfills the aspirations of peoples and nations for freedom and progress, secure because it removes the danger of foreign aggression. The U.S. supports individual freedom and social progress for all the peoples of the world, free of outside pressure or intervention. The U.S. side stated that the peoples of Indochina should be allowed to determine their destiny without outside intervention; that its constant primary objective has been a negotiated solution of the Indochina conflict to which end it had made a series of proposals; and that in the absence of a negotiated settlement it envisaged the ultimate withdrawal of all U.S. forces from the region consistent with the aim of true self-determination for each country of Indochina. The relations between the United States and the Republic of Korea were freely entered into by both sides and the existing commitments would be honored. The U.S. would support all efforts of the Republic of Korea to seek a relaxation of the tension and increased communication in the Korean peninsula. The U.S. placed the highest value on its friendly relations with Japan and it would continue to honor its mutual defense treaty obligations. The U.S. urged India and Pakistan to resolve their differences through peaceful negotiations; all attempts to use armed force to settle international problems are contrary to the interests of the people of this region.

There are essential differences between China and the United States in their social systems and foreign policies. However, the two sides agreed that countries, irrespective of their social systems, have a common interest in working toward a resolution of international differences in the interest of all mankind. They further agreed that relations between states should be conducted on the principles of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all states, non-aggression against other states, non-interference in the internal affairs of other states, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. International disputes should be settled on this basis, without resorting to the use or threat of force. The U.S. and the People's Republic of China are prepared to apply these principles to their own relationships.

It would be against the interests of the peoples of the world for any major country to collude with another against other countries, or to behave in such a way as to suggest that it had an exclusive sphere of interest.

With these principles of international relations in mind the two sides stated that: — both wish to reduce the danger of military conflict;

— progress toward the normalization of relations between China and the United States is in the interests of all countries;

— neither seeks hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region and each is opposed to efforts by any other country or, group of countries to establish such hegemony; and

— neither is prepared to negotiate on behalf of any third party or to enter into agreements or understandings directed at other states.

The two sides reviewed the long-standing serious disputes between China and the United States. The Chinese side reaffirmed its position: The Taiwan question is the crucial question obstructing the normalization of relations between the two countries; the Government of the People's Republic of China is the sole legal Government of China; Taiwan is a part of Chinese territory which has long been returned to the motherland; the liberation of Taiwan is China's internal affair in which no other country has the right to interfere; and the U.S. troops must withdraw from Taiwan. The Chinese Government firmly opposes any activities which aim at the creation of “one China, one Taiwan”, “one China, two governments”, “two Chinas”, an “independent Taiwan” or advocate that"the status of Taiwan remains to be determined.”

The U.S. side stated: The United States acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Straits maintain there is but one China. The United States Government does not challenge that position. It will support efforts to reach [an equitable and] peaceful resolution of the ultimate relationship of Taiwan to the mainland. With respect to the U.S. military presence on Taiwan, the U.S. side stated that the U.S. forces would be progressively reduced as tensions in Asia diminished. This would be done without the abandonment of United States interest in a peaceful solution.

The two sides agreed that pending the normalization of relations between the two countries, the Governments of the two countries would respectively take measures to facilitate the exchange of visits between the two peoples and their conta cts in the scientific, technical, journalistic and cultural fields.

The two sides agreed that the U.S. Government will send a senior representative to Peking at irregular intervals for concrete consultations for further the normalization of relations and carry forward negotiations on issues of common interest.

The two sides were gratified to have this opportunity, after so many years without contact between the leaders of their two countries, to present frankly to one another their respective views on a variety of issues. The two sides expressed the hope that the gains achieved during this visit would open up new prospects for the relations between the two countries. They believe that the normalization of relations between the two countries is not only in the interest of the Chinese and American peoples but also contributes to the relaxation of tension in Asia and the world.

President Nixon and his party expressed their appreciation for the gracious hospitality shown them by the Government and people of the People's Republic of China.

Third Chinese draft

10/26 4:45 A.M.

JOINT COMMUNIQUE (Tentative Draft)

President Richard Nixon of the United States of America visited the People's Republic of China at the invitation of Premier Chou En-lai of the People's Republic of China from __________ to ______, 1972. Accompanying the President on his visit were (Mrs. Nixon,) U.S. Secretary of State William Rogers and Assistant to the President Dr. Henry A. Kissinger.

President Nixon met with Chairman Mao Tsetung of the Communist Party of China on __________ and __________. The two leaders held conversation for _____ hours and had an exchange of views on Sino-U.S. relations and world affairs.

During the visit, further talks were held between President Nixon and Premier Chou En-lai. The two sides held extensive, earnest and frank discussions on the normalization of relations between the United States of America and the People's Republic of China, as well as on other matters of interest to both sides.

Also taking part in the talks on the Chinese side were:

Also taking part in the talks on the U.S. side were:

President Nixon and his party visited Peking and viewed cultural, industrial and agricultural sites, and they also toured __________ and __________ where they, continuing discussions with Chinese leaders, viewed similar places of interest.

During their meetings and talks, the leaders of China and the United States reviewed the international situation in which important changes are taking place and great upheavals exist and expounded their respective positions and views.

The Chinese side stated that wherever there is oppression, there is resistance. Countries want independence, nations want liberation and the people want progress —- this has become the irresistible trend of history. It must be recognized that the people of all countries have the right to choose their social systems according to their own wishes and settle the affairs of their respective countries as independent and sovereign nations, and any foreign intervention is absolutely impermissible. All nations, big or small, should be equal; big nations should not bully the small and strong nations should not bully the weak. China will never be a superpower and it opposes hegemony and power politics of any kind. The Chinese side stated that it firmly supports the struggles of all the oppressed people and nations for freedom and liberation and firmly supports the peoples' right to safeguard the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of their own countries and oppose foreign aggression, interference, control and subversion. All foreign troops should be withdrawn to their own countries. The Chinese side expressed its firm support to the struggle of the peoples of Viet Nam, Laos and Cambodia for the attainment of their goal and its firm support to the seven-point proposal for the peaceful settlement of the Viet Nam question put forward by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam and the Joint Declaration of the Summit Conference of the Indochinese Peoples; it firmly supports the eight-point programme for the peaceful unification of Korea put forward by the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on April 12, 1971 and the stand for the abolition of the “U.N. Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea”; it firmly opposes the revival and outward expansion of Japanese militarism and firmly supports the Japanese people's desire to build an independent, democratic, peaceful and neutral Japan; it firmly opposes anyone exploiting the situation in East Pakistan to interfere in Pakistan's internal affairs, provoke armed conflicts and undermine peace in the Asian sub-continent.

The U.S. side stated that peace in Asia and peace in the world required efforts both to reduce immediate tensions and to eliminate the basic causes of conflict. The U.S. side believes that the effort to reduce tension is served by improving communication between countries that have different world outlooks so as to lessen the risks of confrontation through accident, miscalculation or misunderstanding. Countries should treat each other with mutual respect and with a willingness to compete peacefully, letting performance be the ultimate judge. No country should claim infallibility and each country should be prepared to re-examine its own attitudes for the common good. The U.S. side desires to work with others to build a just and secure peace: just because it fulfills the aspirations of peoples and nations for freedom and progress, secure because it removes the danger of foreign aggression. The United States supports individual freedom and social progress for all the peoples of the world, free of outside pressure or intervention. The U.S. side stated that the peoples of Indochina should be allowed to determine their destiny without outside intervention; that its constant primary objective has been a negotiated solutiont of the Indochina conflict to which and it had made a series of proposals, and that in the absence of a negotiated settlement it envisaged the ultimate withdrawal, of all U.S. forces from the region consistent with, the aim of true self-determination for each country of Indochina. The United States would support all efforts of the Republic of Korea to seek a relaxation of the tension and increased communication in the Korean peninsular. The United States placed the highest value on its friendly relations with Japan and it would continua to honor its mutual defense treaty obligations. The United States urged India and Pakistan to resolve their differences through peaceful negotiations; all attempts to use armed force to settle international problems are contrary to the interests of the people of this region.

There are essential differences between China and the United States in their social systems and foreign polioies. However, the two aides agreed that countries, regardless of their social systems, should conduct their relations on the principles of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all states, non-aggression against other states, non-interference in the internal affairs of other states, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. International disputes should be settled on this basis, without resorting to the use or threat of force. The United States and the People's Republic of China are prepared to apply these principles to their mutual relations.

It would be against the interests of the peoples of the world for any major country to collude with another against other oountries, or to behave in such a way as to suggest that it had an exclusive sphere of interest.

With these principles of international relations in mind the two sides stated that; — progress toward the normalization of relations between China and the United States is in the interests of all countries;

— both wish to reduce the danger of international military conflict;

— neither seeks hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region and each is opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony; and

— neither is prepared to negotiate on behalf of any third party or to enter into agreements or under standings directed at other states.

The two sides reviewed the long-standing serious disputes between China and the United States. The Chinese side reaffirmed its positions The Taiwan question is the crucial question obstructing the normalization of relations between China and the United States; the Government of the People's Republic of China is the sole legal Government of China; Taiwan is a part of Chinese territory which has long been returned to the motherland; the liberation of Taiwan is China's internal affair in which no other country has the right to interfere; and the U.S. troops must withdraw from Taiwan. The Chinese Government firmly opposes any activities which aim at the creation of “one China, one Taiwan”, “one China, two governments”, “two Chinas”, an “independent Taiwan” or advocate that “the status of Taiwan remains to be determined”.

The U.S. side declared; The United States acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Straits maintain there is but one China and that Taiwan is a province of China. The United States Government does not challenge that position; it hopes that the settlement of the Taiwan question consistent with this position will be achieved through peaceful negotiations and states that it will progressively reduce and finally withdraw all the U.S. troops and military installations from Taiwan.

The two sides agreed that pending the normalization of relations between the two countries, the Governments of the two countries would respectively take measures to facilitate the exchange of visits between the two peoples and their contacts in the scientific, technical, journalistic and cultural fields.

The two sides agreed that the U.S. Government will send a senior representative to Peking at irregular intervals for concrete consultations to further the normalization of relations and carry forward negotiations on issues of common interest.

The two sides were gratified to have this opportunity, after so many years without contact between the leaders of their two countries, to present frankly to one another their respective views on variety of issues. The two sides expressed the hope that the gains achieved during this visit would open up new prospects for the relations between the two countries. They believe that the normalization of relations between the two countries is not only in the interest of the Chinese and American peoples but also contributes to the relaxation of tension in Asia and the world.

President Nixon and his party expressed their appreciation for the gracious hospitality shown them by the Government and people of the People's Republic of China.

JOINT COMMUNIQUE (Tentative Draft)

President Richard Nixon of the United States of America visited the People's Republic of China at the invitation of Premier Chou En-lai of the People's Republic of China from __________ to ______, 1972. Accompanying the President on his visit were (Mrs. Nixon,) U.S. Secretary of State William Rogers and Assistant to the President Dr. Henry A. Kissinger.

President Nixon met with Chairman Mao Tsetung of the Communist Party of China on __________ and __________. The two leaders held conversation for _____ hours and had an exchange of views on Sino-U.S. relations and world affairs.

During the visit, further talks were held between President Nixon and Premier Chou En-lai. The two sides held extensive, earnest and frank discussions on the normalization of relations between the United States of America and the People's Republic of China, as well as on other matters of interest to both sides.

Also taking part in the talks on the Chinese side were:

Also taking part in the talks on the U.S. side were:

President Nixon and his party visited Peking and viewed cultural, industrial and agricultural sites, and they also toured __________ and __________ where they, continuing discussions with Chinese leaders, viewed similar places of interest.

During their meetings and talks, the leaders of China and the United States reviewed the international situation in which important changes are taking place and great upheavals exist and expounded their respective positions and views.

The Chinese side stated that wherever there is oppression, there is resistance. Countries want independence, nations want liberation and the people want progress —- this has become the irresistible trend of history. It must be recognized that the people of all countries have the right to choose their social systems according to their own wishes and settle the affairs of their respective countries as independent and sovereign nations, and any foreign intervention is absolutely impermissible. All nations, big or small, should be equal; big nations should not bully the small and strong nations should not bully the weak. China will never be a superpower and it opposes hegemony and power politics of any kind. The Chinese side stated that it firmly supports the struggles of all the oppressed people and nations for freedom and liberation and firmly supports the peoples' right to safeguard the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of their own countries and oppose foreign aggression, interference, control and subversion. All foreign troops should be withdrawn to their own countries. The Chinese side expressed its firm support to the struggle of the peoples of Viet Nam, Laos and Cambodia for the attainment of their goal and its firm support to the seven-point proposal for the peaceful settlement of the Viet Nam question put forward by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam and the Joint Declaration of the Summit Conference of the Indochinese Peoples; it firmly supports the eight-point programme for the peaceful unification of Korea put forward by the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on April 12, 1971 and the stand for the abolition of the “U.N. Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea”; it firmly opposes the revival and outward expansion of Japanese militarism and firmly supports the Japanese people's desire to build an independent, democratic, peaceful and neutral Japan; it firmly opposes anyone exploiting the situation in East Pakistan to interfere in Pakistan's internal affairs, provoke armed conflicts and undermine peace in the Asian sub-continent.

The U.S. side stated that peace in Asia and peace in the world required efforts both to reduce immediate tensions and to eliminate the basic causes of conflict. The U.S. side believes that the effort to reduce tension is served by improving communication between countries that have different world outlooks so as to lessen the risks of confrontation through accident, miscalculation or misunderstanding. Countries should treat each other with mutual respect and with a willingness to compete peacefully, letting performance be the ultimate judge. No country should claim infallibility and each country should be prepared to re-examine its own attitudes for the common good. The U.S. side desires to work with others to build a just and secure peace: just because it fulfills the aspirations of peoples and nations for freedom and progress, secure because it removes the danger of foreign aggression. The United States supports individual freedom and social progress for all the peoples of the world, free of outside pressure or intervention. The U.S. side stated that the peoples of Indochina should be allowed to determine their destiny without outside intervention; that its constant primary objective has been a negotiated solutiont of the Indochina conflict to which and it had made a series of proposals, and that in the absence of a negotiated settlement it envisaged the ultimate withdrawal, of all U.S. forces from the region consistent with, the aim of true self-determination for each country of Indochina. The United States would support all efforts of the Republic of Korea to seek a relaxation of the tension and increased communication in the Korean peninsular. The United States placed the highest value on its friendly relations with Japan and it would continua to honor its mutual defense treaty obligations. The United States urged India and Pakistan to resolve their differences through peaceful negotiations; all attempts to use armed force to settle international problems are contrary to the interests of the people of this region.

There are essential differences between China and the United States in their social systems and foreign polioies. However, the two aides agreed that countries, regardless of their social systems, should conduct their relations on the principles of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all states, non-aggression against other states, non-interference in the internal affairs of other states, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. International disputes should be settled on this basis, without resorting to the use or threat of force. The United States and the People's Republic of China are prepared to apply these principles to their mutual relations.

It would be against the interests of the peoples of the world for any major country to collude with another against other oountries, or to behave in such a way as to suggest that it had an exclusive sphere of interest.

With these principles of international relations in mind the two sides stated that; — progress toward the normalization of relations between China and the United States is in the interests of all countries;

— both wish to reduce the danger of international military conflict;

— neither seeks hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region and each is opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony; and

— neither is prepared to negotiate on behalf of any third party or to enter into agreements or under standings directed at other states.

The two sides reviewed the long-standing serious disputes between China and the United States. The Chinese side reaffirmed its positions The Taiwan question is the crucial question obstructing the normalization of relations between China and the United States; the Government of the People's Republic of China is the sole legal Government of China; Taiwan is a part of Chinese territory which has long been returned to the motherland; the liberation of Taiwan is China's internal affair in which no other country has the right to interfere; and the U.S. troops must withdraw from Taiwan. The Chinese Government firmly opposes any activities which aim at the creation of “one China, one Taiwan”, “one China, two governments”, “two Chinas”, an “independent Taiwan” or advocate that “the status of Taiwan remains to be determined”.

The U.S. side declared; The United States acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Straits maintain there is but one China and that Taiwan is a province of China. The United States Government does not challenge that position; it hopes that the settlement of the Taiwan question consistent with this position will be achieved through peaceful negotiations and states that it will progressively reduce and finally withdraw all the U.S. troops and military installations from Taiwan.

The two sides agreed that pending the normalization of relations between the two countries, the Governments of the two countries would respectively take measures to facilitate the exchange of visits between the two peoples and their contacts in the scientific, technical, journalistic and cultural fields.

The two sides agreed that the U.S. Government will send a senior representative to Peking at irregular intervals for concrete consultations to further the normalization of relations and carry forward negotiations on issues of common interest.

The two sides were gratified to have this opportunity, after so many years without contact between the leaders of their two countries, to present frankly to one another their respective views on variety of issues. The two sides expressed the hope that the gains achieved during this visit would open up new prospects for the relations between the two countries. They believe that the normalization of relations between the two countries is not only in the interest of the Chinese and American peoples but also contributes to the relaxation of tension in Asia and the world.

President Nixon and his party expressed their appreciation for the gracious hospitality shown them by the Government and people of the People's Republic of China.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1035, Files for the President-China Material, China-HAK October 1971 Visit. No classification marking. All brackets in the source text. See Documents 165 and 203, Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII, China, 1969-1972, for the final agreed tentative draft and final version of the communiqué

57. Note From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, October 30, 1971 and Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 31, 1971, 6 p.m. 57. Note From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, October 30, 1971 and Memorandum for the Record, Paris, October 31, 1971, 6 p.m.1

October 31, 1971, 6 p.m.

10/30/71

TO:

GENERAL WALTERS

FROM:GENERAL HAIG

General Walters should make the following three points orally to the Chinese: 1. The U.S. side proposes that the agreed joint announcement of the date for the President's visit be at 1600 on Tuesday, November 23, Washington time.

2. Mrs. Nixon is pleased to accept the invitation of the PRC for her to accompany the President.

3. The U.S. side accepts a seven day visit and is prepared to stay overnight at Hangchow.

[Attachment]

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD:

On 31 October following the receipt of a telegram from Washington at midnight (which I completed deciphering at 0330), I made arrangements to call on the Chinese at 1800 (this time was suggested by them).

I went to their Embassy Residence at Boulevard du Chateau in Neuilly and was received at the gate by Wei and at the door by Tsao who had told me that the Ambassador would also be present and he joined us in the Red Room within two minutes.

I thanked him for coming since he had so much to do just prior to his departure for Peking. He said that he was happy to meet with me since we were working in the interest of both our countries and the peace of the world.

I then read the oral message in French and Wei translated it and read it in English and Tsao copied it down.

The Ambassador then said that he would transmit it electrically at once and also take a copy with him. He said he was very pleased that Mrs. Nixon would be coming with the President and asked whether his daughters would also be coming. I said I had no information on this. He then said that he was also pleased that the President would be going to Hangchow. In China they had a saying that there were two places worth seeing, “Heaven and Hangchow”.

Ambassador Huang said he had heard from the Chinese side that Dr. Kissinger's visit had gone well. He himself was returning to Peking for about 15 days and would be back in Paris around Nov 15. He was taking Wei with him. It was a 23-hour trip and he would be in Peking on Wednesday, Nov 3.

He said that it was both absurd and dangerous for 800 million Chinese and 200 million Americans to pretend that the others did not exist. What was being done, if it worked out, was of long-term historic importance. He knew it had not been easy for Mr. Nixon to open the dialogue, nor had it been easy for their side. President Nixon had been courageous. The Editor (presumably Reston) of the New York Times might not think he was courageous but they agreed with Prime Minister Chou En-lai that the President was courageous. I said that it was fortunate that both sides had had courageous men at this time. He agreed. I said I had seen President Nixon twice in times of great stress and danger (Lima and Caracas) and knew how calm he remained under such circumstances. It was reassuring for the whole world. He nodded.

Ambassador Huang also said it was fortunate that at this time President Nixon had had such a wise counselor as Dr. Kissinger. He had seen him only a few times but he had made a most favorable impression on him (Amb) for frankness, vision and directness.

He then recalled my original approach to the military Attache of the PRC in April and said that the interpreter had been very frightened at being approached by an American General. I had, however, been discreet because I had spoken to him alone in the courtyard of the Polish Embassy. The Ambassador added that the Chinese Military Attache to Paris knew nothing about our meetings.

Ambassador Huang said that if our efforts bring results all mankind will owe us a debt. There was a long tradition of friendship between our countries and we must renew it. Ambassador Huang said that he will report on this channel to the Prime Minister and tell him about me. I had helped open a door that had been closed for many years. He hoped I would visit China.

He then said that Tsao would be empowered to receive any letters or documents but any discussions of substance should await his return. I would be notified as soon as he returned.

All of the foregoing transpired over liters of jasmine tea, preserved apples and two different types of pastries filled with small unmentionable objects in an atmosphere of great cordiality.

Patted on the back and arm and called, “my friend”, I was escorted to the door by Tsao and to the gate by Wei.

The Ambassador was wearing a blue uniform and the other two were in conventional Western clothes. None of them wore any of the usual red Mao badges.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Haig handwrote the addressee instructions, the date, and an additional “eyes only” classification on the note. No time of transmission or receipt appears on the note, but Walters subsequently indicated in his October 31 memorandum of record that he received the telegram at midnight and finished deciphering it at 3:30 a.m. The October 31 memorandum that Walters drafted does not bear any classification markings. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly.

58. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, November 16, 1971 58. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, November 16, 19711

Paris, November 16, 1971

16 November 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD:

On November 15 I called Tsao at the Chinese Embassy. He seemed a little startled and said he absolutely could not see me on Monday (15). I explained that I merely wanted to leave a piece of paper for transmission and he then agreed to see me at 0900 on November 16.

I went there at that time and was met by another Chinese diplomat. (Wei is in Peking with the Ambassador. It is Wei's first trip home to see his family in two and a half years.) This man's name is CHAN YUNG CHIEH. He speaks fluent French but little or no English.

CHIEH met me at the gate (which was locked when I arrived and rang) and ushered me into the house which looked like a wreck. The carpets were up and they were moving furniture around.

Into the living room, jasmine tea and preserved apples and I handed Tsao the message as instructed and told him of Dr. Kissinger's forthcoming visit and desire to see the Ambassador. Tsao said he had had no word concerning the Ambassador's return but he would return either on Wednesday, 17 November, in which case he could see Dr. Kisssinger; if not then, he would not return until Sunday, 21 November, in which case it would be too late.

He then emphasized that he could not discuss substantial matters but would transmit the paper I gave him to Peking at once by electrical means. He seemed to think that answers on the third question (the President's press conference) might be forthcoming by then but dubious about the others.

More tea and preserved apples and the usual ritual for departure.

VERNON A. WALTERS
Major General, USA
Defense Attache

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Walters. The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy.

59. Instructions to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, undated 59. Instructions to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, undated1

Washington, undated

General Walters should request an appointment with the Chinese Ambassador for Monday afternoon, November 15. At that meeting he should inform the Ambassador that Dr. Kissinger will be in Paris on November 20 and would like to see him at 9:00 a. m. General Walters should then hand over the attached note, saying the U.S. side would appreciate a response, if possible, at the November 20 meeting with Dr. Kissinger.

[Attachment]

1. The arrival in New York of the Delegation of the Peoples Republic of China to the United Nations raises the question of contacts between the US side and that Delegation. Up to now, all of our contacts have been with the Chinese representatives in Paris. The US intends to use Paris as the primary channel for communications on major and longer-range policy issues and sensitive questions unless it receives a contrary view from Peking.

There will be, however, a number of policy issues arising in New York requiring early decision on which a more rapid contact may be necessary than would be possible through our arrangements in Paris. For example, there is the possibility of a UN Security Council meeting on the situation in South Asia.

We do not wish to proceed on such a course without informally having ascertained the Chinese view. The exchange of views on such issues would not need to involve commitments but would assure understanding. For such issues, the US proposes that Dr. Kissinger for the US side meet secretly with whomever the Chinese side would designate in New York. Absolute secrecy would be maintained. They would discuss the basic issues and principles. Then they could decide whether more formal discussions of procedures and specific steps would be necessary between Ambassador Bush and the members of the Chinese Delegation. The US side wishes for the time being that Dr. Kissinger remain the principal channel.

2. Aside from the United Nations question, the United States side would appreciate the Chinese side's views on the situation in South Asia to be sure that US actions are taken with the Chinese view in mind.

3. If the Chinese side agrees to the joint announcement of the date of the President's visit on November 23 at 1600 hours Washington time, the US side would like to be free to release some additional information that evening at 1930 hours Washington time. President Nixon is thinking of holding a press conference at that time and may be asked questions to which he would like to respond as follows: — The visit will last seven days.

— The President will visit Shanghai and Hangchow in addition to Peking.

— Mrs. Nixon will accompany the President.

— The two sides are investigating possible arrangements for television and other media coverage.

Does the Chinese side aqree that the President release this information in response to questions.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Published from an unsigned copy. Attached is the note requesting the secret meeting between Chinese officials and Kissinger.

60. Memorandum for Record, Paris, November 18, 1971 60. Memorandum for Record, Paris, November 18, 19711

Paris, November 18, 1971

18 November 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD:

On the morning of 18 November I proceeded by the usual circuitous route to the vicinity of the Chinese Embassy Residence in Neuilly and walked the rest of the way after parking the car some distance away.

I was met at the gate by Wei, at the door by Tsao and ushered into the “Red Room.” The Ambassador came in and greeted me warmly. He said that he had returned a week ahead of schedule to bring me some of the answers which we had requested. I said I was sorry he had had to return early from his homeland. He said that what we were doing was important and he did not mind. He said he had had a good trip but 24 hours in a plane was long. He had returned via Rangoon, Karachi and Cairo.

Ambassador Huang then said that while he was home he had had echoes of Dr. Kissinger's most recent trip and everyone was pleased.

The Ambassador then directed Tsao to read the following to me in English:

“The Chinese side has received the U.S. messages of October 30 and October 31 and hereby makes the following replies: 1. The Chinese side proposes that the announcement already agreed upon by the two sides on the date of President Nixon's visit be made at 0500, November 30, Tuesday, Peking time. That is, 1600, November 29, Monday, Washington time.

2. The Chinese Government welcomes and invites Mrs. Nixon to accompany the President on his visit to China.

3. The Chinese Government will make arrangements for a 7-day visit and overnight stay in Hangchow for President Nixon and his party.”

I thanked them and said that this partially answered some of the contents of the message I had for them.

I then delivered the message covering the postponement of the Vietnamese meeting and consequent postponement of Dr. Kissinger's trip to Paris. The Ambassador noted that some of the questions had already been answered by his message. He asked when would Dr. Kissinger come to Paris. I said that I did not know but that this would depend on the North Vietnamese.

He then said that he would tell me the real reason why the Chinese would prefer to move the date of the announcement of President Nixon's visit to the 29th instead of the 23rd. At that time they would have a Chief of Government of a neighboring state visiting them and they did not feel it would be opportune to make such an announcement during his stay in China. I said that if I were a guessing man I could guess what country was involved. The Ambassador asked which one I would guess and I said, “North Vietnam.” He slapped me on the back and said, “You guessed right the first time. He will leave China on the 26th; therefore, the announcement on the 29th suits us best.”

Ambassador Huang said he was pleased the President would travel in a Chinese plane and said the Prime Minister had told Dr. Kissinger that he (P.M. Chou EN-LAI) would accompany the President and thus security was guaranteed. He then asked if the President often flew in non-American planes. I said that to the best of my knowledge, he had not, nor had any of his predecessors. I had made every single foreign trip with President Eisenhower and two trips with President Truman and as far as I knew, none of them had ever travelled in a foreign plane. He looked as pleased as a Cheshire cat.

The Ambassador said I was an old friend and he had not seen me in a long time and had set aside the morning for me. I was then served large quantities of Chinese food some of which looked like chopped unmentionables wrapped in the gall bladders of sheep, but maybe that was my imagination. I was also served 'Peking lightening,' a beverage called MAI TAI that could easily replace lighter fluid.

When I would not take more than a small amount alleging that I had to drive my car, he commented that Russians drink a lot. I then said that there was a story going around about Khrushchev's visit to President Eisenhower. Reportedly Eisenhower asked Khrushchev what he thought about the U. S. Khrushchev said it was okay but there were lots of drunkards. Eisenhower was indignant, opened his desk, took out a pistol, and gave it to Khrushchev saying, “You have my permission to shoot any drunkards you see.” Next day in New York Khrushchev went for a walk, saw a drunkard and shot him; later he shot another - in all, four. Next morning the New York Newspapers came out with huge headlines, “Four Soviet Diplomats Mysteriously Shot.” The Ambassador laughed till the tears ran down his cheeks and Wei and Tsao were equally transported.

The Ambassador then asked if I was going to China with the President, not as interpreter but as member of his staff, or was I going on the next trip. I said I would like to go but really did not know. He then replied that he had told them in Peking about me and how I had helped open the door that had been closed for 25 years and he would talk to Dr. Kissinger when he saw him about it. First, he would soften him up with a Chinese lunch as he understood Dr. Kissinger was a great lover of Chinese food. (I'm sorry, but he did say all this). During this time I was eating fried shrimp in soy bean sauce in the service of my country. I have only eaten shrimp one other time, also with the Ambassador and in the same Red Room!

All of the foregoing was washed down with jasmine tea and accompanied by the now usual friendly pats on the arm and back. I then took my leave in accord with the usual ceremonial. They said that as soon as they had anything for me they would be in touch.

Left the Ambassador in the Red Room, Tsao at the door and Wei at the garden gate. It was perhaps the most cordial and relaxed interview I had with the Ambassador.

VERNON A. WALTERS
Major General, USA
Defense Attache

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Walters. A handwritten notation reads: “Lord.” The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. Although a precise time is not indicated on the memorandum, Walters indicates that the meeting was held during the morning of November 18.

61. Note From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, November 18, 1971 61. Note From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, November 18, 19711

Washington, November 18, 1971

November 18, 1971

Henry:

Walters saw Group 2—was cordially received. Their Number One is back. He stated that the Chinese strongly prefer 29 November rather than 23 November for announcement. They explained that the problem involved the fact that they will have a visitor from Hanoi in Peking on the 23d and, therefore, hope that we can make the announcement on the 29th.

There were no answers on additional details and no indication of when they would have such an answer. However, they expressed great gratitude that the U.S. side had agreed to the seven-day trip. They expressed pleasure that the First Lady would come and that the President will travel in their aircraft. The Chinese Ambassador was also anxious to know when he could see you and Walters indicated that this depended on the North Vietnamese.

AL HAIG

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive.

62. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, November 19, 1971 62. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, November 19, 19711

Washington, November 19, 1971

November 19, 1971

Dear Dick:

Enclosed are two messages you should hand to the Chinese Ambassador during your meeting on Saturday, November 20, 1971. The first message is a note concerning the announcement of the date for the President's visit. The second is a personal communication from Dr. Kissinger to Prime Minister Chou En-lai about the Vietnam negotiations.

We are all most grateful for your efforts.

Sincerely,

/s/

Alexander M. Haig, Jr. Brigadier General, U.S. Army Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Major General Vernon Walters

Senior U.S. Military Attache

American Embassy

Paris France

APO New York 09777

[Enclosure 1]

The United States accepts the proposed date of November 29 at 1600 Washington time for the agreed announcement of the date for the President's visit.

The President is holding a press conference on November 30 at 2000 Pacific time (2300 Washington time) at which time he would like to be able to respond to questions by releasing the additional information on the visit contained in the U.S. note delivered on November 16, 1971. If the Chinese side agrees that this additional information can be made known, the U.S. side would be grateful if the Chinese side would similarly defer its public release until November 30 at 2300 Washington time.

[Enclosure 2]

In view of the fact that a North Vietnamese delegation is shortly visiting Peking, I would like to put forward some comments on the present negotiating situation against the background of our discussions in Peking.

The United States government is taking seriously your views that Indochina is an urgent issue for the relaxation of tensions in the Far East and it would help to have this issue substantially settled before the President's visit to the People's Republic of China.

On October 11, 1971 the United States presented to North Vietnam a new comprehensive proposal designed to bring a rapid end to the war on a basis just for all parties. While it would not be appropriate for us to give you the details of this proposal, you should know that it provides for the total withdrawal of American forces which you have urged upon us, as well as the maximum suggestions that we can make on the political issue.

The U.S. side proposed a private meeting on November 1, 1971 between me and Le Duc Tho, or any other appropriate representative of the political leadership in Hanoi, together with Xuan Thuy. On October 25, 1971 the North Vietnamese side said that Le Duc Tho and Xuan Thuy would he willing to meet with me on November 20, 1971. The U.S. side accepted this later date.

On November 17, 1971—or three days before the scheduled meeting and after all arrangements for a secret visit to Paris had been made—the North Vietnamese informed us that Le Due Tho had suddenly become ill and could not attend the meeting. On November 19, 1971 we informed the North Vietnamese that under these circumstances I would not be travelling to Paris; that we remained ready to meet with Le Duc Tho, or any other appropriate representative of the political leadership in Hanoi, together with Xuan Thuy; and that we would wait to hear North Vietnamese suggestions for a new date.

As I told you and Vice Chairman Yeh Chien-ying, and as we have made clear to the North Vietnamese, the United States is prepared to treat North. Vietnamese concerns with generosity. At the same time, the People's Republic of China, as a great country, will recognize that we cannot permit ourselves to be humiliated, no matter what the possible consequences for other policies.

We know that the People's Republic, like the United States, does not trade in principles. We have no specific request to make, and we do not expect an answer to this communication. I am sending you this message to keep you informed of major developments as President Nixon's visit draws closer and in the spirit of candor which has marked our conversations.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Published from a copy that indicates Haig signed the original. Attached are the two messages.

63. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, November 20, 1971, 11:30 a.m. 63. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, November 20, 1971, 11:30 a.m.1

Paris, November 20, 1971, 11:30 a.m.

20 November 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD:

Having received instructions to seek a meeting with the Chinese on the morning of 20 November, 1971. I called Tsao on the evening before and made arrangements to see them at 1130 on Saturday the 20th. At that time I went there and was met and escorted into the Red Room in accordance with the usual ritual. The Ambassador, Wei and Tsao were present. This was my 22nd meeting with them.

I said that I had not expected to see them so soon after our last meeting but I had received two messages for them. The Ambassador replied that he also had a message for me but that as I was their guest I should transmit mine first I then read the message referring to our desire to release certain facts about the tr[ip] at the President's press conference on the 30th of November and giving our agreement their proposed date and time of release. Then I handed the English text of the message to Tsao as instructed in your letter of transmittal.

I then read the text of Dr. Kissinger's message to the Prime Minister in French, sentence by sentence, and Wei translated it into Chinese. I then handed it to Tsao and he read from the English text and also translated it into Chinese for the Ambassador. He made no comment other than to ask what the meaning on “regarding of effect it might have on other policies.” I replied that it meant what the text said and he nodded apparently satisfied. He then said “The Vietnamese notified you of Le Duc Tho's illness only three days before the scheduled meeting /” I replied that that was quite correct. He nodded ruefully and grinned. Tsao then asked for clarification of some English expressions of which he was not sure and I gave it in English to him and repeated it for Wei in French to make sure that there were no misunderstandings of any part of the text.

The Ambassador then said that he had learned that the U.S. had made excellent arrangements for the Chinese delegation to the United Nations and that they were pleased. He realized that we had local difficulties such as when Mayor Lindsay had refused to welcome Mr. Pompidou, but that nothing like that had happened with the Chinese delegation.

He then instructed Tsao to hand me the text of their message after first reading it in English. (This is the first time they have ever given me a paper to keep and transmit.). I am enclosing the text of this document.

After it had been read and handed to me Ambassador Huang She then said that he believed that they had answered all of our questions and as of that moment he did not owe me any answers. They had given us their view regarding communication in New York, regarding the situation in South Asia and their agreement for the date of the announcement of President's Nixon, and the release of the additional material on facts which we wished to make public at the President's Press conference. I said that seemed to me that the books were on balance between us as of that time.

All of this was interspersed with floods of Jasmine tea, platefuls of chopped nuts, preserved apples and two types of little pies containing unknown chopped materials. Mai Tai (Chinese Lightening) was also brought in and using my excuse that I had to drive, I took as little as possible. I had already taken the precaution of taking a glass of olive oil before going there to coat my stomach and limit the effects of Mao's culinary and alcoholic revenge. Avery slight fragrance of incense drifted through the Red Room (first time I have had any, but it was much less than for Dr. Kissinger.)

The Ambassador then asked bluntly whether I also dealt with messages for the North Vietnamese. I said that I did but only transmitted and received messages. Dr. Kissinger did the talking but I was present. He laughed and said “you fight on many fronts at once.” I agreed.

We then talked about the racial situation in the United States and I mentioned casually that my Air Attache was an Abenaki Indian and that the Deputy Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army in Europe Maj. Gen Davison was black as was the Ambassador Sweden. He said “You are on tbe right road.” There was more light chit chat and historical persiflage of this type and after an hour I was released to go.

My departure took place in accord with the usual ritual and ceremonia [text illegible] The Ambassador, Tsao and Wei could not have been more cordial and seemed more relaxed at any time since I have been seeing them.

VERNON A. WALTERS
MAJOR GENERAL U.S. ARMY

PS AS ON PREVIOUS OCCASIONS ALL TYPING ERRORS, MISSPELLINGS AND OTHER SHORTCOMINGS IN THE PREPARATION OF THIS MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD ARE DUE TO THE AGE AND GRADE OF THE TYPIST.

1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical Files-China, Chron, 1 September-29 December, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Walters. The meeting was held at the Chinese Embassy. Attached is the English-language version of the Chinese message, with the handwritten notation: “11/20/71.”

64. Message From the Government of the People's Republic of China to the Government of the United States, undated 64. Message From the Government of the People's Republic of China to the Government of the United States, undated1

undated

11/20/71

1. The Chinese side agrees that while Paris remains the primary channel, the Chinese and United states sides designate specific persons to contact each other in New York, and proposes that the Vice-Chairman of the Delegation of the People's Republic of China to the United Nations Mr. Huang Hua for the Chinese side meet with Dr. Kissinger.

“The Chinese side's understanding is that such meetings should only be for exchanges of views on relevant major questions of principle within the scope of the work of the United Nations and would not need to involve commitments and, moreover, they would not be made public and secrecy would be maintained by both sides. As for the concrete arrangements for the meetings, please contact Mr. Huang Hua and work them out directly with him.

“2. With regard to the Indian-Pakistan situation, India is at present interfering in Pakistan's internal affairs and carrying out subversive activities and military threats against Pakistan by continuing to exploit the East Pakistan question. The Indian-Pakistan situation is aggravating daily. The Chinese side maintains that the East Pakistan question is the internal affair of Pakistan which brooks no foreign interference and that disputes between countries should be settled between the two sides concerned through consultation and not by resorting to force of arms. The proposal put forward by President Yahya Khan for the armed forces of India and Pakistan to withdraw from the border respectively and disengage is helpful to the easing of tension in the Sub-Continent and should be welcomed. Should Pakistan be subjected to aggression by India, China will support the Pakistan Government and people in their just struggle. China already made public its above stand during the visit of the Pakistan Delegation to China. China has also agreed to continue to provide military assistance.

“It is hoped that the United States will exert its influence to prevent the further deterioration of the situation through persuasion.

“3. The Chinese side has no objection to the release by the U.S. side of the four points of information under item 3 in the U.S. message of November 16 with the understanding that it is agreeable to the U.S. side that the joint announcement of the date of President Nixon's visit to China be made on November 29, Washington time.”

1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical Files-China, Chron, 1 September-29 December, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusive Eyes Only. The message bears the handwritten notation: “11/20/71.”

65. Checklist of Undertakings With the Government of the People's Republic of China, Washington, June 17, 1972 65. Checklist of Undertakings With the Government of the People's Republic of China, Washington, June 17, 19721

Washington, June 17, 1972

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

INFORMATION

March 17, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR:

HAK/HAIG

FROM: WINSTON LORD

SUBJECT:

Undertakings with the PRC

Attached is a check list of commitments, understandings and undertakings with the Chinese, including when we made them and their present status. All are presently under control and no immediate action is needed.

You will see that the list boils down essentially to the following: — A series of assurances on our Soviet policy, including equality of treatment, meticulous debriefing, and deflection of pressures.

— Our various assurances on Taiwan policy, as reaffirmed by the President.

— Other miscellaneous understandings, including coordination on South Asian policy, restraint on Japan, confidentiality of our talks with the PRC, and various travel/exchange matters in the Watson channel.

If the President stated our intentions more than once, e.g., on certain aspects of Taiwan policy, I have listed it in each case with a close rendition of his actual wording.

Attachment

Checklist of Undertakings with the PRC Soviet Union

Circumstance Nature of Undertaking Status

Haig to Chou 1/3/72 US prepared to use resources, as during Indo-Pak crisis,to attempt to neutralize Soviet threats and deter threats against PRC. White House to monitor

Haig to Chou 1/3/72; RN to Chou, 2/22/72 Prepared unilaterally to provide certain information. HK gave to Yeh/Chiao on 2/23/72

HK to Yeh/Chiao 2/23/72 Will provide additional information if requested. Will inform them if any drastic changes in information. They are to name channel. White House to monitor. No action necessary unless/until PRC names channel, HK read to give more. requests info, or drastic change occurs.

HK to Yeh 2/24/72 HK will check Mongolian information. CIA memo 3/7/72 confirms accuracy

RN to Chou 2/22/72 After Moscow summit, Dr. Kissinger will report personally to Chou on what was discussed and agreed to. June trip agreed upon. Date to be set.

RN to Chou 2/23/72 US will oppose any attempt by the Soviet Union to engage in any aggressive action against China. White House to monitor.

RN/HK to Chou 2/23/72 US will continue to keep PRC current on SALT developments. Being done in HK channel.

HK to Chiao 2/23/72 US will keep PRC meticulously informed of all significant negotiations and agreements with the Soviet Union. We will inform PRC wewll in advance on significant negotiations so that if the PRC wishes to comment the US would be prepared to hear its views and take them very seriously. Being done through HK channel.

Circumstances Nature of Undertaking Status

HK to Chiao 2/23/72 US will avoid SALTpositions which might creature pressure against the PRC. US discouraging French move on accidental war. Being done through HK channel.

HK to Chiao 2/23/72 There will be no US pressure for the PRC to join the Geneva Disarmament Conference. White House to monitor.

HK to Chiao 2/23/72 General US policy on trade is to place the PRC in the same legal status as the Soviet Union. Actions taken in Feb. '72 and previously. White House to monitor.

HK to Chiao 2/23/72 HK to provide PRC with complete account of Middle East discussions at Moscow summit as one of the topics to be convered. White House to monitor.

RN/HK to Chou 2/24/72 HK to check annual figures of Jewish emigration from the Soviet Union. WL checking.

We think Soviet figures are on the low side. In any event, hundres of thousands of Jews wish to leave USSR. Official Soviet figures: 10,000 to Israel last year and 21,000 total

RN to Chou 2/25/72 Under no circumstances will the US at the Moscow summit negotiate about or discuss its relations with the PRC without the PRC's knowledge and approval.We did not discuss the PRC in Moscow. If the Russians raise the question of PRC intentions, the US will relay Chou's position that the PRC seeksimproved relations with the Soviet Union, opposes hegemony, and does not seek collusion. White House to monitor.

RN to Chou 2/25/72 US policy is not to have the PRC and Soviet Union at odds; US wants good reltions with both countries; US welcomes better relations between Moscow and Peking White House to monitor.

HK to Huang Hua 3/14/72 Third city for Soviet Union trip will not be east of Urals. ” done

” US is prepared to make any agreement with the PRC that it makes with the Soviet Union ”

RN to Chou 2/22/72 There will be no US statements that the status of Taiwan is undetermined. ”

” US will not support any Taiwan independence movement. ”

” US, to the extent we are able, will use our influence to discourage Japan from moving into Taiwan as our presence diminishes. ”

” US will support any peaceful resolution of the Taiwan issue that can be worked out and will not support any military attempt by the ROC to return to the mainland. ”

” US seeks normalization of relations with the PRC and will work toward that goal. ”

” The two-thirds of our forces on Taiwan which are related to Southeast Asia will be removed as the problem of Southeast Asia is resolved ”

” The reducation of he remaining one-third of our forces will go forward as progress is made on the peaceful resolution of the problem. ”

RN to Chou 2/24/72 As Vietnam is concluded one way or another, the two-thirds of US forces related to the war will be withdrawn. US will also move to reduce the remaining one-third as the US-PRC relationship develops. ”

” Two-thirds of US forces will go hopefully as soon as we can finish Vietnam involvement and RN plan is also to reduce and withdraw other one-third during the period he has the power to act, i.e., over the four additional years. ”

Circumstances Nature of Undertaking Status

RN to Chou 2/24/72 US to move toward normalization of relations. No secret timetable can be fixed. If RN reelected he has five years to achieve his goal and will move toward it. White House to monitor.

” US will discourage Japanese forces from going into Taiwan after US forces leave. ”

” No American personnel or agencies, directly or indirectly, will give any encouragement or support to the Taiwan Independence Movement, in the US or elsewhere. If the PRC gives us any information on this the US will act to stop US-related activity. ”

South Asia

RN to Chou 2/23/72 US will inform PRC in advance of recognizing Bangladesh. HK told Huang Hua 3/14/72 that recognition & 2/24/72 is planned for first week in April.done

HK to Huang Hua 3/14/72 White House has not informed bureaucracy about Bangladesh recognition and will entertain any PRC views on timing. White House to keep plans secret for time being.

RN to Chou 2/23/72 US will provide some economic assistance to West Pakistan White House to monitor.done

Korea Circumstances Circumstances Status

RN to Chou 2/23/72 To the extent possible, the US will discourage Japan from any military intervention in Korea. White House to monitor

RN to Chou 2/24/72 The US will use its influence to discourage Japanese intervention in Korea. HK did this on Japan visit.

Japan

RN to Chou 2/23/72 US will restrain to the extent we can the Japanese from going from economic expansion to military expansion, but can only do so if we have close relations with them. White House to monitor.

RN/HK to Chou 2/24/72 The US and the PRC should confidentially inform each other ofvtalks with Japan. “HK did this on Japan visit.

Miscellaneous

RN to Chou 2/22/72 Transcripts of White House conversations with the Chinese will be seen only by RN, HK, General Haig , Holdridge and Lord . Bureaucracy will get an account of those matters which can be generally discussed and require bureaucratic implementation. Transcripts kept in White House files.

RN to Chou 2/23/72 US will use influence to prevent Japanese or Indian attacks against China. White House to monitor

RN to Chou 2/23/72 If RN reelected, he will keep HK. To be decided in November.

” US ready to cooperate on cancer research and will make available all the resources of NIH to other countries. White House to monitor

Circumstances Nature of Undertaking Status

RN/HK to Chou 2/28/72 US will do nothing to embarrass the PRC by implication or otherwise about sensitive subjects discussed, such as the Soviet Union, India and Japan. The US will take every precaution to knock down stories that are inaccurate or in violation of understandings on privacy. The US will maintain discipline in the bureaucracy. The US will keep references to such subjects as Japan and India within the bounds of the Communique. White House to monitor.

” The US will check allegations that the US bombed North Vietnam during China trip. US conducted protective reaction only. (Lavelle?)

HK to Huang Hua 3/14/72 The White House will spport and monitor complete investigation of poisoning incident in New York and will involve the FBI. Bush , Rockefeller , and Hooever contacted. White House to monitor.

HK to Huang Hua 3/14/72 HK will include Ambassador Bush in meetings only when UN matters are being discussed. White House to control.

HK to Huang Hua 3/14/72 Original Scott/Mansfield letter to be delivered through Watson, and trip details discussed in Paris. Letter pouched to Paris and Watson instructed to handle matter.

” US will submit Albert letter for Boggs/Ford about one week later—letter will be pouched to Watson week of 3/20/72. White House handling.done

” Most visa problems to be handled at nearest PRC embassy, i.e. usually Ottawa, with HK weighing in occasionally through Watson or HK channel. State/Watson will be informed by the Chinese, and White House to monitor. done

Circumstances Nature of Undertaking Status

HK to Huang Hua 3/14/72 US to raise PRC table tennis visit in Paris. Instructions sent to Watson. done

” US will not increase military operations over North Vietnam unless there is a North Vietnamese offensive. White House to monitor.done

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 87, Country Files, Far East, China, Commitments to the PRC [10/71-7/73]. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Sent for information. Lord transmitted the checklist to Kissinger and Haig under a March 17 covering memorandum. Lord updated the checklist by hand on June 17. The copy published here is the June 17 version of the checklist.

66. Memorandum for the Record, Washington, November 21, 1971 66. Memorandum for the Record, Washington, November 21, 19711

Washington, November 21, 1971

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

November 22, 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

General Haig called me at home at 11:10 A. M. , Sunday, November 21, saying that Dr. Kissinger had instructed me to call Ambassador Huang Hua directly. General Haig said he would inquire of Ambassador Bush whether we knew of a private line for the Ambassador and then call me back.

At 11:55 A. M. General Haig said that we knew of no private line and that I should therefore call the Hotel Roosevelt in New York City directly. I immediately placed the call to the Ambassador and the hotel switchboard put me directly through to the Chinese delegation. An unidentified Chinese man who spoke serviceable English was on the line and I gave him my name and asked to speak to the Ambassador. He said that he would have to check, and after about 30 seconds he came back on the line to say that the Ambassador was not there and would be out for “some time'” that afternoon. I repeated my name and asked the Ambassador to call me back at my office number (202-456-2255).

When the Ambassador had not called by 6:00 P. M. , I once again called the Roosevelt Hotel, this time from the office. I asked for the Ambassador if he had returned, and,in his absence,Miss Tang. There were two false starts: first, the hotel operator gave me the Chinese press relations office which then switched me to another number on the delegation; secondly, when I reached an unidentified member of the delegation, after checking briefly, he tried to switch me to the Ambassador's number and we were cut off. After reaching the same man again he switched me successfully to the Ambassador's extension (his room is 1412).

The Ambassador answered the phone himself. I gave my name and mentioned that we had met in July. The Ambassador immediately recognized me. I then explained that “my superior” would have called the Ambassador normally, but that he thought my calling would be “less conspicuous.” Ambassador Huang commented, “Good.” I then said that my superior had a message for the Ambassador which he wished to get to him directly on Monday afternoon. I said that Commander Howe, whom he had not met but whom others on his delegation had met, would carry the message. I asked the best way for Commander Howe to get the message to him directly. The Ambassador inquired what time we wished to deliver the message, and I replied any time that was convenient for him during the afternoon. He then suggested 2:00 P.M. and said that Commander Howe should come directly to the 14th floor. He would be met by Miss Tang and brought to the Ambassador (presumably his room, 1412). I said that Commander Howe would wait as long as necessary to bring back

The Ambassador was cordial, did not seem at all surprised to hear from us, and spoke in rather halting English.

Winston Lord

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Lord on November 22. Huang Hua was staying at the Hotel Roosevelt in New York.

67. Memorandum for the Record, New York, November 22, 1971, 2-2:25 p.m. 67. Memorandum for the Record, New York, November 22, 1971, 2-2:25 p.m.1

New York, November 22, 1971, 2-2:25 p.m.

November 22, 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

FROM: JONATHAN T. HOWE

SUBJECT:

Meeting with Ambassador Huang Hua, Monday, November 22, 1971, 2:00 2:25 p.m. at the Roosevelt Hotel, New York City

When the elevator door opened on the 14th floor at 2:00 p.m. Commander Howe was greeted by Miss Wang Hai-jung, who he had met in Peking and who now was a member of the PRC delegation. Miss Tang Wen-sheng, who had acted as Chou En-lai's interpreter, was close at hand and the two of them escorted him to a small reception room some distance down the corridor to the left. Miss Wang Hai-jung soon excused herself to inform the Ambassador and she did not return. Miss Tang and Commander Howe engaged in light repartee which she began by saying “who would have thought that we would meet again so soon and here in New York.” Among other things she mentioned that she thought New York had changed a lot but cautioned that her recollection was not precise since she had been in primary school when she left the United States. She also inquired whether Dianne Matthews had received a box left in Peking behind a door in her room which had been returned via Paris. In response to Commander Howe's inquiry she said they didn't know what was in the box because they hadn't opened it. (Dianne says the package contained tea cups and that General Walters has it in hand.) During this period tea and light snacks were served.

In a few minutes the Ambassador entered and, after an exchange of pleasantries Commander Howe handed him the attached note. The Ambassador and Miss Tang read the note together with the latter translating at a few places. After very little further conversation between them, the interpreter stated that Monday night would be difficult because the Ambassador had been invited to a National Day reception for another country. Tuesday would be much better. Since they were giving a reception of their own between 7 and 9 p.m., the meeting should be set for 10 p.m. (It seemed obvious from the precision of their reply that they had anticipated the Tuesday time problem and had already decided on lO p.m.) Commander Howe accepted this time without further discussion except to reiterate that Tuesday was also Dr. Kissinger's preference.

Commander Howe gave them the address of the meeting place and explained that Apartment 1B was one flight up and that someone would be at the curb to bring them to the apartment. He also indicated that Dr. Kissinger would be waiting in the apartment. Miss Tang asked how the house could be identified. Commander Howe apologized for not personally having seen the house and explained that it was not in an affluent area but had been selected primarily to insure privacy. He stated that the dwelling would be numbered and that someone would be on the lookout for them. Miss Tang seemed a little concerned about whether a familiar face would be there to meet them, so Commander Howe told her that Winston Lord would be at the entrance and would greet them as soon as their car opened. He added that Mr. Lord might not be conspicuous but that as soon as they had stopped, he would appear. This seemed to reassure her. She assumed that they should come in their own car.

The conversation then turned to lighter topics. Commander Howe stated at an early point that he knew the Ambassador was very busy and that he did not want to keep him. However, the Ambassador seemed in no mood to end the meeting. The Ambassador remarked that Commander Howe had recently been in Peking and Commander Howe noted that those who had met the Ambassador in July had had many fine things to say about him. The discussion touched on a number of topics including: Chinese hospitality toward the U.S. party during the October trip to Peking, places the U.S. party had visited in China, whether Commander Howe was located in New York or had come to New York especially that day and Dr. Kissinger's whereabouts, the fact that Dr. Kissinger would be in California with the President during the Thanksgiving period, and that the PRC delegation had been very busy and had not had a chance to get out of Manhattan, confining their travels mostly to movement between the Hotel and the UN.

As the meeting was drawing to a close, the Ambassador asked that he be contacted if Dr. Kissinger wished to change the time for the meeting. Commander Howe assured him that this would be done, although he was confident that the time was excellent from Dr. Kissinger's point of view and he did not foresee any reason for change. Commander Howe said that if the Ambassador needed to make a change he could use the telephone numbers Mr. Lord had given him on Sunday. The Ambassador asked if Commander Howe had the hotel telephone number and Commander Howe assured him that there would be no difficulty in reaching the Ambassador if necessary.

In closing, the Ambassador asked that Commander Howe convey his personal regards to Dr. Kissinger and Commander Howe said that he would and that Dr. Kissinger sent his very best regards to the Ambassador.

The Ambassador and Miss Tang then walked Commander Howe to the elevator. (Miss Tang asked that Commander Howe send her regards to Dianne Matthews.)

During the course of the meeting there was no discussion of matters of substance or relating to the President's trip, and no indication as to who would be attending the Tuesday evening meeting.

Footnote on personalities

(As usual, the Chinese were gracious hosts and went out of their way to be pleasant and personable. Miss Tang seemed a little less vivacious than when interpreting for Chou. Ambassador Huang Hua seemed at ease and deliberately prolonged the meeting but was not as glib as some top ranking Chinese previously encountered.)

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Howe. The meeting was held at the Hotel Roosevelt. The note is attached but not published.

68. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, November 23, 1971, 10-11:55 p.m. 68. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, November 23, 1971, 10-11:55 p.m.1

New York, November 23, 1971, 10-11:55 p.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

DATE & TIME: Tuesday, November 23, 1971; 10:00 p.m. - 11:55 p.m.

PLACE: New York City, East Side

PARTICIPANTS:

Ambassador Huang Hua, PRC Permanent Representative to the United Nations and Ambassador to Canada

Ch'en Ch'u, PRC Deputy Permanent Representative to the United Nations and Director, Information Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

T'ang Wen-Sheng, Interpreter

Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Ambassador George Bush, US Representative to the United Nations

Brig. Gen. Alexander M. Haig, Jr., Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, Senior NSC Staff Member

(There were some opening pleasantries as Dr. Kissinger greeted the Chinese whom he had met before in Peking, and introduced his deputy, General Haig, who would be making the next advance trip to Peking to prepare for the President's trip.)

Dr. Kissinger : It's nice to see you again. I have the fondest recollections of my trips to Peking.

I apologize for this apartment. We had to improvise rapidly. We looked for an apartment without a doorman. Next time we will have more adequate surroundings.

Ambassador Huang: It's better than a hotel.

Dr. Kissinger : I would hate to believe that. I hope you are showing courtesy.

It is a pleasure to see you all here. When I saw you in Peking, I thought I might see you in many places, but not necessarily in New York.

Ambassador Huang: We also thought that we would continue to see each other in Peking, not in New York.

Dr. Kissinger : I don't know whether I can express personal sentiments to those from Communist countries or whether everything is done on an objective basis. I did want to tell you that if there is anything that we can do to make your stay, or that of your delegation, more pleasant, you should get in touch with our office. We will do what we can, and we would not consider it an official approach. Sometimes there are technical problems. We will do anything we can to make your stay more comfortable.

Ambassador Huang: We thank you very much.

Dr. Kissinger : We don't have a State Guest House.

Ambassador Huang: It was comfortable?

Dr. Kissinger : Extremely comfortable.

Ambassador Huang: You went when it was hot the first time.

Dr. Kissinger : Inside the Guest House it was very comfortable.

Ambassador Huang: The second time you were there I was no longer there. Otherwise I would have accompanied you to the Great Wall. Mr. Ch'en Ch'u here did so.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, he was there. He is in some pictures with me.

Ambassador Huang: A lot of correspondents and newsmen would like to accompany President Nixon on his trip.

Dr. Kissinger : We keep relative discipline with the press by leaving the impression that we can take very many if they can behave themselves. We have not told them yet the number that the Prime Minister and I have agreed upon. We will try to keep that a secret as long as possible.

Ch'en Ch'u: Until the final minutes.

Dr. Kissinger : The first time I mentioned the approximate number to our regular contact, he said, “What, two companies?”

I understand, Mr. Ambassador, that we can meet on matters within the general scope of UN policy, and that we will keep our other channel for longer range problems. Is that your understanding?

Ambassador Huang: That's also my understanding.

Dr. Kissinger : Of course, the general scope of UN problems is rather wide. If sometime we have an urgent message,in order to get it back there quickly, would it be appropriate to give it to you?

Ambassador Huang: Yes, if they are within the scope of principles with relation to matters of policy in the United Nations. As for the time factor, we hope you will be able to tell us what you would like to say as early as possible.

Dr. Kissinger : Under normal circumstances this would be very easy. I know what to discuss with you and what to discuss elsewhere. Sometimes there are border-line areas where we must act quickly. We can decide these case-by-case. I will approach you and we will decide what to discuss if it is urgent.

Ambassador Huang: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : We will check with you then. You and I will discuss general issues, the principal issues related to UN business, and then the technical discussions can be handled with others meeting as necessary. But you and I will discuss them first and which way we should handle the issue.

Ambassador Huang: We agree to that.

Dr. Kissinger : I have asked Mr. Lord to write down the phone numbers on which we can be reached. I think we should agree on a code name for you. If you give your real name, every operator at the White House will listen to the conversations. You can choose any name at all. Just say Mr. So and So is calling.

Ambassador Huang: We can discuss that later.

Dr. Kissinger : If she (indicating Miss T'ang) calls me and gives a girl's name, they will pay no attention.

Ambassador Huang: We were also considering that, too.

Dr. Kissinger : That is a possibility. Or, she could ask for Mr. Lord or General Haig.

When you were in Ottawa I got full reports from all my colleagues trying to arrange trips for Presidential candidates to China. (Ambassador Huang laughs.) As far as I can tell, you behaved with Oriental inscrutability.

If I may make one other general point. Every time the Chinese side says something, they bring it to me as if I had written it. (Chinese laughter) We have greatly appreciated the delicacy and restraint with which the Chinese delegation has conducted itself in New York within the spirit which we are trying to achieve for the President's visit. On one occasion a lot of paper was brought to my desk and our Ambassador (Bush) made some comments. On our side we will avoid any polemics. Of course, we recognize each side will represent its convictions. As you undoubtedly know from your observations here and in Ottawa, there are many forces in this country, for a variety of motives, that would not be unhappy if the evolution did not take the form we have planned for it. Our side will do everything it can to show restraint.

In this sense, Vietnam is a particularly sensitive point.

There are two issues I thought we could discuss in addition, of course, to any problems the Ambassador wishes to raise. First, the India-Pakistan situation. Secondly, if you wish, the problem of the Secretary General. And of course, any topic which you may wish to raise.

On the issue of India-Pakistan, you are undoubtedly aware by now through your observations of the American scene that our bureaucracy doesn't always speak with one voice, and that those who don't speak with one voice usually speak to the New York Times. A negative point—you must understand that the New York Times, Washington Post, Time Magazine, etc. , don't represent the policy of this Administration on the issue of India-Pakistan.

I don't know whether you have the full details of my conversations with the Prime Minister in Peking. The analysis that I gave to the Prime Minister of our views of that situation remain in full force. We substantially agree with what your delegation said at the United Nations. We substantially agree with the communication which we received through the other channel about your Government's views on the India-Pakistan dispute.

Our view, briefly stated, is as follows. One, we will do what we can to alleviate the suffering of the refugees and the economic dislocation caused by them. We have given to this purpose more than the rest of the world put together, and more than four times as much as the newly found friends of India.

Second, we will give humanitarian relief for the refugees in East Pakistan, to relieve the suffering and to stop the outflow of refugees. We have earmarked $250 million for this purpose.

(Dr. Kissinger asked Lord what had been done with the Ambassador's car, and Lord answered that it had been parked near here and that we would get it when the meeting broke up.)

Third, we are in favor of a political solution of the problem, and we have taken many steps in this direction, some of which are outlined in the other channel and some of which I told to the Prime Minister.

We do not accept the proposition that another country has the right to use military force to alleviate whatever strains are caused by the refugees, and we will not accept military aggression by India against Pakistan.

As a general proposition, I have told our Ambassador (Bush) that if the case comes to the Security Council—I wanted to talk with you whether or not it should—it is the President's wish that we not move too far away from you on this issue. It is in neither of our interests to have identical positions.

I wanted you also to know two other things that we have done today, actually three other things.

First, we sent a note to the Indian Government listing all the things we have done and all the things Pakistan has done. We have pointed out that military aggression will not be understood by the American people or the American Government. This is strictly for your information, and is not generally known—we have talked to friendly governments in the same vein. Specifically, I talked personally today to the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany. On behalf of the President, I also asked the British Ambassador to speak in this sense to the Prime Minister as a personal message from the President. We also told the British Prime Minister—no one in the foreign office—what our strategy will be if it comes to the Security Council, and we have asked for British cooperation.

We have asked Pakistan to hold off going to the United Nations for two days without giving any reason, in order to have a chance to consult with you.

(Dr. Kissinger mentioned to Ambassador Bush that all of this was being done in back channel.)

Ambassador Huang: Pakistan should not propose it?

Dr. Kissinger : They should not propose it only through tomorrow, because I wanted to find out what your plans were. If the Indian attacks continue, we will take certain unilateral steps which I outlined to the Prime Minister in connection with economic aid and the little military assistance that India is getting, which is not much.

I wanted to ask two questions. What is your judgment on the wisdom of having this issue go to the Security Council? And secondly, if you feel free to tell me, if it goes to the Security Council, regardless of our intention because some other country may take it there, what are your views?

Ambassador Huang: As for the situation on the India-Pakistan subcontinent, our acting Prime Minister, Mr. Chi P'eng-fei made a public speech after Dr. Kissinger had left Peking. And within that speech is contained our basic position.

Dr. Kissinger (to General Haig): We don't have that, do we?

Ambassador Huang: That was the speech that the acting Prime Minister made at the farewell banquet for Mr. Bhutto.

Dr. Kissinger : Let's get the text. I have seen excerpts, and I know what you mean. It was not unfriendly towards us so I did not see the full text.

Ambassador Huang: And afterwards, our delegation in the first speech to the General Assembly of the United Nations by Vice Minister, Mr. Ch'iao Kuan-hua, also made clear our views. And therefore we deal with this problem in accordance with what was discussed in Peking between Prime Minister Chou En-lai and yourself and also our public statements.

And if the question comes to the Security Council, that is the question relating to India-Pakistan, we are prepared to speak in accordance with the already mentioned public positions of China on this question.

Dr. Kissinger : Is it correct that what the Prime Minister said on my first visit still remains the full position of your Government, everything you said on the first and second visits?

Ambassador Huang: That's true, and also the communication which we have sent through the other channel remains our position.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, and I have it exactly in mind. I will show you, George (Ambassador Bush). For these purposes, Mr. Bush works directly for me. No one in the Government except the people in this room knew about this channel. If others know I will let you know, so there will be no confusion when you are talking to someone. No matter what others say, there are only these people and Commander Howe and, of course, the President who know about this.

Ambassador Huang: And Commander Howe.

Dr. Kissinger : I said so. Everyone who has been in Peking you can trust.

If the case comes to the Security Council there are two problems. First, there are the speeches that are made by various delegations. Secondly, there are any resolutions that will be proposed. On speeches we will assume that you will stay in the general framework of what you have just indicated. We will take the position of listing all of the things that have been done on our side and therefore we do not believe that military aggression—we won't call it military aggression but military “moves”—are justified.

The second problem is a resolution. We are now in the process of discussing with some of our embassies, especially New Delhi and Islamabad and George Bush, what a proper resolution would be. And I would like to tell you what we are now thinking of, subject to changes, to bureaucratic replies that we will be getting. Ambassador Bush can be very helpful in shaping this discussion by his contribution. Let me tell you the five points we are thinking of and I will be grateful for your reaction: 1) Calls upon all states to refrain from any actions that would endanger the peace in the area;

2) Urges all parties concerned to refrain from actions which would violate the territorial integrity of India and Pakistan;

Miss T'ang: Territorial integrity?

Dr. Kissinger : In practice it is obvious what this means.

3) Requests the Government of Pakistan to continue urgently its efforts towards creating a favorable climate conducive to the voluntary return of refugees to East Pakistan.

4) Requests the Governments of India and Pakistan to take all possible measures to facilitate the safe and speedy return of the refugees to their homes;

Five, and this is optional.

5) Invites the Governments of Pakistan and India to respond affirmatively to the proposal of the Secretary General offering Good Offices looking towards a peaceful resolution of the situation in the area.

The fifth part is not essential. This is a very tentative draft, subject very easily to changes. If you have suggestions we can consider them very easily. Of course, no one except people in this room would know that it was your suggestion. I am not sure we would offer this, but it is the sort of thing we would work towards.

Ambassador Huang: You mean it would not necessarily be put forth by the U.S.?

Dr. Kissinger : This is the solution towards which we would work, not necessarily a resolution which we would put forward.

Ambassador Huang: At the present time it is impossible for me to make any comments on this. We will study this tentative proposal.

Dr. Kissinger : What is your general attitude towards this issue going to the Security Council? Do you prefer it not to go, or are you indifferent, or do you prefer it to go?

Ambassador Huang: Because we had foreseen there was a great possibility that this question would come up in the Security Council or the General Assembly itself, therefore immediately upon arrival and in its first speech the Chinese delegation spoke on this question. Of course, it is not a situation under our control.

Dr. Kissinger : You do not plan to introduce the issue?

Ambassador Huang: We don't have that plan.

Dr. Kissinger : If it is raised by Pakistan, you would support its being discussed?

Ambassador Huang: It is a matter of fact that we have already further explained our views in committee.

Ambassador Bush: The third committee.

Dr. Kissinger : The third committee on Friday. We have to decide whether it should go to the Security Council. Would you find it embarrassing if it were taken to the Security Council?

Ambassador Huang: That's nothing on our side.

Dr. Kissinger : Indifferent.

Ambassador Huang: On our side there is no question of being embarrassed.

Dr. Kissinger : We will not force the pace and will give you advance information of anything we know will happen. If it goes to the Security Council and then a resolution is discussed… What happens—I have practically no experience in the UN—I am told that when a resolution is introduced, all delegations talk to each other. How should we handle the contacts between the Chinese delegation and the U.S. delegation?

Ambassador Huang: We would like to consider this later or in light of circumstances that will be prevailing at the time.

Dr. Kissinger : Let me know. I'm told—I've no experience in the UN—that when a debate actually starts things happen very quickly.

Ambassador Bush: Yes, in fact, Mr. Ambassador, when a resolution is introduced, no matter how small, everyone goes off and consults. Dr. Kissinger refers to the fact that traditionally in that one body, as opposed to other committees, there is a great interchange between delegations on every resolution. Even on one word they are still talking to one another off in one corner. That is why he raised the question.

Dr. Kissinger : I am no more eager to have our people in a corner with you than you are to have yours with them.

Ambassador Bush: We will do what Dr. Kissinger wants.

Ambassador Huang: I believe our attitude is already made clear through the exchange of opinion in the other channel. That is, on matters of principle related to policy we have agreed to contact your Excellency to discuss these problems.

Dr. Kissinger : And you want…….excuse me.

Ambassador Huang: As for the problem of daily contact in the UN, we haven't considered this.

Dr. Kissinger : Mr. Ambassador, we are not so eager for daily contact. In fact, we have told Ambassador Bush this. Anything that permits consideration in Washington must be cleared in Washington. We do not want to overwhelm you with every bright idea of our bureaucracy.

If the case comes to the Security Council, and you have a resolution and the British have a resolution, for example, and someone wants to change a word, how do we get in touch with you on that? Anything of principle must go to us. On the other day-to-day contacts there is no hurry. In fact, we would not want too much for the time being.

Ambassador Huang: We are not familiar with the procedures of the United Nations. We are not so familiar with them as Mr. Bush.

Ambassador Bush: May I interrupt. It may be of interest to the Ambassador that in the Security Council normally you can get time for a reasonable short recess, unlike the General Assembly. This would be particularly true in the case of Mr. Huang. They will accept a 30-minute or 10-minute adjournment, as opposed to other bodies. There they would respect his request for time during consideration of these resolutions.

Dr. Kissinger : Let us leave this for the time being because you will want to reflect upon it.

Let me sum up what I understand our procedures are. We will settle issues of principle between us. Ambassador Bush has our full confidence and will carry out in the spirit of what we have agreed. We are conscious of the fact, and it is in our interest, that we do not give specific indications of cooperation in the view of other delegations by discussing resolutions. However, if things move fast, we shall move first to gain time through procedural devices. Ambassador Bush will talk to me or General Haig, and we can get word to you through less visible channels. If this does not work, we will consider what to do. Does that seem like reasonable procedures to you?

And we will do this only on issues of the first importance, such as South Asia, and we will not bother with every issue before the United Nations until after the President's visit, when many things may become clearer. Is this an agreeable procedure, Mr. Ambassador?

Ambassador Huang: I believe we can agree to the procedures you just mentioned.

Dr. Kissinger : We will do it on this basis, and err on the side of doing right and good atmosphere, rather than bureaucratic elegance. Even if some of the resolutions lack exactly the right word. (Chinese laughter)

I don't know whether the Ambassador remembers when we had our roast duck with the Prime Minister and he told us what he did with his office. My secret dream is that somebody would let me do that with our bureaucracy.

There are two other things. One is on the issue … . .

Ambassador Huang: May I interrupt on this issue? What is your assessment of the present situation that exists in India/Pakistan?

Dr. Kissinger : (Asked Lord for intelligence reports which Lord got, and for a map which he also got. Dr. Kissinger then begins reading which Indian units are in which places, and General Haig then takes this up.)

This violates every security rule. The major attack is through Jessore (indicating on map). As I remember, two Indian brigades are attacking in this area. The Indians claim they are guerrillas, and the Pakistanis claim they are Indian troops. Whatever they are, it is either the Indian Army or the best-equipped guerrilla force that has appeared in recent years. Then they are attacking here in Chittagong Hill Station, in the direction of Chittagong.

General Haig: The report is that there are as many as two divisions supported by armor.

Dr. Kissinger : In all?

General Haig: In all.

Dr. Kissinger : (Pointing out the area of attack) Our assessment is that in all, the units total two divisions and an armored brigade.

General Haig: And in brigade size attacks, except Jessore where there are two brigades.

(Dr. Kissinger asks General Haig to read)

General Haig: There is the 57th Brigade and the 107th Brigade of the 9th Division.

Dr. Kissinger : He is giving the units. (General Haig repeats the above.)

Dr. Kissinger : (to Lord) We should get the briefing text attached to these minutes from now on.

General Haig: It is attached, but it is no good.

Dr. Kissinger : Don't undermine the confidence of our friends.

General Haig: The 23rd and 12th Brigades of the 16th Division and the 55th Brigade of the 16th Division.

Ambassador Huang: In Chittagong.

Dr. Kissinger : In Chittagong, right.

General Haig: The 27th Brigade of the 14th Division.

Dr. Kissinger : We were told—I'm not sure it's right—that they have taken their two mountain divisions from your frontier and moved them down. Frankly, I don't know what mountain divisions would be doing in East Pakistan, except I trained during the war for jungle warfare and I spent a very cold winter in the Battle of the Bulge.

Miss T'ang: The Battle… ?

Dr. Kissinger : The Battle of the Bulge. That was before you were born.

Miss T'ang: I don't think so.

Dr. Kissinger : This will give you an idea. (Ambassador Huang nods) There are totally conflicting reports on losses. The Indians say the Pakistanis have lost 6 airplanes, and the Pakistanis admitted losing 3 planes.

If we have specific information like that, we could send it in a sealed envelope to the hotel if you want us to. Not on a regular basis, but when something special happens, we will send it from my office.

Ambassador Huang: If necessary, we will communicate.

Dr. Kissinger : There are two other things.

On the Secretary General—you need not give your opinion now—if you have a view, it will be taken seriously into account.

I talked to the Prime Minister when I was there about the Formosan Independence Movement. We understand there have been some demonstrations. There are two things here. First, there is no U.S. Government involvement in these activities, and, as I told the Prime Minister, there will not be.

Secondly, as far as these groups are concerned, if they do anything illegal we will take strong measures, but we have no legal basis to prevent them from assembling. If we did, there were a number of occasions in recent years when we would have been delighted to do that in Washington. The President can get larger demonstrations against himself on any university campus than any you have so far attracted.

Did you have any topics you wished to discuss with me?

Ambassador Huang: As for the question of the Secretary General, we aren't familiar with all the candidates put forward.

Dr. Kissinger : We are too familiar with them. (Ambassador Huang chuckles.)

Ambassador Huang: And we have undertaken no obligations to any.

Dr. Kissinger : Some claim they have your support.

Ambassador Huang: That was not said with our approval.

Dr. Kissinger : All right. That's good to know.

Ambassador Huang: Does the U.S. side have any ideas along these lines?

Dr. Kissinger : As I understand it, we have a slight leaning toward Jakobson, but we are very open to other views. Is that right, George? (to Bush)

Ambassador Bush: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : There are a number of others who would also be acceptable.

Ambassador Huang: There have been words going about at the UN, asking his Excellency U Thant to remain the Secretary General for a very short period, for a transitional period so that that question of a new Secretary General could be discussed at a further date. Is there any grounds to that?

Dr. Kissinger : We have not heard this, at least not in Washington.

Ambassador Bush: There were rumors to this effect. The Soviet Union mentioned this in the last two to three days. Our judgment has been that under no conditions would U Thant stay, even for one month. That is our best judgment. We had recent contact with the French Ambassador. The Soviets made a statement that U Thant was staying on for a short period of time. Our judgment, especially in the light of his most recent illness, is that he would not want to stay on under any conditions.

Dr. Kissinger : We have not expressed our view on that.

Ambassador Bush: We only indicated to the French our views on an interim arrangement.— we prefer to solve the problem and get it out of the way, but that was some time ago.

Ambassador Huang: We heard Mr. Kosygin paid a visit to Canada, and he officially put forward to the Prime Minister of Canada, Trudeau, the idea of asking his Excellency U Thant to remain in office for a short period, for a transitional period.

Dr. Kissinger : I thought he said for more than a transitional period.

Ambassador Bush: Originally he did. And then when Gromyko was here, he asked if he would be willing to stay on for one year.

Dr. Kissinger : We do not consider that an interim period.

Ambassador Bush: No. I am not familiar with Kosygin's remarks.

Dr. Kissinger : Kosygin raised something with Trudeau. However, it didn't get anywhere, or I would remember the details. I will check, but we are proceeding under the assumption that U Thant will leave on January 1 and therefore the conversation had no consequence. They never approached us.

Of the candidates mentioned, the only one we have said is unacceptable to us was Herrera.

Ambassador Huang: But as your side already openly expressed your attitude toward Mr. Herrera, it is quite difficult for us to express our attitude.

Dr. Kissinger : I am not asking you to; I am just informing you.

Ambassador Huang: What I mean, under the circumstances where the U.S. has already openly expressed its attitude toward Mr. Herrera as a candidate, then it is very difficult for us to discuss the qualifications of his candidacy, and it also puts us in a very difficult position.

Anyway on the question of Secretary General, we have undertaken no obligations on any part. Neither do we have any obligations toward his Excellency U Thant. Of course, neither has he put forward this question. The Soviet side has had no contact with us on this at all.

Dr. Kissinger : In the future, before we express an opinion on the Secretary General, we will try to let you know our opinion privately.

Ambassador Huang: As for the question of the so-called Taiwan Independence Movement, I would only like to call your attention to the fact that elements are taking part in the so-called Taiwan Independence Movement and becoming more and more active recently in the U.S. and other places, also, for example, in Japan.

Dr. Kissinger : The Prime Minister talked to me about this, and what I said to him from our side remains our position.

Ambassador Huang: You asked me if we have questions to raise on our side. Do you have any ideas on the situation in the Middle East? To be more specific, what ideas does the U.S. have on the procedures for this question in the United Nations?

Dr. Kissinger : The Middle East negotiations have been handled in different forums simultaneously. At one stage we talked bilaterally with the Soviet Union. Then we went through a period when we attempted to act as intermediary between Egypt and Israel to bring about an interim settlement. In the UN we have handled it in a four-power context with the United States, Soviet Union, Britain and France. We are not in principle opposed to the participation of the other permanent members of the Security Council.

The Big Four have not been very active lately. When did they last meet (to Bush)?

Ambassador Bush: Six weeks or two months ago.

Dr. Kissinger : The issue then was guarantees?

Ambassador Bush: Yes, and it was not discussed very seriously. The questions were whether to have a communique about implementing Security Council Resolution 242. That was what really the last three or four meetings boiled down to.

Dr. Kissinger : At the moment all the negotiations seem to be not very active. There have been no effective two-power discussions between us and the Soviet Union for about a year. The interim settlement is at the moment stalemated, because the Egyptians are asking for a commitment to a final settlement before signing an interim settlement, and Israel wants an interim settlement to avoid a final settlement. If the Ambassador (Bush) will forgive me, the four make up for lack of precision by enormous ability in procrastination. But they have—speaking quite openly—the four have not really in the last year discussed any concrete issues that could move toward a settlement. They talk about more abstract problems of guarantees or communiques and so forth.

Ambassador Huang: Mr. Riad, the Foreign Minister of Egypt, will be coming to the United Nations either at the end of this month or the beginning of next month. And it seems that the Egyptian side would like a debate held in the UN with regard to this question. But we still don't know what Egypt will decide, what the final result will be. Does the U.S. side have any consideration, what results it wishes for in the debate in the United Nations?

May I add also on our side that we have already stated, and say now, that we are not prepared to take part in consultations among the four powers. I say this because you mentioned that you were not opposed to participation in the UN discussions by other permanent members of the Security Council. So that's our attitude.

Dr. Kissinger : Our general view on the situation in the Middle East has been that a great deal of effort has been expended over the last few years over debate on theoretical formulas. When you read the sacramental language of Security Council Resolution 242 you see phrases like “just and lasting peace” and “secure and recognized boundaries.” It is only UN lawyers who understand this. (Ambassador Huang laughs)

We would like to move the situation toward some concrete progress. In a way debate on theoretical formulas has the tendency to confirm the existing status quo.

Indeed I told Mr. Riad at a private dinner I had with him when he was here that the major immediate task was to get some movement in the situation rather than discuss theory about how such movements should be brought about. So, our effort in this debate will be to prevent too much exacerbation of feelings by both sides and too much rigid commitments by Israel to existing lines.

Miss T'ang: Could you repeat that last sentence?

Dr. Kissinger : On the one hand, to keep the rhetoric within tolerable limits. On the other hand, to keep Israel from committing itself more and more irrevocably to existing lines.

Miss T'ang: You mean the rigidity of its position—you do not want Israel to take an increasingly rigid position?

Dr. Kissinger : Exactly. We would like Israel to make some movement. We think making too absolute demands on it has the practical tendency of making it easier for it to stay where it is.

Ambassador Huang: I have no more questions.

Dr. Kissinger : We still have to get back to Washington tonight. I don't want to stay in this apartment—it's probably haunted. (Chinese laughter)

Ambassador Huang: We heard you are going to California for Thanksgiving.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, with the President. You can always reach me at any of the numbers that I gave you. What is the best way to call you—through the switchboard, or are there any direct numbers?

Ambassador Huang: We have no way of dialing direct.

Dr. Kissinger : No direct phones? Have you tried to get them?

Miss T'ang: We have not thought of that.

Dr. Kissinger : I don't wish to tell the Ambassador how to do his business, but you can get direct phones so that you can dial yourself, with your own numbers.

Ambassador Huang: This is because we moved into the hotel with very tentative plans to stay there.

Dr. Kissinger : Having lived in the Roosevelt Hotel, the only way to endure it is to hope to leave quickly. (Chinese laughter) I have never been in a winning political campaign. One of the three lost ones that I was in was Governor Rockefeller's, who had headquarters in the Roosevelt Hotel. So I know it very well. (Chinese laughter) There is serious thought being given to asking me to retire for a few months during the next campaign.

Ambassador Huang: Thank you very much for coming especially to New York to give us your opinions.

Dr. Kissinger : It is a great pleasure to see you again. I remember my visits to China with great warmth. There was enormous courtesy shown to us on both visits. Please convey our high personal regards to the Prime Minister.

Will you be in Peking when we come again?

Ambassador Huang: I don't know.

Dr. Kissinger : If you call us, what name will you use?

(There was then a brief discussion of what name should be used by Miss T'ang.)

Ambassador Huang: Perhaps we could simply use the name “Nancy.”

Dr. Kissinger : The name Nancy presents some complications. It's probably in your files—you know more about me than we know about you—but a girl named “Nancy” calls me occasionally. (Ambassador Huang laughs)

(There was some further discussion of a code name.)

General Haig: How about “Kay.”

Dr. Kissinger : You could say “Miss Kay” is calling. It is the same name as the nightclub singer who wanted to go to China. Her name was Miss Kay. She didn't believe that there were no nightclubs in China. She couldn't believe there is a world without nightclubs.

(There was then agreement on the use of the name “Kay.”)

Dr. Kissinger : You should call as “Miss Kay” and ask for any of us, even in California.

(Lord then explained the various telephone numbers and handed over the list.)

(There were final goodbyes and pleasantries all around.)

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. According to information contained in Document, the meeting was held in an unidentified apartment building in New York. Howe noted that it was not in an “affluent area but had been selected primarily to insure privacy.” A typed notation on the memorandum of conversation indicates that the meeting was held on the East Side. For text of the draft UN Security Council resolution, see Document 69. For Kissinger's summary of this meeting, see Foreign Relations, 1969-1972, volume XVII, China, 1969-1972, Document 173.

69. Message From the United States Government to the Government of the People's Republic of China, Washington, November 29, 1971 69. Message From the United States Government to the Government of the People's Republic of China, Washington, November 29, 19711

Washington, November 29, 1971

11/29/71

1. The U.S. side would propose the following with regard to the advance trip to make detailed arrangements for the President's visit: — Dates. It would be most convenient for the U.S. if the trip could be conducted during the period from January 3 through January 10, 1972. Alternate dates would be January 10 through 17 but they are much less convenient.

— Locations. The group would like to visit Shanghai, Hangchow and Peking to survey each site that the President would visit, including residences, meeting rooms, and locations for various events. It is estimated that the team would need about 1 1/2 days each in Shanghai and Hangchow and four or five days in Peking. The best procedure might be to visit Peking first for two days, then go to Shanghai and Hangchow, returning to Peking to complete any unfinished business.

— Size of Party. The U.S. would like to send a group of about twenty persons in addition to the aircraft crew of some seventeen persons. The names of these individuals in protocol order will be forwarded to the People's Republic of China well in advance of the agreed date for the trip. It is presently anticipated that the team will be headed by Brigadier General Alexander M. Haig, Jr., U.S. Army, who is the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs and who has Dr. Kissinger's complete confidence.

2. As a related technical matter, there is a preliminary action concerning the ground satellite terminal which it would be useful to take prior to arrival of the advance party in January. The INTELSAT Communications Satellite Committee which controls the satellites that will relay signals from the ground satellite terminal is meeting during the week of December 8 and is not scheduled to meet again until February 23. To preclude having to reconvene the group during the intervening period, it is proposed that the Communications Satellite Corporation (COMSAT), which manages INTELSAT, request authority from the Committee at the December 8 meeting to approve an application for use of satellite facilities if received at a subsequent date from the People's Republic of China.

This action would not commit the People's Republic of China-to use these facilities, but would merely be a preliminary step to ensure that arrangements can be made efficiently once the PRC has determined that they are satisfactory. A formal application by the People's Republic of China could be made after the January visit when a detailed presentation of the facilities the U.S. recommends and various leasing options will be made.

3. With regard to the November 20 Chinese note on the India-Pakistan situation, President Nixon wanted Prime Minister Chou En-lai to be informed of the various steps that the U.S. Government has taken in recent days, on this question.

On November 23, Dr. Kissinger, in his meeting with Ambassador Huang Hua, exchanged views on this matter in the context of United Nations business. This discussion included the possibility of a UN Security Council resolution which might have a restraining impact. After consultation with the Pakistani government this resolution has been strengthened. Enclosed is a copy of the kind of strengthened resolution we are prepared to support.

On November 23, the U.S. Ambassador in New Delhi was instructed to make a strong demarche to the Indian Government, informing it that the U.S. Government and people would not understand an Indian decision to resort to war. On November 29, an even stronger representation was made to Prime Minister Gandhi on the situation, including our inquiry concerning India's failure to respond to the U.S. proposal already agreed to by President Yahya that both sides pull back their forces from the borders.

On November 23, the U.S. Ambassador in Moscow was instructed to urge the Soviet Government to exercise restraint on India. On November 27, a letter from the President to Premier Kosygin reinforced this request and warned of the consequences of continued hostilities.

On November 23, Dr. Kissinger talked to Chancellor Brandt on behalf of the President. Dr. Kissinger informed the Chancellor of U.S. thinking on a possible UN Security Council resolution and said that the U.S. would appreciate a demarche to the Indian Government from the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany, urging an end to military action.

On November 24, Dr. Kissinger informed the British Ambassador of U.S. thinking on a possible UN Security Council resolution. It was emphasized that the U.S. would leave to the Government of Pakistan the decision as to whether the issue should be referred to the UN Security Council. The U.S. side asked the British to support Pakistan in the UN or, if this proved impossible, to refrain from supporting India.

On November 25, the President called Prime Minister Heath to express his concern over the India-Pakistan situation and the Indian actions which have contributed to its deterioration. He told the Prime Minister that while urging restraint in the subcontinent the U.S. will favor Pakistan in its comments. He repeated Dr. Kissinger's representation of the previous day.

The U.S. is now using administrative techniques to delay implementing economic assistance measures for India.

On November 30, the U.S. Director of the World Bank will warn the other directors of the adverse impact on Indian development caused by the outbreak of war.

At the next Indian incursion, the U.S. will suspend the shipment of arms to India (now at a very low level—about $5 million per year).

Other steps are under consideration, including actions the U.S. might take if full hostilities erupt.

The U.S. is keeping the Government of Pakistan fully informed of all steps it is taking with regard to this situation.

4. In line with the U.S. practice of informing the Prime Minister, of negotiations of possible interest, the U.S. Government would like to inform the Government of the People's Republic of China of the current state of our negotiations with the USSR on the subject of incidents at sea. As a result of discussions in Moscow from October 12 to 22, 1971, both sides' delegations agreed to refer the following provisions to their respective governments as the basis for an agreement: — Both sides will instruct commanding officers to observe strictly the letter and spirit of the international rules of the road.

— Commanding officers will keep their ships far enough apart to avoid risk of collision.

— Ships engaged in surveillance operations will keep enough distance to avoid risk of collision and to avoid endangering the ships under surveillance.

— Ships of both sides operating within sight of each other will show correct international signals (flag, sound and light).

— Ships of both sides will not simulate attacks by aiming their guns or other armament at a passing ship, or by launching an object in the direction of a passing ship.

— Ships will not use their searchlights at night to 'blind' the bridge personnel on passing ships.

— Ships will show correct international signals when conducting exercises with submerged submarines.

— Ships will stay well clear of ships of the other side engaged in such operations as aircraft carrier launch and recovery.

— Pilots will be instructed to use the greatest prudence and caution when approaching ships of the other side.

— Pilots will be instructed to display correct navigation lights.

— Ships planning to conduct flight operations will be required to give appropriate signals.

— Pilots will be instructed not to make simulated attacks by the simulated use of weapons against ships, and not to perform acrobatic maneuvers over ships, including supersonic overflights.

— Arrangements for the mutual exchange of information regarding collisions and other incidents at sea should be established.

— The question of overflights should be thoroughly examined during the next round of talks (expected to be in Washington early in 1972).

SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION

The Security Council,

Noting the memoranda of the Secretary General dated July 10, 1971 and October 20, 1971 to the President of the Security Council;

Having heard the statements of the representatives of India and Pakistan,

Deeply concerned that hostilities along the India-Pakistan border could constitute an immediate threat to international peace and security, 1) Calls upon the Governments of India and Pakistan to take all steps required for an immediate cessation of hostilities;

2) Calls for an immediate withdrawal of any foreign forces present on the territory of the other to their own sides of the India-Pakistan border;

3) Calls upon the Governments of India and Pakistan and others concerned to exert their best efforts toward the creation of a political climate conducive to the voluntary return of refugees to East Pakistan;

4) Calls upon all states to refrain from any action that would endanger the peace in the area;

5) Invites the Governments of Pakistan and India to respond affirmatively to the proposal of the Secretary General offering good offices looking towards a peaceful resolution of the situaion in the area.

6) Requests the Secretary General to report to the Security Council as soon as possible on the implementation of this resolution.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Haig transmitted the message under a November 28 covering memorandum to Walters, requesting that Walters seek a meeting with Huang Chen on November 29 and indicating that Haig would provide him with an additional oral message for the Chinese. See Document 70 for information concerning the oral message. For the November 20 Chinese note, see Document 64. Attached is a copy of the United Nations Security Council resolution concerning the India-Pakistan crisis. Documentation on the India-Pakistan situation can be found in Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XI, South Asia Crisis, 1971 and Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume E–7, Documents on South Asia, 1969-1972.

70. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, November 29, 1971, 5 p.m. 70. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, November 29, 1971, 5 p.m.1

Paris, November 29, 1971, 5 p.m.

30 November 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD:

Subj:

24th Meeting with Chinese in Paris on November 29, 1971

As instructed in the message brought by the courier on the morning of Nov 29, I requested an appointment on the phone talking to Tsao at 10:30 a.m. He said that he could not answer right away as the Ambassador was not available, but he would call me back later.

He did so while I was talking to General Haig on the phone. He suggested meeting the following day and I indicated that one matter I had to discuss with them involved a certain urgency. (The release of the supplementary details on the Presidents trip, but I did not mention them over the phone.) He then consulted the Ambassador and proposed 5:00 p.m. on Monday, 29 November 1971. I at once accepted and went on foot to the Chinese Embassy in Neuilly after leaving my car at a safe distance.

I was received at the garden gate by Wei, wearing a Mao jacket and with a red metal badge on his left breast with Mao's profile on it. At the door Tsao was waiting. He was in Western clothes (coat and tie) but he also wore a Mao badge over his handkerchief pocket. I was escorted to the Red Room and as usual the Ambassador appeared within minutes. Exchange of “Ni Haos”, etc.

I then apologized for asking to see him the same day and explained your oral message concerning our desire to release the additional details regarding the President's trip seven hours earlier and in Washington rather than on the West Coast as we had previously indicated because the press of congressional business required the President to remain in Washington rather than on the West Coast.

Ambassador Huang Chen said that he saw no problem in this at all. The Chinese had agreed to our release of these supplementary details on Nov 30 and the hour at which we did it was really up to us. They did not intend to make a simultaneous announcement but if anyone asked them whether our release was true or not, they would confirm it. I then said that the written message I had was quite long. Did he want me to read it all in French and have Wei translate it or would giving it to Tsao and having him translate it later for the Ambassador be better. He said that I would sum up the contents in French and Wei would translate it and then he would see Tsao's detailed translation from the English original.

I read him the paragraph about the further preliminary group headed by General Haig going to China and this did not seem to be a problem to him. He said that he would forward this to Peking. He asked whether I would be in this group and I said that I did not believe that this would be the case. He said that he was aware of the meeting between Dr. Kissinger and Ambassador Huang Hua in New York “to discuss United Nations Affairs”. Some emphasis on the last phrase.

I then read the essentials of the steps we had taken. I did, however, read the communications satellite paragraph to him in French verbatim. He said that this was a technical matter. He would have a paper for me at 11:30 a.m. on Nov 30 that might answer some of these matters and he asked if I could be there. I replied that I would, of course, be there.

I then read the various steps the President and Dr. Kissinger had taken on the Indo-Pakistan crisis. He nodded at each one saying, “I know”. I would gather that the Pakistanis had kept him informed. (At least I hope that is his source rather than a capability to read our mail.) He said that these were positive steps and asked what I thought of the Indians. I replied jokingly that, “the non-violent are often dangerous.” He laughed and said, “I share your opinion of the Indians.” He did, however, seem very pleased with the recital of our actions.

I then read him the paragraph concerning our talks with the Soviets regarding the prevention of incidents at sea. He did not appear very interested. Perhaps he was, but, if so, he did not show it.

He made a number of complimentary personal remarks and could not have been more pleasant.

I then said that I would be going to the United States at the end of the week and would be gone a week or ten days. He asked, “Are you going to the Azores meeting?” I said that I did not know. There was perhaps a fifty percent chance. He grinned and replied that he would place the probability higher than that.

He then said that he would be looking forward to seeing me the following morning at 11:30. He walked me to the door of the building. The Ambassador was, as always, in a Mao jacket, but on several previous occasions he had worn no Mao badge. On this occasion, like his two subordinates, he was wearing one.

All of the foregoing was washed down with gallons of jasmine tea and, thank God, only preserved apples and unsalted peanuts from Shansi.

As I left the building a great Mao portrait still smiled inscrutably down from the lobby of the Embassy. Wei saw me to the gate and I left.

VERNON A. WALTERS
Major General, USA

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Drafted by Walters on November 30. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. For the message Walters delivered to the Chinese, see Document 69.

71. Memorandum for the Record, New York, December 3 and 4, 1971 71. Memorandum for the Record, New York, December 3 and 4, 19711

New York, December 3 and 4, 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

FROM: JONATHAN T. HOWE

SUBJECT: Discussions with Miss Wang Hai-jung and Miss T'ang Wen-Sheng during the period December 3-4, 1971

The following is an account of two meetings and a number of telephone conversations with representatives of the PRC conducted over the period December 3-4, 1971 in New York City.

I. First Meeting - 10:30 p.m., December 3, 1971, Roosevelt Hotel

Commander Howe arrived about 15 minutes after the originally appointed hour due to cancellation of the flight on which he had reservations. (Mr. Lord was unable to reach the Chinese side to inform them of the delay.) He was met by Miss Wang and Miss T'ang who asked if he had run into trouble and indicated they were beginning to think he might not be coming. They escorted him to the same room he had been in on his previous visit, down the corridor to the left from the elevator and almost at the end of the hall.

Miss Wang explained that the Ambassador was at a reception and probably would not be back until late and therefore they would be glad to receive the message and convey it to him on his return. After they had read the message (Tab A) a discussion ensued as to how contact might best be made the following morning. It was agreed that Commander Howe would call the hotel room which the two women shared (ext. 1422) at 10:00 a.m. and that Miss T'ang would answer and indicate whether it was desired that Commander Howe come to the Roosevelt Hotel. Commander Howe politely indicated that he would be available at an earlier hour but the Chinese were adamant that 10:00 a.m. was the best time for telephoning.

After a relaxed conversation over tea on inconsequential subjects, Commander Howe took leave of his hosts. Both women escorted him to the elevator and got in saying they would go down with him. During the ride, Commander Howe indicated that it might be best if the group were not seen together in the lobby, and the women agreed and left the elevator at the second floor.

II. Telephone Calls between 10:00 a.m. and 10:45 a.m., December 4, 1971

Before 10:00 a.m. Commander Howe had received a call from Dr. Kissinger indicating that he should convey to the Chinese Ambassador that Dr. Kissinger was under great pressure to go to the UN and had been trying to hold off the bureaucracy. Commander Howe was to phone by 10:30 a.m. with the Chinese reaction on the UN question. A WSAG meeting was scheduled to commence at 11:00 a.m. Subsequently, General Haig called to say that Commander Howe should convey that the US side had heard from the Pakistanis and the Pakistanis left to the judgment of the United States whether to go to the Security Council. In view of this the US felt it should proceed unless there were strong feelings to the contrary.

No one answered at 10:00 a.m. when Commander Howe called Miss T'ang; however, when the call was replaced a few minutes later she was there. Miss T'ang reported it was the view of the Ambassador that the meeting on the 10th was “unnecessary at the present time.” She indicated that there was nothing else to report so Commander Howe said he had additional information to convey to them concerning the first topic in the note. Miss T'ang responded that she would have to check on this and asked if he would call back in 10 minutes.

In the intervening period Commander Howe and Dr. Kissinger agreed that the Chinese side was saying, in so many words, that it had no reply. He instructed Commander Howe to tell them, either in a meeting or over the phone, if necessary, that the U.S. had heard from the Pakistanis and they were leaving it up to American judgment as to whether to call a Security Council meeting. Therefore, the U.S. felt it should proceed.

After several attempts to reach Miss T'ang, Commander Howe again made contact and she indicated that if he had anything written to pass on they would accept it; however, “if it was verbal, or if he only had an oral message, perhaps this could be done some other time.” Commander Howe said he would call back shortly. She asked if the information was urgent and he reiterated that it concerned further developments related to the first subject of the note and was something they would want to know. He said he did not want to inconvenience them in any way, and offered to pass the information over the phone if that would be easier.

Commander Howe then reported to General Haig and began putting the oral message on paper. General Haig called back shortly, agreeing to the text (Tab B) with the addition of the phrase “in coordination with other powers” which lowered the U.S. profile somewhat.

Commander Howe then called Miss T'ang to say that he had a written message to deliver. She seemed surprised and asked if he would call back in ten minutes. In assenting, he indicated that there would be no need for a special meeting or direct reply.

At 10:45 a.m. Commander Howe called Miss T'ang again and she said, “if you deem it necessary you can come with a message in written form.” Commander Howe reiterated that he wished to deliver a written message and could be there in ten minutes if that was convenient. She asked for a call in five minutes. At 10:50 a.m., Miss T'ang said that they would be glad to receive the written message in the usual way.

When Commander Howe called to indicate that he finally had an appointment, Dr. Kissinger instructed him to tell them that the U.S. side was going to call a Security Council meeting.

III. Meeting at 11:00 a.m.

Commander Howe arrived at the Roosevelt Hotel at 11:00 a.m. and was greeted by Miss Wang and Miss T'ang who escorted him to the usual meeting room. After they had read the hand-printed note (Tab B) and discussed it briefly, Commander Howe added orally that the U.S. intended to move toward a Security Council meeting. The ladies promised they would convey the message to the Ambassador and stated they had nothing to say at the present time. They added that if there were anything to convey they would contact the U.S. side through the previously agreed arrangement.

A very genial discussion then ensued, including comments on various Eastern cities and the spreading megalopolis along the Eastern seaboard and the President's forthcoming trip to China. Miss Wang asked who would accompany Mrs. Nixon and Commander Howe cautioned that anything he said on that subject would have to be totally off the record and unofficial, but that he did not believe anything final had been decided. He speculated, however, that there would probably not be any women accompanying Mrs. Nixon other than the President's secretary, Miss Woods, who had been listed in the book given to the PRC in October. (This in fact is the current plan.) He added that there might be a few additional security personnel. They agreed that the discussion would be a non conversation and asked whether any of the White House security personnel were women. With a passing reference to the Woman's Liberation Movement in the U.S., Commander Howe indicated that in the past couple of years a few women have been brought into the White House security organization.

They also inquired about people on Dr. Kissinger's staff, including the secretaries, who would be on the President's trip. Commander Howe indicated that plans were not final but that it was a much sought after assignment. In response to his inquiry, they said they thought they would be in Peking when the President arrived. They noted that the woman who had served as the interpreter for the technical discussions was also at the UN and would return to Peking for the visit. Commander Howe remarked that he thought he had seen her on the CBS television coverage of the PRC delegation's flight from Paris to New York.

One noteworthy point developed during the discussion of New York City. They indicated they had done some exploring and visited a number of department stores and book stores, and also mentioned the restriction on their movement beyond the city which required prior notification, comment ing that they assumed this was true in other countries as well. (Note: Commander Howe treated this subject delicately but at some point in the future there might be a propitious moment for Dr. Kissinger to inform them that if they desire to travel it would be handled routinely and quietly.)

Toward the end of the discussion, they raised the question of the timing of the U.S. side going to the Security Council. They indicated they assumed it might be after the weekend. Commander Howe responded that he was unaware of the precise timing, but it was his impression that it would be very soon. He noted casually that there had been strong sentiment in the U.S. Government to move to the UN immediately but that Dr. Kissinger had been holding things down. Now, Dr. Kissinger felt the U.S. should proceed. They then confirmed that Commander Howe had received the additional information concerning the UN subsequent to the previous evening's meeting, and that the point made orally about the U.S. intention to seek a meeting had been received after the note had been written.

As Commander Howe was departing they asked him to extend their personal regards to their friends Miss Matthews and Miss Pineau and he reciprocated. They then dumped the candy bowl into napkins, and presented the candy to Commander Howe for Dr. Kissinger's two secretaries. They had earlier noted that they sometimes received Chinese candies from their friends in Canada. After a mild protest, Commander Howe expressed appreciation for this gesture. They then escorted him to the elevator and this time did not get in.

Both Miss Wang and Miss T'ang were relaxed and gracious and the conversation was lively and extremely friendly. From this series of encounters it appears that the Ambassador has very little leverage. Although he obviously had not received any guidance from Peking on the note presented the previous evening, the rejection of the December 10 invitation combined with emphasis on written communication may indicate that Peking is having second thoughts about using this arrangement for tete-a-tetes on UN issues.

[Tab A]

1. The U.S. side wanted the Chinese side to be aware of the following developments. In light of the deteriorating situation in South. Asia, the United States has told Pakistan that it is prepared to take this issue to the U.N. Security Council. Assuming the Pakistani Government favors this step, the U.S. would plan to work toward a Security Council resolution along the lines of the current tentative draft attached. Based on consultations with the Pakistani Government, this draft is strengthened over the U.S. draft discussed on November 23.

In view of the urgency of this situation, the U.S. wishes to inform the Chinese through this channel. of the measures it is currently taking. The State Department announced today, December 3, the U.S. decision of December 2 to cancel all remaining valid licenses for military equipment for India. This is in addition to the December 1 announcement that all such future licenses for India were suspended, existing licenses would not be renewed, and some current licenses relating to ammunition were canceled. The U.S. is now reviewing all economic assistance programs to South Asia to determine what further measures might be appropriate. It is in the meantime holding up new disbursements.

The U.S. side proposes that as the situation in the United Nations evolves, the U.S. and Chinese sides maintain contact through Pakistani diplomats. If the Chinese side wishes to contact the U.S. side directly, the U.S. side suggests that it first call Washington, using the procedure agreed upon on November 23. If any American official, no matter what level, seeks to arrange a meeting with the Chinese side, this should not be considered official unless it has been previously confirmed in this channel.

2. In light of the pressure building up on the issue of a successor to Secretary General U Thant, the question arises as to how the People's Republic of China wishes to proceed. For example, there have been informal discussions in New York looking toward a possible informal meeting of the five permanent members of the Secretary Council. Dr. Kissinger plans to be in New York on other business Friday, December 10, 1971 and could arrange to see Ambassador Huang Hua secretly if the Chinese side would like to discuss this matter as well as any other pertinent U.N. topics, including the South Asian situation. If the Chinese side considers an earlier meeting desirable, Dr. Kissinger is prepared to rearrange his schedule.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Drafted by Howe. A handwritten notation indicates that Haig saw the memorandum. Attached at Tab A is the message outlining communication channels between the U.S. and China and the steps the United States was taking in order to diffuse the situation. Handwritten notes on the attached message read: “Delivered by Jon Howe to Miss Tang 10:15 pm, 12/13/71” and “Win Lord.” For discussion of the communication channels agreed upon at the November 23 meeting, see Document 68. Attached at Tab B but not published is Howe's hand-written note, dictated by Haig on December 4.

72. Message From Nancy Oullette to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Paris, December 10, 1971 72. Message From Nancy Oullette to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Paris, December 10, 19711

Paris, December 10, 1971

TO: GENERAL HAIG

FROM: NANCY OULLEITE (PARIS)

BEGIN TEXT

I saw Chinese at eleven oclock on 10 December and was handed following handwritten message: “We are very grateful if the inventory of the detailed specifications will be provided as early as possible so that we can transmit to Peking within one week.”

I was read and given the following typewritten message: “Taking account of the fact that the convicts John Thomas Downey and Richard George Fecteau, two U.S. CIA spies, after being tried, have admitted their crimes. The department concerned of the Chinese Government has now decided to treat them with leniency: Downey's original sentence of life imprisonment, will be replaced by one of five years imprisonment, beginning from December 13, 1971; Fecteau, who was sentenced to twenty years imprisonment, will be released before the expiration of his term, and he will be set free and cross the border at SUMCHUN on December 13, 1971.

The Chinese side hereby informs the U.S. side that Maryann Harbert (female) and Gerald Ross McLaughlin (male), two Americans, illegally trespassed in a yacht into China's territorial waters near the TAMKON ISLANDS (ofstuary) of the Pearl River, Kwangtung province and were detained by Chinese Civil Police on April 21, 1968. The above fact of trespassing into Chinese territorial waters has been established through investigations by the Chinese authorities concerned. Harbert has admitted her mistake and will also be released and sent across the border on December 13, 1971. McLlaughlin resisted investigation during his detention and committed suicide on March 7, 1969. He died after emergency measures to save him failed and his body was cremated. The Red Cross Society of China will inform his family of this through the American National Red Cross.”

END TEXT

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Secret; Eyes Only. No time of transmission or receipt appears on the message. A handwritten notation reads: “Winston,” in reference to Lord. Oullette served as Walters' secretary in Paris.

73. Message From the Government of the United States to the Government of the People's Republic of China, Washington, December 17, 1971 73. Message From the Government of the United States to the Government of the People's Republic of China, Washington, December 17, 19711

Washington, December 17, 1971

Consistent with Dr. Kissinger's understanding with Prime Minister Chou En-lai the U.S. side would like to inform the Chinese side of the following measures it took with regard to South Asia since the December 12 meeting between Ambassador Huang Hua and General Haig in New York City.

On Sunday December 12, the U.S. used the hot line to Moscow calling for an urgent end to hostilities to prevent consequences wanted by no one.

Early Monday morning, December 13, the Soviet Union sent a brief note which said it was conducting consultations with India and would inform the U.S. of the results without delay.

Early Tuesday morning, December 14, the Soviet Union sent a message which, in addition to some standard Soviet views on the South Asian situation, relayed firm assurances by the Indian leadership that India had no plans of seizing West Pakistani territory or attacking West Pakistan armed forces.

Later Tuesday morning, December 14, General Haig on instructions from the President called in Charge Vorontsov and made the following points. He said that the President and Dr. Kissinger considered the Soviet message vague and imprecise on Indian intentions in West Pakistan. The U.S. had to be clear that the Soviet message included Azad Kashmir and involved a return to the exact borders before the outbreak of hostilities. Mr. Vorontsov expressed his personal understanding that this was precisely the Soviet view. General Haig stressed that it was the U.S. view that the Soviet Union must move promptly to halt the fighting and that delays could have the most serious impact on U.S.-Soviet relations.

The Chinese side will be aware of press reports of the remarks Dr. Kissinger made to journalists on the airplane returning from the Azores that day with regard to the possible impact of Soviet actions on the President's plan to visit Moscow.

Upon arrival in Washington on December 14, Dr. Kissinger called in Charge Vorontsov to reiterate and expand on the points made by General Haig. Dr. Kissinger repeated that there must be an understanding that the Indians would not attack West Pakistan, would not seek to acquire Pakistani territory and would return to the territorial limits that existed prior to the crisis. Mr. Vorontsov confirmed this was the Soviet understanding of Indian assurances. Dr. Kissinger said that the Soviet Union should be blamed for letting the situation develop because of their massive arms shipments to India and security guarantees. And now Soviet delays in the current situation were making the President question Soviet motives.

On Wednesday morning December 15, Dr. Kissinger called in charge Vorontsov again and said that it was time to move, that no more delays were excusable and that if there were not a ceasefire in West Pakistan soon the U.S. would have to draw the appropriate conclusions.

The Chinese side is, of course, aware of developments in the subcontinent which have subsequently taken place.

The U.S. is continuing to encourage other nations to assist Pakistan along the lines previously outlined to the Chinese side. Jordan has now sent fourteen aircraft to Pakistan and is considering sending three more.

The U.S. side will continue to keep the Chinese side informed on this situation. It is the U.S. view that recent events in South Asia involve sobering conclusions. The governments of the People's Republic of China and the United States should not again find themselves in a position where hostile global aims can be furthered through the use of proxy countries.

General Haig during his January visit to China will be prepared to discuss this problem and possible efforts designed to prevent similar events in the future.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. No classification marking. A handwritten note reads, “Handed to Gen Walters 17 Dec 71 for delivery Dec 18.”

74. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, December 18, 1971, 11 a.m. 74. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, December 18, 1971, 11 a.m.1

Paris, December 18, 1971, 11 a.m.

20 December 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD

SUBJECT: 28th Meeting with the Chinese in Paris. 18 December 1971 1100

Almost as soon as I walked in the door of my office coming from Orly Airport and the United States I received a phone call from Tsao enquiring whether I was actually coming at 1100 that morning. I assured him that I was and it was quite obvious that they were anxious to see me.

At that time I went to the Chinese Embassy Residence in Neuilly using the usual precautions in order not to be too obvious and was received there in accordance with the usual protocolary sequence and rites. That is to say Wei at the gate and Tsao at the door and the Ambassador a few moments later in the Red Room. My heart sank as I saw the plates and forks and small glasses for Mai Tai, the Chinese fire and food about which my feelings are somewhat mitigated.

The Ambassador told me that he had seen me on television in the Azores even though he had not seen me in person for some time. I had been with President Nixon. Both Tsao and Wei added that they too had seen me. This had obviously given my prestige a somewhat needed boost.

I then read to the Ambassador the message regarding our activities during the Indo Pakistan War. He said at the end after Wei had translated this that the Social Imperialism of the Soviet Union had dropped its mask and revealed its ugly face to the whole world. He said that the Soviet Union was obviously moving to establish itself on the shores of the Indian Ocean. The threat to China was a permanent one. The Soviets had over a million camped along their border with China and they had also installed missile bases. China was not afraid. She was strong and the Chinese peoples had dug great tunnel cities under their major cities and were quite prepared to face anything that the Soviet Union might do. He noted the Soviet use of the veto to thwart the will of the overwhelming majority of the members of the United Nations. Pakistan had unquestionably been the victim of the crudest kind of aggression. He made no direct comment on the substance of our message, other than to say that he would transmit it to Peking as soon as possible.

I then handed them the preliminary plans of the building designed to house the Television Production and Transmission Center, as well as the technical date which I had received for them. The Ambassador said that all of this was too technical for him but that he was certain that the Chinese technicians would know what to do with it, particularly when they received the remaining data which we had promised them.

The Ambassador then said that in my absence Tsao and Wei had seen my Secretary Miss Ouellette and had found her most efficient, discreet and to the point.

I said that the Chinese action in releasing the American prisoners had been very well received in the United States by all. The prisoners themselves had been discreet and had said nothing that could be interpreted as hostile to China. Such actions were much appreciated by American public opinion.

The Ambassador said that he was glad that after a period of guardedness we had come to speak frankly to one another and he appreciated this. The Ambassador then asked how I viewed the immediate future on the South Asian sub continent. I said that it was difficult to see what the immediate future would bring but it seemed to me speaking on a purely personal basis that we should find means not to be caught in such a disadvantageous position again and that we must find means to prevent aggression from being rewarded. He nodded thoughtfully but made no direct comment.

The Ambassador then turned the conversation into personal channels, Was I tired? How were the Azores? He did not probe to find out what actually went on and asked no questions of substance concerning that meeting. He said that they would be happy to get the remainder of the technical data. I replied that I had been promised that this would be sent along by courier in the next few days and that as soon as I received it I would see that it got into his hands as soon as possible. All of this with cups and cups of tea and wedge after wedge of preserved apples as well as various little pies stuffed with unmentionable unknown chopped you know whats. I was escorted out in the usual reverse sequence to my arrival.

Vernon A. Walters
Maj. Gen. U.S. Army

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 20, 1971-Dec 31, 1971. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusive; Eyes Only. Drafted by Walters on December 20. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly.

75. Backchannel Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Beijing, January 4, 1972 75. Backchannel Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Beijing, January 4, 19721

Beijing, January 4, 1972

January, 4, 1971 Peking #2

TO: KISSINGER

FROM: HAIG

Following my initial interim report, we were suddenly informed that we would be expected in the Great Hall for a meeting with the Acting Foreign Minister, to be followed by a banquet hosted by him. Upon arrival at the Great Hall, we were led into a room containing at least thirty PRC officials. As soon as we were seated, the Acting Foreign Minister entered and he immediately launched into a propagandistic pitch about the differences between our systems. He also questioned our ability to be able to work with a Socialist Regime and concluded with the standard confessional of PRC shortcomings, past mistakes and limited ability to cope with our technology.

I put him down rather abruptly and nothing more of the propaganda line was heard. During the banquet, the Acting Foreign Minister who lacks anything of the skill or grace of our other hosts gave a warmly written toast (he did read it) and I followed. All in all, the meeting and banquet were highly successful and seemed to dispose of all preliminary modalities. I then went to my room (we are staying in hotel, not guest house). At 2345 hours, as I was about to fall asleep, Mr. Han Su, the Protocol Chief, arrived and informed me I was to meet with the Prime Minister immediately. He informed me, contrary to my earlier request, that others would be present. Upon arriving at the Great Hall at midnight, flanked only by Muriel, I was greeted by Chou with Acting Foreign Minister Fei, the Vice Foreign Minister, Director Chang and Protocol Chief Han Su. Nancy Tang served as interpreter. At this point, it was obvious that Chou had no intention of meeting alone with me. Therefore, for better or worse, I proceeded after an exchange of pleasantries, to deliver the points we discussed at Key Biscayne. Because of the audience, I was slightly more circumspect on several minor points. Nevertheless, I adhered religiously to the substance we discussed. Throughout, Chou listened intently, nodding agreement on most issues and correcting Nancy's Chinese when she failed to precisely translate a particular phrase or sentence. All this took about an hour and one half and interruptions were very few. Then Chou lucidly replied in an objective and friendly style. Verbatim text follows:

“C: I thank you for your rather clear notification. Of course, you have said you have not gone into great detail but we understand the general idea. And, of course, we must report this to Chairman Mao Tse-tung and also must consult with other colleagues. Therefore, I am not able to give an official reply. However, I would like to comment on what you have said. The first thing is just as you mentioned that the coming together of our two countries would be beneficial to the promotion of the normalization of relations between our two countries and also to the relaxation of tension in the Far East. We believe this will not only be beneficial to the U.S. but also to the People's Republic of China and also to the peoples of our two countries and to the people in the Far East.

“The second point is that Soviet meddling in the South Asian subcontinent and in Indochina, in my opinion, is not due to a change in the strategic policies of the Soviet Union but rather a necessary consequence of reaction on the part of the Soviet Union toward the coming closer between China and the United States. And I mentioned this to Dr. Kissinger during his first visit to China—that we were anticipating to shoulder, to bear the consequences of this coming together of U.S. and China and that we were prepared for this and we do not, therefore, find it to be unexpected. For instance, the question of the subcontinent. It was because the Sino-American Communique of July 15—the first announcement of July 15th, your time, was published that the Soviet-Indian Treaty, a so-called treaty which was actually a military alliance, came into being after having been delayed for two years. It was finally signed in Delhi in August and it can be said that Pakistan did not deal with that very earnestly at that time.

“Of course, this is not something that either China or the United States could do for them as their friend. And, therefore, when later on in December, the situation had already become rather urgent, when we heard of Dr. Kissinger's information about the policy as adopted by the United States, we considered that although it was rather late at that time already, we considered that that was the only possible policy that could be adopted at that time. Of course, now, the question of the subcontinent has become complicated. And we believe that it will continue to develop. And if the United States Government has any other new further opinion with regard to this situation, we are willing to hear it. Because the obstruction of India's advance toward West Pakistan is only a temporary phenomenon. And with the development of the already complex situation on the subcontinent, will undergo still more changes. And, therefore, if the interim period from now until the visit of your President to China, if the U.S. Government has any new information it would like to convey, we are willing to exchange opinions on the situation in the area.

“I would like to say also, very frankly, that our opinions differ from yours on Vietnam. We believe that it was not necessary for the U.S. Government to bomb North Vietnam in such a way as President Nixon has never done since he has taken office, as he did around Christmas last year. And, in addition, this action was taken after President Nixon had withdrawn I believe around 400,000 troops from South Vietnam, and, therefore, this action made it even more unacceptable to the people of the world, including the people of the United States and this was also reflected in the press of the United States. And this also occurred at precisely the time when President Nixon declared to the world around Christmas that he wised to move toward relaxation of tension and toward peace in the world. And if we should say that Soviet forces in the Indian Ocean and in the South Asian subcontinent have increased, we should say that the Soviet Union was given an opportunity to increase its influence and its force in the Democratic Republic of Vietnam then we should say that it was assisted by the recent action of the United States. Because as I remember, when Dr. Kissinger was here discussing things with us, he expressed particular admiration and appreciation of the fifth point put forth by Madame Binh of the Republic of Vietnam. The basic spirit of that clause was to change South Vietnam and Indochina into a non-allied area, ie.e, an area which would maintain peaceful and friendly relations with all sides. And this would be beneficial to the relaxation of tension in Southeast Asia. It would also be beneficial to the improvement of relations between the United States and China. However, now the U.S. bombing has increased the Soviet influence and tension in this area. Of course, this is not of great consequence to us but it is quite bad for the local area. It will make the situation in all of Southeast Asia tense and it will also be a matter of great concern to the people of the U.S. and the world and it will not be favorable toward the ending of the war in that area.

“Originally, we were waiting to convey these views to President Nixon and Dr. Kissinger when they come alter on but since you have now mentioned, we think this is also another opportunity to advance some of our opinions. Of course, this is also just an initial exchange and I believe we will have another opportunity to exchange opinions. And, of course, as you said, this exchange is limited to us two.

“And as for the third factor, we have taken into consideration the fact that you have certain internal problems which we see from the press and also Dr. Kissinger mentioned it during his previous visits and we have also felt the three forces which you mentioned. I would also like to ask something very bluntly and to you as you are a military man. Is it that the Pentagon also has differing opinions?”

“H: Some elements in the Pentagon have differing opinions but those who are the most responsible and strategic thinkers are in full agreement with this initiative and the visit of the President.”

“C: As for the two questions—the two issues that Dr. Kissinger raised about the joint communique.

“The first is essentially a question of trade. We understand this proposal and we can also see from American opinion that they are also attaching importance to this question and this is also an issue that carries weight.

“The second is the suggestion you have brought from Dr. Kissinger about the wording of the part about Taiwan. In our opinion, the paragraph that we have written down—I am not speaking about the part the Chinese says but the part that the U.S. side says. We believe that in the wording of that part we have fully taken into consideration the present dilemma that you just now mentioned between the United States Government and the forces you mention from the Left and the Right because this is a force of crucial significance to the United States but since you have brought a new opinion, we would be willing to take it into consideration, because as we have mentioned before we are always willing to get the work done as best as possible because you must work with a view toward the future. And also Dr. Kissinger has already given some hints about this question to the press —- five points, isn't that so?”

“H: Five points?”

“C: You have not seen them? A Minister of Japan—we found it in the Japanese press. They were representatives of the Democratic Socialist Party—the leader of that party.”

“H: He did talk to him.”

“C: And he announced these five points to the Japanese pres.”

“H: I don't recall Dr. Kissinger using five points.”

“C: We have been trying to get a copy.”

“H: I will find out about that. I did not sit in at the meeting.”

“C: We will try to get a copy and give you an English translation. Of course, it quoted Dr. Kissinger and these words came from the Japanese. As for the specific questions you later mentioned (administrative questions), we don't think there is any question to that because we believe during his second visit Dr. Kissinger mentioned these points. I believe we can cooperate very well on them. Of course, you can continue discussions with Acting Foreign Minister Fei, either directly or you can have separate group discussions with various other people. Of course, we will not do anything to embarrass you and if anything comes up at lower levels, they will not be settled there. They will be brought to you.

“As for your plans for this present visit to China, there are two suggestions. One was that you would spend a greater portion of your time in Peking and then go to Shanghai and Hangchow and come back here. In my personal opinion, it would be better to have all issues decided in Peking and then go to other places. It would be economizing on the time. But, of course, if you would like to wait for a reply from Washington before you would like to finalize certain details or if you have other political matters to discuss later on, then a return trip would be better. Either question is entirely up to you to decide.”

“H: I think, at first glance, we would favor a longer time here and then the trip to the other two locations and depart from there. I think we will know that better after we have had discussions of the schedule tomorrow morning at the plenary sessions, after which we could decide. But I believe that this would be the best way to proceed.”

“C: I am sorry to have taken up too much of your sleep.”

“H: I am honored that you have taken this time to see me.”

“C: I am also very happy to have been able to meet you. Anyway, if you are going to contact Dr. Kissinger, please send my regards to him.”

“H: I will do so.”

From the preceding, it is clear that Chou's assessment of South Asia is more precise but not incompatible with the one I presented. His assessment of the bombing sounded like it was mostly for the records though not altogether. He never answered the issue on why Hanoi has failed to respond to our initiative. On more positive elements to the communique, including trade, I think we can count on some movement. On Taiwan, he was less forthcoming but I believe here too we can achieve an acceptable compromise. The questions the Chinese will wish answered as soon as possible are how we should proceed during this visit on: a. Further exchanges of views on South Asia. (I believe the PRC will definitely cause some trouble in East Pakistan and have now put us on notice).

b. Further exchange of views on Southeast Asia.

c. New language for the positive portions of the communique.

d. New language in communique on Taiwan.

e. Our trip schedule.

Regarding a above, you can judge better than I whether you wish to provide more views. I recommend that I merely tell PRC I have nothing further but should something develop you will send via Paris channel.

Regarding b above, recommend same as a.

Regarding c above, I believe you should consider some language changes and bring them in February. I would tell PRC that we are doing so and request they do likewise but hold on further exchanges of views until President's trip.

Regarding d above, press no further since we left ad referendum new language for them to consider which they promised to do.

Regarding e above, we can best settle here based on tomorrow's meeting and assessment of PRC's attitude on President and Mrs. Nixon's schedule.

After eighteen straight thrilling hours, I'm going to bed. Muriel won't be so fortunate.

Warm regards.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1015, Haig Special File, Haig China Trip File [Haig Advance Party, Dec. 29, 1971 to Jan. 10, 1972] [1 of 2]. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only.

76. Backchannel Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Beijing, undated 76. Backchannel Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Beijing, undated1

Beijing, undated

MEMORANDUM FOR: DR. HENRY A. KISSINGER

FROM: ALEXANDER M. HAIG

YOU WILL HAVE RECEIVED MY EARLY MORNING REPORT OF DISCUSSIONS WITH PRIME MINISTER CHOW AS A RESULT OF WHICH I HAVE REQUESTED YOUR GUIDANCE ON SEVEVERAL ISSUES AS I NOTED IN THAT MESSAGE, IT IS LIKELY THAT WE WILL HAVE ACHIEVED SOME PRC MOVEMENT ON MORE POSITIVE EXPRESSIONS IN COMMUNIQUE AND HOPEFULLY SOME BETTER LANGUAGE ON TAIWAN ISSUE. I DO NOT BELIEVE IT WILL SERVE ANY USEFUL PURPOSE TO DEBATE THESE ISSUES FURTHER DURING OUR VISIT BUT RATHER TO BE SURE WE ARE PREPARED TO MAKE POSITIVE SUGGESTIONS IN FEBRUARY. THE PRIME MINISTER ALSO NOTED HIS WILLINGNESS TO CONSIDER OUR FURTHER VIEWS ON SOUTHEAST ASIA AND VIETNAM. HERE AGAIN, I WOULD PROPOSE HOLDING ACTION ACCOMPANIED BY INTENSE PREPARATORY STEPS HERE FOR FURTHER DISCUSSIONS IN FEBRUARY. AS YOU KNOW, THE PRIME MINISTER ASSURED ME THERE WOULD BE NO EMBARRASSMENT TO THE PRESIDENT DURING HIS VISIT. HE ALSO AGREED COMPLETELY WITH ALL OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE, ITEMS WE DISCUSSED IN KEY BISCAYNE LAUGHING AT ITEM ON FEMALE TV PERSONALITY.

REFERENCE YOUR W.H. 20022, I HIT STRONGLY LAST NIGHT WITH THE PRIME MINISTER SUBJECT OF GROMYKO VISIT TO TOKYO. HE APPEARED CONCERNED WITH THIS TURN. I WILL MENTION DACCA TRANSGRESSION TODAY AT APPROPRIATE MOMENT.

I HAVE REFERRED THROUGHOUT SATAY IN BOTH OFFICIAL AND UNOFFICIAL REMARKS TO YOUR WARM ATTITUDE TOWARD OFFICALS HERE. ALL HOLD YOU IN HIGHEST REGARD. WILL OBTAIN GIFTS AT EARLIEST CONVENIENCE.

WE ARE NOW PROCEEDING TO FIRST TECHNICAL PLENARY SESSION. I REMAIN ENCOURAGED THAT PRC HAS INDEED CROSSED LINE ON NORMALIZATION AND IS DETERMINED TO PROCEED AT ALMOST ANY COST. ALL ARE MOST ANXIOUS TO MAKE VISIT SUCCESSFUL.

WARM REGARDS

NNNN

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1037, Files for the President-China Material, China-AH January [1972] visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only.

77. Backchannel Message From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Washington, undated 77. Backchannel Message From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Washington, undated1

Washington, undated

TO BE DELIVERED IN SEALED ENVELOPE DIRECTLY TO GEN. HAIG

TO: Gen. Haig, AF 86971

FROM: Henry A. Kissinger

REF: Peking #2

Thank you for your cables which I read with interest and not a little nostalgia.

Not surprisingly, you have handled yourself ably and with discretion.

I agree with your line of procedure.

— On the communique the ball is in their court. The trade section can wait till we get there as long as they understand what we have in mind.

An additional area for strengthening is cultural and scientific exchanges where we might mention some specific projects. Please raise this.

— On Taiwan, you should take any counter draft ad referendum. They do not want to use Paris channel for this so do not suggest it.

— With respect to South Asia you can tell them we will communicate further thoughts through Paris channel. At present the primary objective is to gain time and to arm Pakistan. We have used our influence with Turkey and France in this regard; we welcome any PRC efforts. We are starting economic assistance programs again and on larger scale.

— With respect to Southeast Asia you should stress that in our view Moscow is blocking negotiated settlement. We have made sweeping proposal; Hanoi cancelled meeting set for November 20. You can reaffirm everything I said on my visits, particularly our readiness to accept non-aligned Southeast Asia. The only reason in our view the war continues is for Soviet, not U.S., aims. No patriotic Vietnamese need fear our eventual domination.

— I am puzzled by reference to Japanese Social Democrat. Given Japanese propensity to leak, you can be sure I said nothing. Memcon is being sent to you separately. Chou may have obliquely asked for reaffirmation of my commitments to him.

—Withdrawal of Southeast Asian related part of forces within a reasonable period after end of Indochina war.

— Gradual withdrawal of remainder as tensions ease.

— No support for Japanese return to Formosa or introduction of Japanese troops there.

— No further reference to status of Formosa being undetermined.

— No encouragement of Taiwan independence movement.

Do not worry that Chou will not see you alone. You should pull no punches for this reason. You can be frank with Foreign Minister who is Chou's disciple if not very bright.

1 National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1037, Files for the President-China Material, China-AH January [1972]visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A typed notation indicated that the message was to be “delivered in sealed envelope directly to Gen. Haig.” Kissinger wrote next to the reference number: “and your immediately following message with identifier 008.”

78. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing January 6, 1972, 11 a.m. 78. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing January 6, 1972, 11 a.m.1

Beijing January 6, 1972, 11 a.m.

January 7, 1971

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PLACE: The Great Hall of the People Peking, China

DATE: 11:45 A.M., January 7, 1971

FM Chi: So you went to see the Palace Museum this morning?

Gen Haig: Yes, we had a most enjoyable visit there. It was just marvelous and extremely educational.

FM Chi: The only thing—it is rather cold in the morning.

Gen Haig: It is cold, but it serves to wake you up.

FM Chi: Yes, it is good to wake you up.

Gen Haig: It also helps the appetite.

FM Chi: That is a good thing.

Gen Haig: I will do what Dr. Kissinger did while he was here—put on weight. First, Mr. Minister, I thought I would like to just reiterate and reemphasize personally that I am very grateful for the personal cooperativeness that we are receiving at every level from your people. I am somewhat embarrassed to find that some of our people, have come with all the answers and have not operated with as much efficiency as I would have preferred. This has required additional patience and assistance from your side which has certainly not been lacking.

FM Chi: I heard that they have had rather smooth and rather good discussions in the groups.

Gen Haig: Everything has been superior in the exchange of views but I find that the network people have sometimes not performed as effectively as I would have liked.

FM Chi: They seem to be doing alright.

Gen Haig: You are too kind. I did have some other followup information to our meetings of early Tuesday morning with the Prime Minister, I immediately reported in great detail that morning to Dr. Kissinger the results of the discussions with the Prime Minister. And he replied to me first that he received my report with no little nostalgia and he felt that in replying to my message that he wanted to again extend his personal greetings to each of you that had worked with him so cooperatively and in such a friendly spirit in October and July.

FM Chi: We would also like to thank him.

Gen Haig: One of the first items I mentioned to the Prime Minister was our hope that we could strengthen the positive actions of the Draft Communique. And when the Prime Minister replied to me he mentioned that this was primarily a problem of trade. I wanted to reemphasize that we were thinking also of cultural and scientific exchanges between the two sides—that we might wish to consider improved language with respect to these two items as well as trade. In line with this, when Dr. Kissinger and the President come in February, they will have some additional proposals for exchange in the cultural and scientific area, as well as some ideas for your consideration in the area of trade, recognizing that this must come very slowly and it is not the kind of thing we would anticipate immediate action on but maybe some words of future promise. And we would welcome if between now and the visit you care to communicate further on this, perhaps in the Paris channel or, if you prefer, to wait until the party arrives and there could be some further discussion.

Concerning the draft alternative language I left ad referendum with respect to the U.S. portion of the paragraph on Taiwan, we would welcome any additional views which your side might have before I return to the United States and we would be prepared to accept and consider any additional or alternate language that you might care to give before I leave. In any event, we would anticipate that this subject would always be the result of direct exchanges here in Peking between you and myself while I am here or Dr. Kissinger and the President after they arrive.

Now, also, during the meeting on Tuesday morning, the Prime Minister conveyed the thought that he would welcome any additional views we have on the subject of South Asia and the subcontinent before any meetings with President Nixon. With your side's approval, we would like to send some additional views on this subject through the Paris channel between now and the 21st of February. And for now, I would like to emphasize that our policies there will focus on efforts to buy time and to strengthen the defense capabilities of Pakistan. We certainly share the Prime Minister's concern that that situation is far from settled and is still in a period of dynamism which will require the most careful watching and perhaps action on both our parts. We have been using our influence just before and since the cease-fire to get Turkey and France to help in the arms situation in Pakistan.

FM Chi: Turkey and France?

Gen Haig: Yes. Turkey and France and this was a topic discussed between Presidents Nixon and Pompidou in the Azores. Concurrently, we are starting up our economic program for Pakistan at a greater level of assistance than heretofore. Now, turning to the topic of Southeast Asia which was also discussed with the Prime Minister on Tuesday morning, Dr. Kissinger has asked me to reiterate our government's view that it is Moscow which is blocking the arrival at a peaceful negotiated settlement of the conflict. He has asked me to recount in somewhat greater detail the sweeping proposals which we have made in search of a settlement of the conflict. We had, as I stated earlier, a meeting scheduled for the 20th of November with representatives of Hanoi in Paris. They cancelled that meeting and since that time, we have heard nothing from Hanoi. Vietnam, as Dr. Kissinger stated in October, is an anguishing problem for our government. In this sense, it was not the Nixon Administration that got us into the conflict but he, of course, has the problem of terminating the conflict.

Dr. Kissinger has also asked me to emphasize that when he met with Mr. Le Duc Tho in Paris in July, after the visit to Peking, be informed Mr. Le Duc Tho that the United States wished to end the war in Hanoi and not in Peking. During the past year, we have done the following specific things with respect to the conflict: - On May 31st of last year, Dr. Kissinger met with Minister Xuan Thuy and proposed seven U.S. points for ending the war. One of these points was an offer on our part to set a deadline for our withdrawal.

- Then, on June 26th, Mr. Le Duc Tho came to Paris and met secretly with Dr. Kissinger. At that time, Hanoi proposed nine points in reply to the seven points we had proposed in May.

- Then, on July 1st, Madame Binh published here seven points and as Dr. Kissinger pointed out to the Prime Minister in October it was very odd procedure from our perspective to be given nine points secretly and seven points publicly.

- So, on July 12th, on his return from Peking, Dr. Kissinger met with Mr. Le Duc Tho in Paris, again secretly, and at this meeting we inquired of Mr. Le Duc Tho which we should deal with the nine points or the seven points and Mr. Le Duc Tho said the nine points were more significant—the ones we had gotten secretly. In view of that response, it was very difficult for us to deal publicly with the seven points of Madame Binh when we were told that the more significant points were the nine secret points given by Mr. Le Due Tho.

- Despite the confusion that came from these different views, on August 16th, we made a formal eight point proposal which constituted our reply to the secret nine points, as well as a reply to the seven points made publicly by Madame Birth. In this reply in August, we actually went very far toward the seven and nine points of the other side and even included their specific language in our proposal on several of the key points.

- On September 13th, Dr. Kissinger again went to Paris secretly. On this occasion, as on the preceding occasion in August, Mr. Le Duc Tho found it inconvenient to come from Hanoi to meet with Mr. Kissinger and, instead, he met with Mr. Xuan Thuy. Nevertheless, at this meeting, Mr. Xuan Thuy rejected two of the eight points Dr. Kissinger had forwarded in August. As a result of this rejection, we then reformulated those two points and submitted eight new points on October 11. Of those eight points, six are identical to those already accepted by Hanoi, and the other two points constituted reformulation of the points which Hanoi had rejected in September.

- We then requested a secret meeting on November 1. As I pointed out earlier, since then we have had no substantive reply or exchange from Hanoi. In our view, our proposal of October went as far as anyone could possibly go. So, we were faced with intransigence not after we struck North Vietnam in December but well before. Among the proposals we offered in October were the following: 1. A specific offer for a fixed date for the withdrawal of our forces.

2. The provisions for new elections six months after a peace treaty would be signed.

3. A specific offer that all American troops would be withdrawn one month before this election.

4. The specific offer that the President and the Vice President of Vietnam would resign one month before the election so that they would not run it.

In addition to this proposal, the United States reiterated to Hanoi and reiterates here, our readiness to accept a post-settlement nonaligned Southeast Asia. Specifically, what we visualized under our proposal would be the immediate signature of a statement of principles by both sides on which a settlement would be based. We would then withdraw all American forces except a few thousand within seven months of the signing of these principles. And we would do this even before the signature of a final peace treaty. There is also the provision for an all-around cease-fire and the resignation one month before the election of President Thieu and his Vice President. Therefore, in the broadest sense we feel we have replied positively to every demand that Hanoi has made that is reasonable and does not constitute a direct humiliation of the United States as a world power. It is this sequence of events which has led to the conclusion on our part that the war continues in Southeast Asia only for Soviet aims. Certainly, no Asian power or no patriotic Vietnamese element can fear our eventual domination. It is interesting that just this week we have learned that New Delhi is going to upgrade its representation in Hanoi very soon. And certainly this is an ominous further clarification of what Soviet aims must be along the southern flank of the People's Republic of China. I will not elaborate further on this topic during my visit but I would hope that there could be some very frank exchange of views on some of the more recent indications of increased Soviet strategy of encirclement.

Now, also during Tuesday morning's meeting, the Prime Minister raised the December 16, 1971 issue of the Japanese Weekly Shuhan Gendai, a copy of which was furnished to me yesterday (attached). This was an article allegedly written by the Director of Propaganda for the Democratic Socialist Party of Japan. The article also allegedly portrayed the substance of a discussion between Mr. Kasuga and Dr. Kissinger in Washington. As I confirmed on Tuesday morning to the Prime Minister, Dr. Kissinger had met with Mr. Kasuga in Washington. However, that meeting lasted just 30 minutes, not two hours as the article indicates. During the meeting, Mr. Kasuga raised several questions associated with the President's visit here to Peking and persisted strongly in attempting to get some U.S. view on Taiwan from Dr. Kissinger. I have informed Dr. Kissinger of the contents of this article following the discussion Tuesday morning with the Prime Minister, and he has replied by providing me with a text of the precise minutes of his meeting with Mr. Kasuga. Dr. Kissinger also has reiterated personally to me, in addition to providing me with the minutes, that he gave no reply to Mr. Kasuga with respect to the future status of Taiwan. My personal review of the minutes of that meeting confirm categorically that Dr. Kissinger deflected all questions on the subject. Instead, be referred to his press conference which occurred on the Tuesday before the December 3rd meeting with Mr. Kasuga and offered to give him a copy of that press conference, with which I know you are familiar. In commenting on the Japanese press article, Dr. Kissinger asked me to convey the following message to the Prime Minister. In Dr. Kissinger's view, the only press which is less reliable than our own is that of the Japanese. He also asked me to reiterate again what I stated on Tuesday morning to the Prime Minister and in somewhat more detail concerning our view on the future of Taiwan. Tuesday morning, I cited three specific policies of the United States with respect to Taiwan. Dr. Kissinger has reformulated these assurances in terms of five specific points. First, the United States will withdraw Southeast Asian-related forces within a reasonable period after the end of the Indochina war. Second, the United States will gradually withdraw the reminder of its forces as tensions ease. Third, the United States will give no support to the return of the Japanese presence in Formosa or to the introduction of Japanese troops in that location. Fourth, the United States will make no further reference to the status of Formosa as being undetermined. And, fifth, the United States will offer no encouragement to the so-called Taiwan independence movement. This is the essence of the guidance I have received from Dr. Kissinger and I think completes the response to all of the untended issues which arose on Tuesday morning.

FM Chi: First of all, I would like to thank General Haig for conveying Dr. Kissinger's message. And I will convey it to Premier Chou En-lai. And if Premier Chou En-lai has any considerations of any other discussions or any other messages we will further inform you. So, there is nothing further on our side.

Gen Haig: Very good.

(following as we were walking out)

FM Chi: After all the groups have finished their meetings, do you think there is any further need for a meeting between us?

Gen Haig: I am just a little concerned about the networks portion. Everything else has gone beautifully and I think we are in very good shape. There are some unsettled problems in terms of television coverage. I am hoping it will be resolved this morning. If not, we may have to delay 24 hours. I hope this does not occur because I know this is a terrible burden on you and I am very anxious for us to finish on schedule.

FM Chi: I believe it may be solved very quickly. I do not believe there is any great obstruction.

Gen Haig: That group is commercially oriented. This is business to them. They are not conscious of the political details. I would hope they would not attempt to play your side off against us.

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Chou En-lai

Mr. CHI P'eng-fei, Acting Foreign Minister

Mr. HSIUNG Hsiang-hui, Secretary to the Premier

Mr. HAN Hsu, Director, Protocol Department, MFA

Mr. CHANG Wen-chin, Director of the West European, American and Australian Affairs, MFA

Miss Nancy T'ang (Interpreter)

Brig. General Alexander M. Haig, Jr.

Chou En-lai: We gave you too much wine today? Our hosts did not know how to make conversation, so they just drowned you in wine. I believe Mr. Chapin can down quite a few cups. General Haig has quite a capacity. It is alright—you are quite young.

This afternoon, Acting Foreign Minister Fei conveyed to me the message from Dr. Kisinger that you conveyed to him. I thank you for your information. I already said, on the morning of the 4th, that after I reported to Chairman Mao Tse-tung I would discuss it with my colleagues and give you a formal reply. So I would like, first of all, to give a reply to the former message you gave on the morning of the 4th and then to deal with the latter message given this morning—later on.

We have studied the message conveyed by General Haig. Your straightforwardness has helped us to attain a clearer understanding of the views of the U.S. side on the current situation and Sino-Soviet ways. We would like to express our views in a similarly frank way.

1. The high level talks to be held between China and the United States to seek normalization of the relations between the two countries accord with the desire of the Chinese and American people and if positive results can be achieved they will also be conducive to the easing of tension in the Far East and in conformity with the interests of the people in Asia and the world. As the time for the talks draws near, certain hostile forces have been intensifying their destruction and sabotage. This is something within our expectations and we are prepared for it.

2. After the announcement of President Nixon's visit to China, the Soviet Government hastily made concessions in Europe and came to agreement with the West on the Berlin question. While in Asia, it concluded with India a Treaty of peace, friendship and cooperation in name but it was a military alliance in substance. Following that, the Soviet Government took advantage of the situation to support India, to commit armed aggression against Pakistan and occupy East Pakistan. This is a continuation, under new circumstances, of the consistent Soviet policy of contending for hegemony. There is no shift of strategy to speak of. China is under no commitment to Pakistan. However, proceeding from its current principal stand, China has rendered and will continue to render political support and also materiel assistance within our capacity to Pakistan in its struggle against division and aggression. The Soviet Union has supported India to invade and occupy East Pakistan. They appeared arrogant and unbridled for a time but in fact they have further opened their expansionist situation and, in fact, have become isolated from the entire world. The development of events are proving that the subcontinent will be in continuous turmoil. India and its supporter have the nooses around their own necks. They will certainly suffer from the consequences of their own doing.

3. There exist fundamental differences between China and the U. S. on the question of Vietnam and Indochina. After Christmas, the United States wantonly bombed the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. This has shocked world opinion and aroused world opposition. The self-justification made by the United States side is utterly untenable. As victims of the war of aggression, the Vietnamese people have the right to take every necessary action in self defense. China firmly supports their struggle. If the United States truly has the desire to withdraw all its forces and end the war in Vietnam, there is no reason for them to refuse to accept the reasonable sevenpoint proposal put forward by the North Vietnamese side. In fact, it is not Hanoi that is humiliating the United States but the United States that is insulting Hanoi. By what logic may a big country willfully commit aggression against a small country while the self-defense by a small country be described as aggression? This policy of the U.S. can in no way shape the firm resolve of the peoples of Vietnam and other Asian countries to fight and win. On the contrary, it has created obstacles to the U.S. to the withdrawal of troops and to its efforts to obtain release of the POWs. And has also brought an unfavorable element into the visit of the President of the United States to the People's Republic of China.

4. China is a big country but not yet a very strong one. Economically, we are still very backward. One half a year ago, President Nixon described China as one of the five great powers of the world but now in its message the United States side, all of a sudden, expresses doubt over China's viability, asserting that it wants to maintain China's independence and viability. We are surprised at this. We hold that no country should ever rely on external forces to maintain its independence and viability. If it does so, it can only become a protectorate or a colony. However small a country may be, so long as it fears no brute force and dares to struggle, it will be able always to stay on its own feet in the family of nations. Vietnam is a vivid case in point. Socialist New China was born and has grown up in continuous struggle against foreign oppression and aggression and will continue to live on and develop. We have long stated that we are prepared to meet enemy invasions from all sides and fight to the very end—not flinching from undertaking the greatest national sacrifice and make contribution to the human progress. Facts have proved and will continue to prove that all schemes to isolate, encircle, contain and subvert China will only end up in ignominious defeat.

5. The relations between China and the United States have not been normal. Nevertheless, the Chinese side will receive President Nixon with due protocol and courtesy and will make its efforts to seek positive results in the Sino-United States talks. In its message, the United States side expressed the wish that the image of the President as a world leader should be enhanced through the visit. This we find it difficult to understand. The image of a man depends on his own deeds and not on any other factors. We do not believe that any world leader can be self styled.

6. In its message, the United States side indicated that certain forces in the United States are opposed to the normalization of Sino-United States relations and the Sino-United States high level talks and asked the Chinese side to reconsider the language of the Draft Communique with regard to a certain portion on Taiwan. Of course, we do not object to further consultations but we would. like to point out that we have already done our best to take your difficulties into consideration in our draft. As you know, the Chinese people feel very strongly about the Taiwan question. If the United States side truly has the desire to improve Sino-United States relations, it should adopt a positive attitude of settling this issue which is the crucial question in Sino-United States relations. If there is yielding to certain forces opposed to the normalization of Sin-oUnited States relations and backing down from the former position, that will bring no benefit to China and the United States.

So that is our comment to the oral message you conveyed on the morning of the 4th. Of course, you mentioned some new matters this morning. The first thing is that of trade and I remember very clearly that your Excellency conveyed in your message the wishes of President Nixon and Dr. Kissinger with regard to that matter. And I said that we had noted the opinion of the United States side and we would consider putting it into the Joint Communique. There is no question that the relations between China and the United States have not been normalized and that the development of trade will be limited and slow. However, we should look further to the future and the relations between China and the United States—should proceed in a direction headed for normalization and the matter of trade should be viewed as a positive factor in this progress. And since Dr. Kissinger has mentioned cultural and scientific exchanges, if he has any specific idea, of course we would be willing to exchange opinion on these matters during the discussions.

The second question is the matter of the South Asian subcontinent that you mentioned in the message you conveyed from Dr. Kissinger. We appreciate the part of the message in which you mentioned that the United States side at present would wish to count on gaining time to enhance the self-defense of Pakistan and that the United States was willing to undertake an economic assistance towards Pakistan. As for the other portions, they were a sort of explanation and as I have already answered them previously, I feel them to be redundant. And as General Haig has in the early hours of the 4th very straightforwardly conveyed President Nixon's and Dr. Kissinger's message to us, I would like to request your Excellency to report the reply we have just given you in a similarly straightforward manner to President Nixon and Dr. Kissinger.

Haig: I am very grateful for the very detailed and very frank views which I will convey precisely as received to Dr. Kissinger and to the President. As I pointed out at the time I gave those views, they were views which were largely conveyed in my own language as I understood the general thrust of my instructions. In several instances, I believe the simple language of a soldier might have been more blunt than it might have been. I believe some of my words may have been misinterpreted. I would also like to briefly discuss your reply from a personal point of view because I have not been able to discuss the matter personally with the President or Dr. Kissinger.

First, with respect to the situation in Southeast Asia, I believe it is very helpful to exchange views even though it appears we basically disagree on this subject. From our perspective, and this is a problem I have been very very close to for the last three years, it is not United States forces that are in Laos or United States forces that are in Cambodia but North Vietnamese forces. We have expressed our desire to withdraw our forces and we have made honorable conscientious proposals that would lead to that withdrawal and a settlement. It is the other side that has not responded to these proposals. I think I explained that we were told to pay attention to the nine points given to us secretly by Hanoi and that is the way we have proceeded, based on advice from Hanoi's spokesman. Even so, this is a topic that I think warrants more extensive exchange at the time of the President's visit. I do believe that in the long run our perception of the convergence of the interests of the United States and the People's Republic of China in the area of Southeast Asia is the ultimate truth.

The second point is the terminology that I used concerning the viability and independence of the People's Republic of China. Certainly, we would not presume to infer that we were assuming the role of the protector or the guarantor of China's viability. On the other hand, we did want to make very clear, and perhaps I did it clumsily, that in our perspective China's viability and future health is of interest to the United States. This is a matter of our own national interest in the context of the world situation as it has developed.

The third point I would like to mention is the again unfortunate language which suggests that the imagery of the President was an important item. This was meant only in the context of the preparations we are making for the President's visit. I think it is important that we do not afford our enemies an opportunity to attack the President either in terms of his motivation or his effectiveness during his visit. The worst disservice I could do to President Nixon would be to suggest that his public image is a matter of concern to him or a matter which influences his decision on any given substance. Certainly, his performance in the international arena thus far suggests that popularity has never been, nor will ever be, the criteria by which he makes his decisions.

With respect to the issue of Taiwan, I immediately conveyed to Dr. Kissinger the reply that I received from you on Tuesday morning and he is, I think, very much aware of that reply. He did provide this additional information today, primarily to answer the questions that came up Tuesday and not to elevate our discussions here to a dialogue that would go on continuously but, hopefully, to elaborate on those issues which might have required clarification based on the discussion of Tuesday morning.

On the three subjects that we discussed that our side hoped could be more positive in the communique, i.e., trade, scientific and cultural matters, I am confident that Dr. Kissinger will come up with some very modest proposals because he realizes that that portion of the communique is balanced and very well worked out. I do not expect any drastic revision to the communique in this respect and we recognize the issue of trade is a long term one.

And finally, on the subject of the South Asian subcontinent, I think recent events have confirmed one thing to me from my humble perspective and that is that while forces are sometimes under way that we would like to think our own good intentions may somehow control, the facts are sometimes quite to the contrary. In South Asia, certainly the United States was slow in recognizing the dangers. I think it behooves both our sides to be equally cognizant of future dangers there and elsewhere and I would hope it would not be a question of looking back on a situation that had turned sour for the lack of timely action which might have prevented that.

I again thank the Prime Minister for his very thoughtful treatment to me and my party while we have been here in Peking. One thing has characterized any exchanges I have been involved in with your officials and that has been the degree of candor and frankness which is very encouraging to me. I think both of us have had long standing positions on controversial issues on which we do not agree and would hope those will not be translated too readily into—and to use your term—“empty canons of rhetoric” but rather to the kind of frank language that will minimize misunderstanding even though the disagreement might remain at the conclusion of the discussion.

Chou En-lai: Your Excellency has just now commented a bit on our reply and I think I should also like to add a few words. Of course, the reply I gave you just now in itself is a complete answer. And what I am now adding, of course, is additional and it was led to by your comment.

And on the question of Southeast Asia, our current opinion has been, to put it simply, that the United States is in the wrong. This is not only the words of the Chinese but also of the other people in the world. I have heard American friends themselves speak of this. And, in addition, this is not something that was created by President Nixon himself. It was his predecessors. And President Nixon has already decided to withdraw his troops. And as I have said to Dr. Kissinger before, I would wish that the United States would withdraw completely as General DeGaulle did in Algeria and do it in one strike and cleanly, wholly, without any remainder and immediately. And to find various excuses to drag on in a messy way will only finally end up in losing the initiative. With a subjective wish for a glorious and honorable withdrawal while in reality there may not be such honorable and glorious withdrawal and if you only have the subjective wish but reality is not a glorious and honorable withdrawal, then on the contrary, this might give rise to difficult predicaments that are difficult to extract ones self from. Have you read the Soviet News? That is upon your present visit to China, the Soviet press has done some reporting in which they have given some special descriptions of you as saying that you are especially in charge of Vietnamese and Indochina Affairs. Of course, we do not pay attention to that. It is precisely because you may be in charge of this that I would like to speak to you with special earnestness. That is that your excuses will not carry over with the people of the world. For instance, you said that it was not the United States troops that went first into Laos and Cambodia but North Vietnamese troops. The question is that your troops should not have gone to Vietnam in the first place. The sending of United States troops into Vietnam itself is aggression. For instance, we have a common point in opposing the sending of Indian troops into East Pakistan. Then, how can we agree to your sending troops into South Vietnam. That is why the Soviet Ambassador criticized you on the issue of Vietnam when the question of the war in Pakistan was under debate in the United Nations. That is the first point.

The second point is—take Laos for instance—the troops of Thailand went into Laos. That is also foreign aggression. And your CIA has given often air support to the Laotian bandits in the form of ammunition or money or food. They have given this to the Lao bandits of the minority Nationality, the forces of Vang Pao in the area that is under the control of Laos and this is something that is recognized in the American press. Then, since the United States and Thailand can give air support to bandits in Laos, then why can Vietnam not give patriotic assistance to the forces of liberation? For instance, it is the same as the situation in which you assisted South Korea and advanced your forces up to the very banks of the Yellow River. It was only then that we sent our volunteers to assist the Democratic Republic of Korea and when we now cooly assess that situation—was that not very clear? And the case is similar in Cambodia. If the Lon Nol - Matak clique had not subverted Sihanouk, then how would the war in Cambodia have come about?

Later on, your President himself decided to send troops on an intrusion into Cambodia. That was at the end of April 1970 and later on in the early part of 1971, United States troops entered into Laos and this was even further aggression and at Christmas last year, you launched a massive air strike against North Vietnam. Your President and your Pentagon have called those successes but, in my opinion, they are not successes. You are a soldier and I also have been one in the past—not now of course. I have also been in military action and I know that this kind of fighting cannot bring victory. It can only give rise to dissatisfaction on the part of ones own people. And these actions on the contrary are giving the Soviet Union an opportunity. And if you want some news, I can tell you a bit that if you do not leave that place, then Southeast Asia which does have the possibility of being turned into an area of nonalignment will become an area of contention between the two superpowers. We are very clear about that. And then Europe, the Mediterranean, the Middle East, the subcontinent, the Indian Ocean, Southeast Asia will be linked together and how can tension be relaxed and wouldn't that be completely contrary to the ideals of your President. On the morning of the 4th, you told us of the strategic thinking of the President. And you once again mentioned that your President wished to relax the tension but if things go on like that, then the situation that will appear will be completely contrary to those subjective wishes. And the result will be that the situation will continue in continuous turmoil not only in the subcontinent, Of course, the settlement of the Vietnam question will be reached between the United States and the DRV either in Paris or Hanoi or perhaps in other places. Of course, we, as the third party, cannot meddle in this but we must state clearly our stand and there must be no ambiguity about that. I have dealt in rather great detail on this question in the hope that you will convey this to President Nixon and Dr. Kissinger. This itself, in fact, constitutes an initial exchange of opinion. Of course, it is probably too long to send in your cables so you can talk about them when you get back and Mrs. Hartley will be tired working on them until tomorrow morning.

As for the other two questions, there is no need to pay too great attention to the wordings and terminology. We would like you to know that although our country is backward, we have our independence. In our country, we have relied on our own initiative and self-reliance and have relied on these to fight until today. We have our self-dignity and so have you and if we mutually respect each other that is equality. So the erroneous terminology that you just now mentioned is not only a matter of terminology but a matter of attitude. We are not a superpower and we refuse to be a superpower. Your President has mentioned that China is a potential strength power. There is a degree of reason in that.

The third point you mentioned was the image of your President and our reply would be as we have mentioned in the third point of our reply—that the image of a man depends on his own deeds. And since we have invited your President to China, we will certainly give him the protocol and courtesy due him. I don't think there is any question of this and do not believe we have to say more about this because I believe you will understand this through the technical discussions we have had. Of course, it is impossible to go beyond that because we have not established diplomatic relations and you still recognize Taiwan. You must not forget that. It is important to us. The good thing about it is that Chiang Kai-shek also only recognizes one China. He also says Taiwan is a Province of China. It is a good thing because Taiwan would have long ago become a puppet of yours and become another Thieu or Sigmund Rhee and if such a situation had occurred wouldn't that make it even more impossible for us to come together and that would bring even more difficulty in the normalization of relations. So now, we have come to the question of Taiwan. So as to the question of Taiwan, I have already dealt with it in the official answer to you and if there is further discussion—if there is still room for individual changes in that part—then they should await the arrival of President Nixon or Dr. Kissinger. As for the present, we believe that in our draft we have already given very great consideration to your difficulties. As for other specific wordings and various measures, just as I mentioned about trade, cultural and scientific matters, they are rather minor matters and can wait until the arrival of your President. And my secretary has just now called my attention to the fact that you mentioned the fact to pay attention to the danger developing in the subcontinent and you mentioned in the past you had been late in recognizing the danger there. You just now mentioned that in the past you had come to the realization of this danger too late to avoid danger.

As to that question, I have already answered on the morning of the 4th and we have identical views.

Haig: I am very grateful for this lengthy discussion. It is presumptious of me to speak for President Nixon or Dr. Kissinger. I think on the subject of Southeast Asia there will be many useful exchanges during the President's visit. The past history you referred to should be a source of wisdom and learning. It does not necessarily provide the answers to current situations.

Chou En-lai: Of course, this answer must be given by your President. I cannot do that for him. For instance, in the instance of the Korean War. We entered into the war against aggression. During that time, the President was Truman who was a Democrat and not a Republican. He still put forth the suggestion of negotiation, so actually they fought one year without negotiations but later on, with your Republican President Eisenhower, he ended the war in Korea. I think it is useful to recall that part of history but the situation in Korea was different from that in Vietnam so it would not do to dogmatically copy that. The war that began in Vietnam has brought the whole of Indochina together, has merged it into one but we have not entered that war so the situation is different. And only with determination and resolve can that situation be settled. Otherwise, you will only lose the initiative.

Haig: I think we are convinced that it is going to take bold action and I think we have taken it by offering sweeping proposals. It is somewhat of a puzzle that we have not received a response to those proposals. Perhaps that is where the trouble lies. That is why alternative means must be pursued.

Chou En-lai: That is a question that I cannot answer because the war in Indochina is different from the war in Korea. In the case of Korea, on our side the Democratic people of Korea were the main representatives and our representatives were their deputies. On the other side, the United States was the main representative while Sigmund Rhee was the deputy, so actually there were four sides and in that circumstance it was easier for us to get an opinion. Now you are discussing face to face. So, I will not take up more of your time from your sleep.

Haig: Thank you very much, Mr. Prime Minister.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1037, Files for the President-China Material, China, Haig trip-memcons January 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People.

79. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, January 7, 1972, 11:45 p.m. 79. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, January 7, 1972, 11:45 p.m.1

Beijing, January 7, 1972, 11:45 p.m.

January 7, 1971

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

SUBJECT: Meeting between Prime Minister Chou En-lai and Brigadier General Alexander M. Haig, Jr.

PLACE: The Great Hall of the People Peking, China

TIME: 11:45 PM, January 7, 1971

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Chou En-lai

Mr. CHI P'eng-fei, Acting Foreign Minister

Mr. HSIUNG Hsiang-hui, Secretary to the Premier

Mr. HAN Hsu, Director, Protocol Department, MFA

Mr. CHANG Wen-chin, Director of the West European, American and Australian Affairs, MFA

Miss Nancy T'ang (Interpreter)

Brig. General Alexander M. Haig, Jr.

Chou En-lai: We gave you too much wine today? Our hosts did not know how to make conversation, so they just drowned you in wine. I believe Mr. Chapin can down quite a few cups. General Haig has quite a capacity. It is alright—you are quite young.

This afternoon, Acting Foreign Minister Fei conveyed to me the message from Dr. Kisinger that you conveyed to him. I thank you for your information. I already said, on the morning of the 4th, that after I reported to Chairman Mao Tse-tung I would discuss it with my colleagues and give you a formal reply. So I would like, first of all, to give a reply to the former message you gave on the morning of the 4th and then to deal with the latter message given this morning—later on.

We have studied the message conveyed by General Haig. Your straightforwardness has helped us to attain a clearer understanding of the views of the U.S. side on the current situation and Sino-Soviet ways. We would like to express our views in a similarly frank way.

1. The high level talks to be held between China and the United States to seek normalization of the relations between the two countries accord with the desire of the Chinese and American people and if positive results can be achieved they will also be conducive to the easing of tension in the Far East and in conformity with the interests of the people in Asia and the world. As the time for the talks draws near, certain hostile forces have been intensifying their destruction and sabotage. This is something within our expectations and we are prepared for it.

2. After the announcement of President Nixon's visit to China, the Soviet Government hastily made concessions in Europe and came to agreement with the West on the Berlin question. While in Asia, it concluded with India a Treaty of peace, friendship and cooperation in name but it was a military alliance in substance. Following that, the Soviet Government took advantage of the situation to support India, to commit armed aggression against Pakistan and occupy East Pakistan. This is a continuation, under new circumstances, of the consistent Soviet policy of contending for hegemony. There is no shift of strategy to speak of. China is under no commitment to Pakistan. However, proceeding from its current principal stand, China has rendered and will continue to render political support and also materiel assistance within our capacity to Pakistan in its struggle against division and aggression. The Soviet Union has supported India to invade and occupy East Pakistan. They appeared arrogant and unbridled for a time but in fact they have further opened their expansionist situation and, in fact, have become isolated from the entire world. The development of events are proving that the subcontinent will be in continuous turmoil. India and its supporter have the nooses around their own necks. They will certainly suffer from the consequences of their own doing.

3. There exist fundamental differences between China and the U. S. on the question of Vietnam and Indochina. After Christmas, the United States wantonly bombed the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. This has shocked world opinion and aroused world opposition. The self-justification made by the United States side is utterly untenable. As victims of the war of aggression, the Vietnamese people have the right to take every necessary action in self defense. China firmly supports their struggle. If the United States truly has the desire to withdraw all its forces and end the war in Vietnam, there is no reason for them to refuse to accept the reasonable sevenpoint proposal put forward by the North Vietnamese side. In fact, it is not Hanoi that is humiliating the United States but the United States that is insulting Hanoi. By what logic may a big country willfully commit aggression against a small country while the self-defense by a small country be described as aggression? This policy of the U.S. can in no way shape the firm resolve of the peoples of Vietnam and other Asian countries to fight and win. On the contrary, it has created obstacles to the U.S. to the withdrawal of troops and to its efforts to obtain release of the POWs. And has also brought an unfavorable element into the visit of the President of the United States to the People's Republic of China.

4. China is a big country but not yet a very strong one. Economically, we are still very backward. One half a year ago, President Nixon described China as one of the five great powers of the world but now in its message the United States side, all of a sudden, expresses doubt over China's viability, asserting that it wants to maintain China's independence and viability. We are surprised at this. We hold that no country should ever rely on external forces to maintain its independence and viability. If it does so, it can only become a protectorate or a colony. However small a country may be, so long as it fears no brute force and dares to struggle, it will be able always to stay on its own feet in the family of nations. Vietnam is a vivid case in point. Socialist New China was born and has grown up in continuous struggle against foreign oppression and aggression and will continue to live on and develop. We have long stated that we are prepared to meet enemy invasions from all sides and fight to the very end—not flinching from undertaking the greatest national sacrifice and make contribution to the human progress. Facts have proved and will continue to prove that all schemes to isolate, encircle, contain and subvert China will only end up in ignominious defeat.

5. The relations between China and the United States have not been normal. Nevertheless, the Chinese side will receive President Nixon with due protocol and courtesy and will make its efforts to seek positive results in the Sino-United States talks. In its message, the United States side expressed the wish that the image of the President as a world leader should be enhanced through the visit. This we find it difficult to understand. The image of a man depends on his own deeds and not on any other factors. We do not believe that any world leader can be self styled.

6. In its message, the United States side indicated that certain forces in the United States are opposed to the normalization of Sino-United States relations and the Sino-United States high level talks and asked the Chinese side to reconsider the language of the Draft Communique with regard to a certain portion on Taiwan. Of course, we do not object to further consultations but we would. like to point out that we have already done our best to take your difficulties into consideration in our draft. As you know, the Chinese people feel very strongly about the Taiwan question. If the United States side truly has the desire to improve Sino-United States relations, it should adopt a positive attitude of settling this issue which is the crucial question in Sino-United States relations. If there is yielding to certain forces opposed to the normalization of Sin-oUnited States relations and backing down from the former position, that will bring no benefit to China and the United States.

So that is our comment to the oral message you conveyed on the morning of the 4th. Of course, you mentioned some new matters this morning. The first thing is that of trade and I remember very clearly that your Excellency conveyed in your message the wishes of President Nixon and Dr. Kissinger with regard to that matter. And I said that we had noted the opinion of the United States side and we would consider putting it into the Joint Communique. There is no question that the relations between China and the United States have not been normalized and that the development of trade will be limited and slow. However, we should look further to the future and the relations between China and the United States—should proceed in a direction headed for normalization and the matter of trade should be viewed as a positive factor in this progress. And since Dr. Kissinger has mentioned cultural and scientific exchanges, if he has any specific idea, of course we would be willing to exchange opinion on these matters during the discussions.

The second question is the matter of the South Asian subcontinent that you mentioned in the message you conveyed from Dr. Kissinger. We appreciate the part of the message in which you mentioned that the United States side at present would wish to count on gaining time to enhance the self-defense of Pakistan and that the United States was willing to undertake an economic assistance towards Pakistan. As for the other portions, they were a sort of explanation and as I have already answered them previously, I feel them to be redundant. And as General Haig has in the early hours of the 4th very straightforwardly conveyed President Nixon's and Dr. Kissinger's message to us, I would like to request your Excellency to report the reply we have just given you in a similarly straightforward manner to President Nixon and Dr. Kissinger.

Haig: I am very grateful for the very detailed and very frank views which I will convey precisely as received to Dr. Kissinger and to the President. As I pointed out at the time I gave those views, they were views which were largely conveyed in my own language as I understood the general thrust of my instructions. In several instances, I believe the simple language of a soldier might have been more blunt than it might have been. I believe some of my words may have been misinterpreted. I would also like to briefly discuss your reply from a personal point of view because I have not been able to discuss the matter personally with the President or Dr. Kissinger.

First, with respect to the situation in Southeast Asia, I believe it is very helpful to exchange views even though it appears we basically disagree on this subject. From our perspective, and this is a problem I have been very very close to for the last three years, it is not United States forces that are in Laos or United States forces that are in Cambodia but North Vietnamese forces. We have expressed our desire to withdraw our forces and we have made honorable conscientious proposals that would lead to that withdrawal and a settlement. It is the other side that has not responded to these proposals. I think I explained that we were told to pay attention to the nine points given to us secretly by Hanoi and that is the way we have proceeded, based on advice from Hanoi's spokesman. Even so, this is a topic that I think warrants more extensive exchange at the time of the President's visit. I do believe that in the long run our perception of the convergence of the interests of the United States and the People's Republic of China in the area of Southeast Asia is the ultimate truth.

The second point is the terminology that I used concerning the viability and independence of the People's Republic of China. Certainly, we would not presume to infer that we were assuming the role of the protector or the guarantor of China's viability. On the other hand, we did want to make very clear, and perhaps I did it clumsily, that in our perspective China's viability and future health is of interest to the United States. This is a matter of our own national interest in the context of the world situation as it has developed.

The third point I would like to mention is the again unfortunate language which suggests that the imagery of the President was an important item. This was meant only in the context of the preparations we are making for the President's visit. I think it is important that we do not afford our enemies an opportunity to attack the President either in terms of his motivation or his effectiveness during his visit. The worst disservice I could do to President Nixon would be to suggest that his public image is a matter of concern to him or a matter which influences his decision on any given substance. Certainly, his performance in the international arena thus far suggests that popularity has never been, nor will ever be, the criteria by which he makes his decisions.

With respect to the issue of Taiwan, I immediately conveyed to Dr. Kissinger the reply that I received from you on Tuesday morning and he is, I think, very much aware of that reply. He did provide this additional information today, primarily to answer the questions that came up Tuesday and not to elevate our discussions here to a dialogue that would go on continuously but, hopefully, to elaborate on those issues which might have required clarification based on the discussion of Tuesday morning.

On the three subjects that we discussed that our side hoped could be more positive in the communique, i.e., trade, scientific and cultural matters, I am confident that Dr. Kissinger will come up with some very modest proposals because he realizes that that portion of the communique is balanced and very well worked out. I do not expect any drastic revision to the communique in this respect and we recognize the issue of trade is a long term one.

And finally, on the subject of the South Asian subcontinent, I think recent events have confirmed one thing to me from my humble perspective and that is that while forces are sometimes under way that we would like to think our own good intentions may somehow control, the facts are sometimes quite to the contrary. In South Asia, certainly the United States was slow in recognizing the dangers. I think it behooves both our sides to be equally cognizant of future dangers there and elsewhere and I would hope it would not be a question of looking back on a situation that had turned sour for the lack of timely action which might have prevented that.

I again thank the Prime Minister for his very thoughtful treatment to me and my party while we have been here in Peking. One thing has characterized any exchanges I have been involved in with your officials and that has been the degree of candor and frankness which is very encouraging to me. I think both of us have had long standing positions on controversial issues on which we do not agree and would hope those will not be translated too readily into—and to use your term—“empty canons of rhetoric” but rather to the kind of frank language that will minimize misunderstanding even though the disagreement might remain at the conclusion of the discussion.

Chou En-lai: Your Excellency has just now commented a bit on our reply and I think I should also like to add a few words. Of course, the reply I gave you just now in itself is a complete answer. And what I am now adding, of course, is additional and it was led to by your comment.

And on the question of Southeast Asia, our current opinion has been, to put it simply, that the United States is in the wrong. This is not only the words of the Chinese but also of the other people in the world. I have heard American friends themselves speak of this. And, in addition, this is not something that was created by President Nixon himself. It was his predecessors. And President Nixon has already decided to withdraw his troops. And as I have said to Dr. Kissinger before, I would wish that the United States would withdraw completely as General DeGaulle did in Algeria and do it in one strike and cleanly, wholly, without any remainder and immediately. And to find various excuses to drag on in a messy way will only finally end up in losing the initiative. With a subjective wish for a glorious and honorable withdrawal while in reality there may not be such honorable and glorious withdrawal and if you only have the subjective wish but reality is not a glorious and honorable withdrawal, then on the contrary, this might give rise to difficult predicaments that are difficult to extract ones self from. Have you read the Soviet News? That is upon your present visit to China, the Soviet press has done some reporting in which they have given some special descriptions of you as saying that you are especially in charge of Vietnamese and Indochina Affairs. Of course, we do not pay attention to that. It is precisely because you may be in charge of this that I would like to speak to you with special earnestness. That is that your excuses will not carry over with the people of the world. For instance, you said that it was not the United States troops that went first into Laos and Cambodia but North Vietnamese troops. The question is that your troops should not have gone to Vietnam in the first place. The sending of United States troops into Vietnam itself is aggression. For instance, we have a common point in opposing the sending of Indian troops into East Pakistan. Then, how can we agree to your sending troops into South Vietnam. That is why the Soviet Ambassador criticized you on the issue of Vietnam when the question of the war in Pakistan was under debate in the United Nations. That is the first point.

The second point is—take Laos for instance—the troops of Thailand went into Laos. That is also foreign aggression. And your CIA has given often air support to the Laotian bandits in the form of ammunition or money or food. They have given this to the Lao bandits of the minority Nationality, the forces of Vang Pao in the area that is under the control of Laos and this is something that is recognized in the American press. Then, since the United States and Thailand can give air support to bandits in Laos, then why can Vietnam not give patriotic assistance to the forces of liberation? For instance, it is the same as the situation in which you assisted South Korea and advanced your forces up to the very banks of the Yellow River. It was only then that we sent our volunteers to assist the Democratic Republic of Korea and when we now cooly assess that situation—was that not very clear? And the case is similar in Cambodia. If the Lon Nol - Matak clique had not subverted Sihanouk, then how would the war in Cambodia have come about?

Later on, your President himself decided to send troops on an intrusion into Cambodia. That was at the end of April 1970 and later on in the early part of 1971, United States troops entered into Laos and this was even further aggression and at Christmas last year, you launched a massive air strike against North Vietnam. Your President and your Pentagon have called those successes but, in my opinion, they are not successes. You are a soldier and I also have been one in the past—not now of course. I have also been in military action and I know that this kind of fighting cannot bring victory. It can only give rise to dissatisfaction on the part of ones own people. And these actions on the contrary are giving the Soviet Union an opportunity. And if you want some news, I can tell you a bit that if you do not leave that place, then Southeast Asia which does have the possibility of being turned into an area of nonalignment will become an area of contention between the two superpowers. We are very clear about that. And then Europe, the Mediterranean, the Middle East, the subcontinent, the Indian Ocean, Southeast Asia will be linked together and how can tension be relaxed and wouldn't that be completely contrary to the ideals of your President. On the morning of the 4th, you told us of the strategic thinking of the President. And you once again mentioned that your President wished to relax the tension but if things go on like that, then the situation that will appear will be completely contrary to those subjective wishes. And the result will be that the situation will continue in continuous turmoil not only in the subcontinent, Of course, the settlement of the Vietnam question will be reached between the United States and the DRV either in Paris or Hanoi or perhaps in other places. Of course, we, as the third party, cannot meddle in this but we must state clearly our stand and there must be no ambiguity about that. I have dealt in rather great detail on this question in the hope that you will convey this to President Nixon and Dr. Kissinger. This itself, in fact, constitutes an initial exchange of opinion. Of course, it is probably too long to send in your cables so you can talk about them when you get back and Mrs. Hartley will be tired working on them until tomorrow morning.

As for the other two questions, there is no need to pay too great attention to the wordings and terminology. We would like you to know that although our country is backward, we have our independence. In our country, we have relied on our own initiative and self-reliance and have relied on these to fight until today. We have our self-dignity and so have you and if we mutually respect each other that is equality. So the erroneous terminology that you just now mentioned is not only a matter of terminology but a matter of attitude. We are not a superpower and we refuse to be a superpower. Your President has mentioned that China is a potential strength power. There is a degree of reason in that.

The third point you mentioned was the image of your President and our reply would be as we have mentioned in the third point of our reply—that the image of a man depends on his own deeds. And since we have invited your President to China, we will certainly give him the protocol and courtesy due him. I don't think there is any question of this and do not believe we have to say more about this because I believe you will understand this through the technical discussions we have had. Of course, it is impossible to go beyond that because we have not established diplomatic relations and you still recognize Taiwan. You must not forget that. It is important to us. The good thing about it is that Chiang Kai-shek also only recognizes one China. He also says Taiwan is a Province of China. It is a good thing because Taiwan would have long ago become a puppet of yours and become another Thieu or Sigmund Rhee and if such a situation had occurred wouldn't that make it even more impossible for us to come together and that would bring even more difficulty in the normalization of relations. So now, we have come to the question of Taiwan. So as to the question of Taiwan, I have already dealt with it in the official answer to you and if there is further discussion—if there is still room for individual changes in that part—then they should await the arrival of President Nixon or Dr. Kissinger. As for the present, we believe that in our draft we have already given very great consideration to your difficulties. As for other specific wordings and various measures, just as I mentioned about trade, cultural and scientific matters, they are rather minor matters and can wait until the arrival of your President. And my secretary has just now called my attention to the fact that you mentioned the fact to pay attention to the danger developing in the subcontinent and you mentioned in the past you had been late in recognizing the danger there. You just now mentioned that in the past you had come to the realization of this danger too late to avoid danger.

As to that question, I have already answered on the morning of the 4th and we have identical views.

Haig: I am very grateful for this lengthy discussion. It is presumptious of me to speak for President Nixon or Dr. Kissinger. I think on the subject of Southeast Asia there will be many useful exchanges during the President's visit. The past history you referred to should be a source of wisdom and learning. It does not necessarily provide the answers to current situations.

Chou En-lai: Of course, this answer must be given by your President. I cannot do that for him. For instance, in the instance of the Korean War. We entered into the war against aggression. During that time, the President was Truman who was a Democrat and not a Republican. He still put forth the suggestion of negotiation, so actually they fought one year without negotiations but later on, with your Republican President Eisenhower, he ended the war in Korea. I think it is useful to recall that part of history but the situation in Korea was different from that in Vietnam so it would not do to dogmatically copy that. The war that began in Vietnam has brought the whole of Indochina together, has merged it into one but we have not entered that war so the situation is different. And only with determination and resolve can that situation be settled. Otherwise, you will only lose the initiative.

Haig: I think we are convinced that it is going to take bold action and I think we have taken it by offering sweeping proposals. It is somewhat of a puzzle that we have not received a response to those proposals. Perhaps that is where the trouble lies. That is why alternative means must be pursued.

Chou En-lai: That is a question that I cannot answer because the war in Indochina is different from the war in Korea. In the case of Korea, on our side the Democratic people of Korea were the main representatives and our representatives were their deputies. On the other side, the United States was the main representative while Sigmund Rhee was the deputy, so actually there were four sides and in that circumstance it was easier for us to get an opinion. Now you are discussing face to face. So, I will not take up more of your time from your sleep.

Haig: Thank you very much, Mr. Prime Minister.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1037, Files for the President-China Material, China, Haig trip-memcons, January 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People. The memorandum is mistakenly dated January 7, 1971.

80. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, January 24, 1972 80. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, January 24, 19721

Washington, January 24, 1972

January 24, 1972

Dear Dick:

Enclosed are documents for you to use in your meeting on Wednesday with representatives of the PRC: — A note plus enclosure concerning the President's speech which should be handed to your contact (Tab A).

— A proposed schedule for the arrival of aircraft on February 1 and 2, including passenger lists (Tab B). Please note that we prefer that the Saturn aircraft arrive a day later (Feb. 2) so that its arrival and off-loading procedures will not conflict with the other aircraft.

— Proposed procedures for notifying the PRC of departure of aircraft and suggested time for testing this arrangement (Tab C).

— Request that a medical corpsman be allowed to accompany the advance party (Tab D).

— A list of equipment needed to support the aircraft arriving on February 1 (Tab E).

— A proposed plan for communications by the advance party (Tab F).

Major General Vernon W. Walters

Senior Defense Attache

American Embassy

Paris

Sincerely,

Alexander Haig
Brigadier General, U.S. Army Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, January 1-February 29, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. The tabs are attached but not published. Walters' account of the January 26 meeting is Document 82.

81. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, January 25, 1972 81. Letter From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the Military Attaché at the Embassy in France (Walters), Washington, January 25, 19721

Washington, January 25, 1972

January 25, 1972

2:00 A.M.

Dear Dick:

Per our conversation a few minutes ago enclosed are the two documents I mentioned.

— The document at Tab I substitutes for the enclosure (”proposal”) to the note at Tab A of my letter dated January 24 concerning your meeting with representatives of the PRC. Please note that the double spaced note at Tab A remains the same. It is only the single spaced “proposal”, the enclosure to the note, that is changed.

— At Tab II you will find a note to be handed to Group I. This substitutes completely for the note which was attached to my separate memo of January 24, 1972 in the other package (envelope #1).

This envelope is marked #2 on the outside. The fatter envelope containing my letter of January 24 and memo of January 24 has been marked #1 on the outside.

Sincerely,

Alexander M. Haig, Jr.

Brigadier General, U.S. Army

Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Major General Vernon W. Walters

Senior Defense Attache

American Embassy

Paris

[Tab I]

Republic of Vietnam and United States Proposal for a Negotiated Settlement of the Indochina Conflict

January 27, 1972

1. There will be a total withdrawal from South Vietnam of all U.S. forces and other foreign forces allied with the government of South Vietnam within six months of an agreement.

2. The release of all military men and innocent civilians captured throughout Indochina will be carried out in parallel with the troop withdrawals mentioned in point 1. Both sides will present a complete list of military men and innocent civilians held throughout Indochina on the day the agreement is signed. The release will begin on the same day as the troop withdrawals and will be completed when they are completed.

3. The following principles will govern the political future of South Vietnam.

The political future of South Vietnam will be left for the South Vietnamese people to decide for themselves, free from outside interference.

There will be a free and democratic Presidential election in South Vietnam within six months of an agreement. This election will be organized and run by an independent body representing all political forces in South Vietnam which will assume its responsibilities on the date of the agreement. This body will, among other responsibilities, determine the qualification of candidates. All political forces in South Vietnam can participate in the election and present candidates. There will be international supervision of this election.

One month before the Presidential election takes place, the incumbent President and Vice President of South Vietnam will resign. A caretaker Administration, headed by the Chairman of the Senate, will assume administrative responsibilities except for those pertaining to the election, which will remain with the independent election body.

The United States, for its part, declares that it

— will support no candidate and will remain completely neutral in the election.

— will abide by the outcome of this election and any other political processes shaped by the South Vietnamese people themselves.

— is prepared to define its military and economic assistance relationship with any government that exists in South Vietnam.

Both sides agree that: — South Vietnam, together with the other countries of Indochina, should adopt a foreign policy consistent with the military provisions of the 1954 Geneva Accords.

— Reunification of Vietnam should be decided on the basis of discussions and agreements between North and South Vietnam without constraint and annexation from either party, and without foreign interference.

4. Both sides will respect the 1954 Geneva Agreements on Indochina and those of 1962 on Laos. There will be no foreign intervention in the Indochinese countries and the Indochinese peoples will be left to settle their own affairs by themselves.

5. The problems existing among the Indochinese countries will be settled by the Indochinese parties on the basis of mutual respect for independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in each other's affairs. Among the problems that will be settled is the implementation of the principle that all armed forces of the countries of Indochina must remain within their national frontiers.

6. There will be a general ceasefire throughout Indochina, to begin when the agreement is signed. As part of the ceasefire, there will be no further infiltration of outside forces into any of the countries of Indochina.

7. There will be international supervision of the military aspects of this agreement including the ceasefire and its provisions, the release of prisoners of war and innocent civilians, the withdrawal of outside forces from Indochina, and the implementation of the principle that all armed forces of the countries of Indochina must remain within their national frontiers.

8. There will be an international guarantee for the fundamental national rights of the Indochinese peoples, the status of all the countries in Indochina, and lasting peace in this region.

Both sides express their willingness to participate in an international conference for this and other appropriate purposes.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, January 1-February 29, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Tab I is the substitute version of an enclosure attached to a note at Tab A in Document 80. Tab II is attached but not published.

82. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, January 26, 1972, 7:30 p.m. 82. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, January 26, 1972, 7:30 p.m.1

Paris, January 26, 1972, 7:30 p.m.

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD

Subject: 36th Meeting with the Chinese in Paris

On the evening of 26 January at 1930 I called as arranged two days before at the Chinese Embassy Residence in Neuilly. I was met in the usual manner. Only Tsao and Wei were present.

I then told them (reading from General Haig's letter) the various documents I was going to give them. I then proceeded to do so.

They received the enclosures concerning the President's speech. (I read them in both French and English. They like this system as then both Tsao and Wei know what is there. There is no doubt, however, that Tsao is the higher in the hierarchy.) They made no comment other than Tsao's mentioning he had stayed up to hear it (0230 French time).

They seemed somewhat overwhelmed at the number of aircraft in Tab B. They accepted Tab C (Procedures for notifying PRC of departure of aircraft from Guam). Tab D they also accepted without comment as well as Tab E (The request for the medical corpsman and list of equipment needed to support aircraft). The Proposed Plan for Communications (Tab F) was also a source of some confusion to them. Terms such as “satellite suitcase terminal” left them baffled. I tried to explain and they seemed to get the general idea.

Tsao, however, asked what was the function of the two Western Union men. It was not listed as was the specialization of everyone else. He also said that they did not know the frequencies of the various aircraft. On what frequencies should Shanghai call them while in flight. I said that I would try and get the answers for him as soon as I could. He seemed slightly overwhelmed at the mass of material and said more plaintively than complaining, “It is already the 26th of January. I will have to send someone to Peking. This is too much to send by telegram.”

They were as friendly and pleasant as always and seemed anxious to start getting all this material off. So I did not stay and engage in the usual small talk. As I was leaving, a group of Chinese arrived in a Volkswagen minibus. Before they could see me, they were shoved around to the side entrance by Wei. I then left.

VERNON A. WALTERS
Major General, USA Defense Attache

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, January 1-February 29, 1972. No classification marking. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. No drafting date appears on the memorandum. Walters added the handwritten notation “Provided” next to the sentence beginning with “He also said that they did not know…” For additional information about the attached tabs, see Document 80.

83. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, January 30, 1972 83. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, January 30, 19721

Paris, January 30, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD:

37th Meeting with the Chinese in Paris.

Having been notified in Germany that the Chinese had a message and wished to deliver it to me, I returned by commercial air from Germany. (This message was given regarding my return to Paris by a prearranged code with my secretary.)

On Sunday, January 30th, 1972. I went to the Chinese Embassy residence in Neuilly and was received in accordance with the usual rites and priorities. The Ambassador said that he appreciated my returning from Germany but he had a communication of some consequence for me. After minor preliminaries washed down with tea and preserved apples he ordered Tsao to give me the communication and said that in order to save time they would not read it to me. This was the first time that this was done and I am sure it was to avoid the embarrassment of having to read something relatively unpleasant. I read the communication which Tsao handed me and made a conscious effort to show no emotion or reaction, folded it carefully and said that I would transmit it at once. This was their rather harsh reply to our note concerning our Vietnam Peace Plan which I transmitted to General Haig at 2245 that same day. Once this was out of the way they were extremely cordial though there was clearly a note of some embarrassment in the manner of all three including the normally supremely poised and self confident Ambassador. They asked about my trip to Germany, whether I was going to China, What the weather was like in the United States at this time and other platitudes. I did not wish to prolong the situation so after another cup of jasmine tea and two more preserved apples, I took leave of them and was ushered out with more that usually heart handshakes and back pats.

They did seem genuinely relieved when after giving me the harsh note they were able to move to the more technical details of the forthcoming trip of the advance party.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, January 1-February 29, 1972. No classification marking. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. The meeting time is not indicated. A handwritten notation on the memorandum reads: “Win.”

84. Memorandum for Record, Paris, February 1, 1972 84. Memorandum for Record, Paris, February 1, 19721

Paris, February 1, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD

Subject: 39th Meeting with the Chinese in Paris. Feb 1, 1972

Having been notified late at night on January 31st, that a message was on its way to Paris for delivery to the Chinese, I flew on the morning of February 1st from Wiesbaden to Paris by military aircraft. I stopped at the Embassy and picked up the message which had been decoded by Miss Ouellette. I went to the Chinese Embassy in Neuilly. I was received as usual and the Ambassador said that he had not expected to see me so soon, that I was an almost daily traveler from Germany. He was very cordial, after the appropriate amount of small talk and chit chat I produced my message and read it first in French and then in English. (They like it this way, then Tsao can check on Wei and Wei can check on Tsao.). The Ambassador nodded vigorously when I had finished and said “that makes things much more clear”.

We then engaged in an appropriate amount of further small talk that was characterized by much tea, unsalted peanuts and preserved apples and apologies that they did not have something more suitable to offer me. We talked of the super sonic Concorde and I gathered that the Chinese enthusiasm for it had cooled somewhat. The Ambassador joked about James Reston who had made a book out of his operation. We talked also about Sun Tzu and his theories. He indicated that they were required reading in the Peoples Army. Again all three Chinese could not have been more cordial and friendly and this time the note of embarrassment which had marked our previous meeting seemed to be absent. After an appropriate interval of nonsense and persiflage, I left.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, January 1-February 29, 1972. No classification marking. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly. The meeting time is not indicated. A handwritten notation on the memorandum reads: “Win.”

85. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, February 11, 1972, 4 p.m. 85. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, February 11, 1972, 4 p.m.1

Paris, February 11, 1972, 4 p.m.

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD

Subject: 41st Meeting with the Chinese in Paris, 11 February 1972

Shortly after my return from meeting that morning with the Chinese I received a further message from Washington and called the Chinese for another appointment. (This is done from a special phone and using a code name.) They set 1600 that afternoon and at that time I again returned for the second time that day to the Chinese Embassy in Neuilly.

Met at the gate by Tsao and Wei and ushered into the Red Room, a minute or two later Ambassador Huang Chen joined us and after appropriate chit chat he produced a lavish cake and said that it was the beginning of their New Year. We ate the cake and toasted the New Year for our peoples and our leaders with rose flower wine. All of this made me believe that they had something acrimonious to say and I was not wrong. They then produced the message which reaffirmed their position not to interfere in the Vietnamese War and repeating their support for the North Vietnamese. I made a serious effort not to show any feeling as they read it to me in English and then put it in my pocket (without, I hope, any change in expression) and said that I would transmit it to Dr. Kissinger at once. As soon as this was done we discussed Chinese Calligraphy. I drew several characters. They criticized them and showed me how to write them correctly. The Ambassador, trying to be very nice, said that I had obvious aptitude and it would not take me more than three years (!!!) to learn Chinese. All of them were obviously a little embarrassed by the harshness of the tone of the note they had handed me.

I then gave them our message regarding further easing of trade restrictions and our views on the Indian Subcontinent. These they accepted without comment.

Tsao asked, as Press Attaché, if I knew the names of the newspapermen who were going with the President's Party. I said that I did not. He commented that though the numbers might seem small to us they were unprecedented as far as the Chinese were concerned. They had never handled anything like this number before. They asked me whether I was going with the President and I said that I did not believe so or I would have heard by now. The Ambassador said that he hoped that at some other time I would have the opportunity to go to his country. The Ambassador asked whether I thought President Nixon would be reelected and I said that I was sure he would. The Ambassador said he thought so too as the American people approved of his opening a dialogue with China. I replied, “That and many other things too. “ He nodded agreement. After further cordial chit chat and much tea I left.

VERNON A. WALTERS
Major General, USA Defense Attache

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, January 1-February 29, 1972. No classification marking. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly.

86. Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff, Washington, undated 86. Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff, Washington, undated1

Washington, undated

MEMORANDUM

February 15, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT

FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER

SUBJECT: Your Meetings with Mao

Attached is a paper prepared by my staff that I think you will find helpful in preparing for your meetings with Chairman Mao-Tse-Tung.

This paper distills some of Mao's major philosophic and political themes drawn from his writings, statements and actions throughout his life. It seeks to give you the flavor of the man and his mind. And it suggests some of the topics that he is likely to discuss or you would find profitable in raising yourself.

MEETINGS WITH MAO TSE-TUNG

Mao Tse-tung's stature as one of the 20th century's outstanding political figures derives from a combination of personal assertiveness, charismatic self-confidence, and a creative native intelligence. This man knows where he wants China to go, and has been pushing his country's social revolution for more than fifty years.

Mao's personality style combines audacity and the activist impulse with a skillful sense of political tactics: He has repeatedly shown a unique capacity to judge when to press, when to retreat and adopt a humble posture, how to build a broad coalition of support, and also an unflinching willingness to attack his opposition when his own position is strong. As he expressed this political style to Party leaders after surviving an attack on his policies in 1959:

“I shall not attack unless I am attacked; if I am attacked, I will certainly counterattack; I counterattack only after I am attacked. Up to now I have not given up this principle.

“I have now learned the art of listening. I always listen to others with forbearance for one or two weeks before I hit back. I advise you comrades to heed what others say. You may agree or disagree with me; that is your business. If you disagree, I'll make a self-criticism if I am wrong.”

Mao's peasant background is evident in his direct and earthy humor, which he often used to ridicule or disarm opponents. As he observed to his comrades after the 1959 political battle: “Now you'll all feel better after you break wind and empty your bowels.” As well, however, he has the sensitivity to write appealing poetry, displays a good working knowledge of Chinese history, and has a capacity for insight and abstract social analysis which has produced a number of philosophical writings and a clear (if not necessarily attainable) vision of his country's future.

In your discussions with Mao, the Party Chairman is likely to approach issues at a general, philosophical level (leaving the details to Chou En-lai), and in a style that will reflect the above-noted personal characteristics.

Following are a series of social and political issues which we know to be of interest to Mao, given his strong expression of views on these matters. You are likely to find these views expressed in a variety of ways in his discourse, or as themes which may catch his interest.

I. Mao on the United States

Mao Tse-tung's general perspective on the United States might be characterized as follows: A once revolutionary power has degenerated as “the people” have lost power to the “monopoly capitalists.” The U.S. ruling circles have transformed America into an imperialist country, but “the people” are now becoming politically conscious of their plight, and a revolutionary trend in the U.S. is beginning to develop.

Mao's earliest view of the United States was of a country that had successfully overthrown British colonial rule in a “protracted war” (such as Mao was to lead against the Japanese). In 1936, Mao told Edgar Snow that he “had first heard of America in an article which told of the American Revolution and contained a sentence like this: 'After eight years of difficult war, Washington won victory and built up his nation'.” Mao also claims to have been exposed to the views of Lincoln, although some measure of the degree to which the Chinese leaders view American history in Marxist terms may be gauged by their interpretation that the American Civil War was fought by “capitalists” because they wanted to ensure a free labor market for exploitation at low wages. Had the slavery system been maintained, so this argument goes, the northern capitalists would have been faced with a labor shortage, while southern slave owners would have been at a competitive advantage because of their free labor supply.

During the mid-1940s, Mao—then the leader of a small but disciplined Communist insurgency fighting the Japanese in an uneasy “united front” with Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist Government—sought to gain American material assistance for guerrilla operations (and to strengthen his position against the Nationalists). When the U.S. rebuffed his overtures for assistance, Mao's attitude turned toward hostility.

Mao has characterized the U.S. as an “imperialist” power since the late 1940s, when it was clear that we would continue to give exclusive support to Chiang Kai-shek. In his view we interfered in the Chinese civil war in 1948 when we transported Chiang's troops from Chungking to China's coastal cities, and gave the Nationalists weapons for their life and death struggle with the Communist armies.

Perhaps Mao's most powerful statement on the U.S. role in the Chinese revolution —revealing his capacity for biting irony and polemical attack—was made in September 1949. As his armies were sweeping to victory, Mao turned the knife on America's unsuccessful China policy by spurning Dean Acheson's view that because of China's population pressures the Communist revolution in China has an uncertain future: “Do revolutions arise from overpopulation?… Were China's many revolutions in the past few thousand years also due to overpopulation? Was the American Revolution against Britain 174 years ago also due to overpopulation? Acheson's knowledge of history is nil. He has not even read the American Declaration of Independence. Washington, Jefferson and others made the revolution against Britain because of British oppression and exploitation of the Americans, and not because of any overpopulation in America.”(*)

[footnote] (*) The full text of this revealing article is appended at Tab A.

While there might have been some possibility of normalizing relations with the newly formed People's Republic of China in the early 1950s, the abandonment of the Truman/Acheson “let the dust settle” policy toward the Communist revolution after the onset of the Korean War locked the U.S. into two decades of confrontation with the PRC. In Mao's view, America has denied him final victory over his bitter adversary of more than 50 years of civil war.

Current Chinese Views of the U.S.

Mao's decision of late 1970 to extend to you an invitation to visit Peking, and to seek through negotiations a normalization of Sino-American relations, basically derives from a desire to deal with China's own security problems (in the form of a Soviet military threat, and Japan growing into an economic, political, and potentially military power) and to resolve the Taiwan issue. Yet he and Chou En-lai seem to feel that the current situation in which the United States finds itself is favorable to a limited Sino-American rapprochement.

Mao and Chou En-lai have expressed the view that the U.S. has learned the hard way that it cannot manipulate political affairs in Asia to its own advantage. They look at the unsuccessful efforts of the Roosevelt and Truman Administrations to prop up Chiang Kai-shek's Government in the 1940s, the military stalemate in Korea, and the Vietnam quagmire, as events which have so soured the U.S. on its active role in Asia that the political climate is now right for a substantial American withdrawal from the region.

Since the early 1960s the Chinese leaders have seen the possibility of weakening the Western alliance system. Their establishment of diplomatic relations with France in 1964 was designed to encourage trends to “national independence” among America's allies. Similarly, as Marxists, the Chinese probably assume that conflicts of economic interest between the U.S. and Japan provide a line of cleavage that can be struck to divide opponent states. By your visit the Chinese may seek to play on such trends.

In this same vein, the Chinese seem aware of American distrust of the Soviet Union as a lever which can be used to convince us that we share a common enemy. Undoubtedly their hope is that we can be persuaded that China constitutes no threat to the U.S., as does the Soviet Union, and that we will redeploy our forces from China's eastern flank to the Middle East and Europe. In this way China will no longer face a two front threat, while Russia will be confronted with a strengthened U.S. opponent on southern and western frontiers. China will then be in an improved position to deploy her limited nuclear forces against the Soviet threat on her northern border.

The Chinese, ever sensitive to areas of internal division within a country (”contradictions,” in Mao's parlance) that may weaken an opponent's strength, are also paying close attention to racial tensions in the U.S., and to the political ferment on American campuses. Chou En-lai told an American student group that visited China in July 1971: “In recent years Chairman Mao himself has paid attention to the American situation and he has also asked us all to note the fact that it can be said that the United States is now on the eve of a great storm. The question of how this storm develops, however, is your task, not ours. We can only tell you something of our hopes…

Mao and Chou have indicated as well, however, that any anticipated social revolution in American is a long-term prospect. They realize China's immediate concerns can be dealt with most effectively through contacts with your Administration. They are sensitive enough to the American political scene to realize that your trip to China is likely to be a positive benefit to your leadership. Mao and Chou have both observed to foreign visitors that they see your visit in relation to the 1972 Presidential campaign. They feel there is popular pressure in the U.S. for an improvement in Sino-American relations, and they see you motivated in part by a desire to respond to those pressures in order to win re-election. By extending to you an invitation to visit their country, they evidently view the prospect of your re-election as both likely and favorable to their interests. Mao Tse-tung is reported to have remarked: “Bad things can change into good things, and bad persons can become good persons. I like a person such as Nixon, but I do not like Social Democrats or Revisionists. These kinds of people say one thing and do another. Although Nixon has his cunning side, he is not as bad as the others, for his policy is more open.”

Both Mao and Chou, viewing our country in Marxist terms, assume you represent the “serious” and powerful economic interests which are the “real” source of power in the United States. This being the case, you can speak from a position of authority with directness. Mao told Edgar Snow that while you represent the “monopoly capitalists,” the problems in Sino-American relations “would have to be solved with Nixon.” Thus your visit is viewed as an occasion for substantial and authoritative discussions, the building of a longer term relationship with your Administration, and an opportunity to directly exchange views on a wide range of issues. And, as noted, Mao (and Chou) enjoy a direct intellectual scrap.

II. China in the International Arena

Over the past thirty years, Mao Tse-tung has shown considerable movement in his approach to international affairs—with his constant concern being China's national independence and security.

1944-45 Undercut American Support for the Nationalists, Balance the U.S. and the Soviets

In the last days of the war against Japan, while the Communists were an insurgent political movement outnumbered by Chiang Kai-shek's forces by 3:1, and where the CCP had indications that Stalin would not directly back them in a civil war, Mao sought ways of undercutting the exclusive American support for the Nationalists. He found sympathetic observers of his guerrilla armies in American officers of the “Dixie Mission,” assigned to Yenan in the search for more effective Chinese opposition to the Japanese. In January of 1945, in the hope of gaining military assistance from the Roosevelt Administration (and thus undercutting the American backing of Chiang Kal-shek) Mao and Chou En-lai made a private offer to General Wedemeyer to come to Washington in order to “interpret and explain the situation in China” to the President. This overture was ignored by American officials who wished to see a strong, united nationalistic China emerge in Asia as a counterweight to Soviet and Japanese influence. Chiang Kai-shek seemed at that time to be the leader most likely to create such a China.

1949, China Will 'Lean to One Side”

Despite Stalin's opposition to the CCP promoting civil war, and the Russian treaty of 1945 with the Nationalist government, Mao pressed his military operations against Chiang Kai-shek's armies in 1947. Two years later, as the CCP neared victory, Mao's concern was that the U.S. might intervene in the last phase of the civil conflict, or that Stalin might not support his leadership of a Communist Chinese state. For these reasons, in July of 1949 Mao proclaimed that the new China would “lean to one side”; that is, that the PRC would join the “socialist camp.”

Mao did not find that Stalin welcomed this new addition to the Communist world with open arms, however. In December of 1949, Mao went to Moscow to negotiate a new Sino-Soviet treaty. Years later the Chairman told Party leaders of the struggle required to gain Stalin's support:

After the revolutionary victory, [Stalin] suspected that China would be like Yugoslavia and that I would become a Tito. Then I went to Moscow to conclude the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Alliance and Mutual Assistance [signed on February 14, 1950], but this involved a struggle. He [Stalin] did not want to sign it, finally agreeing to do so after two months of negotiations. When did Stalin begin to have confidence in us? It began in the winter of 1950-51, during the Resist-America Aid-North Korea Campaign. He finally came to believe that we were not Yugoslavia, and that I was not a Titoist.

1958-60 The Break with the Soviets

This commitment of China to the bipolar world struggle between Communism and Capitalism was to last barely the decade of the 1950s. In 1956, Khrushchev's attack on Stalin and the “cult of personality proved to be a political embarrassment for Mao in China, where certain leaders of the CCP felt that Mao himself was promoting a “cult.” As well, Khrushchev's initiative was seen by Mao as a personal affront in that Khrushchev did not inform him of the move ahead of time. Sino-Soviet tensions increased further in the wake of the Hungarian and Polish uprisings triggered by “de-Stalinization” as the Chinese sought to promote greater freedom for Bloc countries within the “socialist camp,” to the anger of the Russians.

Mao was further embarrassed in 1956 to find that Khrushchev began to promote a “peace” line—“peaceful coexistence,” “peaceful competition, “peaceful transition to socialism”—which contradicted Mao's policy prescriptions for China. In the summer of 1958, in an effort to force the Soviets to stand up for Chinese interests on the Taiwan issue, Mao promoted the crisis over the offshore islands of Quemoy and Matsu. This Chinese test of Khrushchev's “revolutionary commitment,” and events which followed, led to a breakdown of the Sino-Soviet alliance. As Mao recalled for Party leaders in 1962:

In the second half of 1958, Khrushchev attempted to block the China seacoast, to launch a joint Sino-Soviet fleet to dominate the coastal area, and to blockade us. Khrushchev came [secretly] to China because of this problem [in late July 1958]. Thereafter, Khrushchev supported Nehru in attacking us on the Sino-Indian border problem in September 1959, and a statement to this effect was issued by Tass. Khrushchev came to China in October [1959, just after his meetings with President Eisenhower at Camp David], to attend the tenth anniversary of our national day, and he attacked us when speaking at a dinner party. This was followed [by a series of international Communist meetings] all of which concerned themselves with the dispute between Marxism-Leninism and Revisionism. During 1960 we fought with Khrushchev. You see, even between socialist nations and with Marxism-Leninism, such a problem as this has arisen.

China's full break with the Russians came in the summer of 1960, when at the height of the agricultural crisis created by the Great Leap Forward, Khrushchev suddenly withdrew all Soviet technical assistance personnel and aid programs from China. This was viewed by Mao as a great act of betrayal; it confirmed his view of Khrushchev's “revisionism,” and compounded the Chinese economic crisis.

Mao's hatred of the Soviets remains as a key factor (if not the key factor) in Mao's thinking today, and extends as much or more to Khrushchev's successors than to Khrushchev himself. It was, of course, under Brezhnev and Kosygin that “more than a million Soviet troops” (a Chinese quote) have been massed on China's borders.

The 1960s, China in an Era of “Great Upheaval Great Division, Great Reorganization.”

Mao's response to Khrushchev's betrayal of the Sino-Soviet relationship began in the early 1960s with efforts to promote factional polemics within the International Communist Movement to erode support for Soviet “revisionism.” This was combined with attempts to encourage revolutionary struggles among “third world” countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America. Neither of these approaches was very successful from the Chinese perspective, although Mao's vigorous attacks on Khrushchev's policies probably contributed to the Soviet Premier's downfall in 1964, and prevented the Soviets from convening a world meeting of Communist Parties to chastise the Chinese for being “dogmatists.”

On the eve of the Cultural Revolution, when China withdrew from the world to fight domestic battles, CCP media revealed Mao's perception of the breakdown of the bipolar world of the 1950s.

The characteristic of the present world situation is that… a process of great upheaval, great division, and great reorganization is taking place. The revolutionary movement of the people of the world is surging forward vigorously….Drastic divisions and realignments of political forces are taking place on a world scale.

It was only in the aftermath of the Cultural Revolution that Mao found himself able to begin to cope with this “process of great upheaval” and seek to shape the realignment of world political forces in a manner suitable for China's interests. Since 1969, there have been three major themes in China's approach to international relations: 1. China will seek to be self-reliant. The slogan “regeneration through one's own efforts,” is the new watchword of the PRC's foreign policy, as well as a guideline for internal affairs. (Note: this slogan was used by Mao Tse-tung in the Yenan days.)

2. The Soviet Union is a “Social-Imperialist State.” In the wake of the Sino-Soviet border clashes of 1969, the Chinese characterized the Russian leadership as “the new Czars.” Mao is seeking to construct a united front against the Soviets out of a combination of disaffected Eastern European states, non-ruling Communist Parties hostile to Moscow, and any non-Communist states who will join in opposition to Russian power.

3. China will Speak for the Interests of the “Third World.” Mao now sees China's natural allies as the colored and underdeveloped peoples of Asia, Africa, and Latin America. He and Chou En-lai proclaim that China will never be a “super power,” bullying other states or interfering in their internal affairs. In the UN this fall, the Chinese delegation sought to cultivate the smaller unaligned states; and substantial efforts have been made to establish strong bilateral relationships (through aid agreements, and political support) in such countries as Ethiopia, Sudan, Zambia and Tanzania in Africa, and Peru and Chile in Latin America.

III. Mao and Nuclear Weapons

Mao has taken an attitude toward nuclear weapons that while they are indeed instruments of mass destruction, fear of nuclear war should not paralyze the fighting will of the “revolutionary forces.” He is sensitive to the psychological inhibitions on nuclear powers which limit their willingness to use such weapons. As he once said: “They [nuclear weapons] will not be used lightly.” He has taken a posture of aggressive and self-righteous willingness to promote revolution by means well under the nuclear threshold.

At the same time, beginning in 1958, Mao has pressed a program of atomic weapons development for China. He seeks to attain a nuclear force which will deter any attack on China proper, render the country immune from nuclear blackmail (which he feels China suffered in Korea and in the Offshore Island crisis of 1958), give pause to other major powers who would compromise China's international interests, and inhibit non-nuclear powers from turning to the U.S. for security under the American nuclear umbrella.” (Should such countries accept American nuclear weapons on their territory, for example, they would then themselves become potential targets of a retaliatory Chinese strike.)

In 1946, Mao told Anna Louise Strong that the atom bomb was a “paper tiger.” He said that while it was true that the bomb was a weapon of “mass slaughter,” wars were decided by people, not bombs, and that people with a revolutionary will would fight on despite atomic weapons. In this same period he sought to buck up the fighting spirit of his armies by pointing out that Japan had surrendered at the end of World War II because the Soviet Union sent troops against her, not because the U.S. had used two atomic bombs against Japanese cities. He criticized some CCP comrades” for their fear of the atomic bomb and their belief in the theory that “weapons decide everything.” Mao's eventual victory over Chiang Kai-shek's armies—which were armed with American weapons—convinced Mao that his “paper tiger” thesis was correct.

Mao further sought to convince China's nuclear adversaries that because of his country's large population he did not fear an atomic attack:

I had an argument about [nuclear war] with Nehru [in 1954]. In this respect he is more pessimistic than I am. I told him that if half of humanity is destroyed the other half will still remain but imperialism will have been totally destroyed…

As late as 1965, Mao further reiterated the view that nuclear war would hardly mean the end of mankind. He observed to Edgar Snow that “he had read reports of an investigation by Americans who visited the Bikini Islands six years after nuclear tests had been conducted there… They found mice scampering about and fish swimming in the streams as usual… Probably there had been two bad years after the tests [Mao asserted], but nature had gone on. In the eyes of nature and the birds, the mice and the trees, the atom bomb was a paper tiger.

Such an attitude, it would appear, was designed to convey the message that China would not give up the revolutionary struggle because of a fear of nuclear weapons. In fact, however, the Chinese appear to have backed away from confrontations with the United States in Korea (in response to President Eisenhower's hint that atomic weapons might be used) and in the Taiwan Strait crisis of 1958, out of concern that atomic weapons might be used against them.

It was very likely in response to this sense of nuclear inferiority that Mao, in 1957, pressed the Soviets for assistance in developing an independent nuclear capability. When Khrushchev's partially positive response(*) indicated to Mao that the Soviets would use such assistance to control rather than to aid China, Mao pressed the Quernoy and Matsu confrontation of 1958 in hopes of discrediting Khrushchev's policy of “peaceful coexistence.” When the U.S. turned out to be more than a “paper tiger”—through its support for the Nationalists, and despite the Soviet nuclear protection of China—Mao lost his calculated gamble. Khrushchev, in fear of Chinese adventurism, unilaterally cancelled the nuclear sharing agreement with China in June of 1959. Mao continued to press for the development of a Chinese nuclear weapons force, however. This effort first bore fruit with an atomic test in October 1964—on the very day that Khrushchev was ousted from power.

[footnote] (*) A Sino-Soviet nuclear sharing agreement was signed in October 1957. The Chinese later revealed, however, that they had asked the Russians “for a sample atomic bomb and technical data on its manufacture,” but had been rebuffed on such direct aid.

As China has developed her own nuclear weapons, official PRC statements have stressed four points: 1. China will never be the first to use such weapons. PRC officials have challenged the Soviets and U.S. to make similar “no first use” pledges.

2. The existing nuclear powers have no right to a “nuclear monopoly,” and China's weapons program is designed to break that monopoly for her own defense and to create the circumstances in which negotiations might bring about the “complete, thorough, total, and resolute prohibition and destruction of nuclear weapons.

3. The existing nuclear powers should dismantle their foreign bases, withdraw all their troops and atomic weapons to their home territory, and “adopt effective measures to prevent nuclear war.”

4. China will never agree to participate in nuclear disarmanent talks behind the backs of the non-nuclear countries. On an issue of such importance, all countries in the world, big or small, should have some say. China has a few nuclear weapons, but she will never join the so-called club of nuclear powers.”

IV. Social Change Comes Only Through “Struggle”

Mao believes that social progress comes only through “struggle.” In a philosophical treatise of 1937 he wrote that, “Changes in a society are due chiefly to the development of internal contradictions [in that society].” Mao seems to relish a good fight, and has shown a creative politician's ability to turn conflict situations to his advantage. In 1939 he wrote an essay entitled “To Be Attacked By The Enemy Is A Good Thing, Not A Bad Thing.” He turned this perspective to the CCP's ultimate survival during the war against Japan by creating a united front against the foreign invader which prevented the Nationalists—over-burdened with security problems—from dealing their Communist “allies” in the united front a death blow.

Since coming to power, Mao has manipulated “class struggle” in Chinese society, and policy conflict among CCP leaders, so as to speed the modernization of Chinese society. This has been evident in a series of so-called “mass movements”—such as the Great Leap Forward of 1958-1960, and the Cultural Revolution of 1966-1969—and also in Mao's political in-fighting and purging of leaders who have opposed his policies. As the Chairman observed in 1963: “The struggle between the socialist and capitalist roads [of national development can become a driving force for social change.” Mao rejects any abstract commitment to “peace” as a political goal.

Complementing his stress on struggle, Mao has attacked the Confucian stress on social “harmony,” which he believes kept China's peasants for centuries in a position of exploitation by the elite Mandarin political class. One of the issues in the Sino-Soviet dispute has been Mao's assertion that the “peaceful transition to socialism” through parliamentary politics is unlikely, and hence that Communist Parties should not tie their hands regarding the use of violent struggle as a means of achieving power.

One of the most profound differences in Chinese and American views of international affairs remains Mao's belief that China has both the “right” and the “duty” to assist revolutionary movements in other countries in their struggles for power through political and material aid. While he asserts that China—unlike the U.S. and Soviets—will not send her troops abroad, he does not accept Western notions of international relations limited solely to state-to-state dealings. Through “people's diplomacy” and contacts among Communist Parties, he seeks to encourage social change through revolution even if it means subverting “bourgeois” governments with which China has state relations. This view acquires greater urgency, of course, when the Chinese feel that by supporting a subversive movement they can exclude from a country Western or Soviet influence.

In regard to such “unfinished revolutions” as are embodied in divided Korea or Vietnam, Mao is likely to take the attitude that both China and the U. S. should keep “hands off” and let events take the course that is “historically inevitable.” It is not known how he might respond to suggestions that violence in these areas will tend to pull in outside powers who see their interests threatened—thus enlarging the conflict—or to the view that political violence is not the most effective way to promote enduring social change.

V. Mao on the Race Issue

While the Chinese are sensitive to the political unacceptability of racist attitudes (they publicly attack, for example, white racist governments in Africa), they also sense that being a “colored” people they can use subtle racial appeals to create a common cause with the poor underdeveloped (colored) peoples of the world against the rich (white) Americans and Russians.

An example of such a subtle racist line is Mao's 1963 appeal to the “workers, peasants, revolutionary intellectuals, enlightened elements of the bourgeoisie and other enlightened personages of all colors in the world—white, black, yellow, brown, and so forth” to unite in opposition to racial discrimination in the U.S. Mao sees the race problem in America as a profound “contradiction” which can be stimulated to divide and weaken a major adversary, perhaps creating the potential for a revolutionary situation. His 1963 statement saw “a gigantic and vigorous nationwide struggle” mounting throughout the U. S.—“and the struggle keeps mounting.” Mao interpreted this conflict in Marxist terms:

The rapid development of the struggle of the American negroes is a manifestation of the sharpening of class struggle… within the U. S.; it has increasingly aroused the anxiety of the U.S. ruling circles.

Again, viewing the world in terms of China's revolution, Mao felt that the “internal contradictions” in American society provided a point of cleavage which could be stimulated to divide and weaken China's (then) major opponent.

VI. Accent on Youth

Reflecting Mao's own early years as a rebellious student, the Chairman sees youth as playing an important role in social change. Young people are assertive, audacious, and uncommitted to the status quo. Mao has also expressed concern, however, that China's younger generation might not carry on the struggle for China's modernization because they are growing up in a peaceful society. As this was expressed in 1963:

… the question of cultivating successors [to lead China's revolution] has become increasingly urgent and important. Internationally, imperialism headed by the United States has placed its hope of realizing “peaceful evolution” in China on the corruption of our third and fourth generations. Who can say that this way of thinking of theirs is not without a certain foundation?

In 1965 Mao told Andre Malraux that China's youth “has to be put to the test” in order to develop their revolutionary commitment. During the Cultural Revolution of 1966-1969 the Chairman sought to “steel” China's younger generation in struggle by organizing them as Red Guards to attack his opponents in the Party leadership.

These views shape Mao's perception of social change in the world beyond China. He and Chou En-lai have obviously interpreted the current student political unrest in the United States as holding the same potential for revolution which they knew in their youth. As Chou En-lai observed to an American student group that visited China in July of 1971:

In our country you would be considered high intellectuals, and you have a heavy responsibility. It is your responsibility to link general truth with actual practice… Some of you have said that foreign experience cannot be mechanically brought over to your country. That is right. Chairman Mao tells us that one must rely on his own efforts. We cannot impose on you; neither can you just mechanically copy from us. [But] you can see that America's youth is gradually raising their political consciousness. According to our experience, it is always intellectuals who start [a revolution] because it is easier for them to accept revolutionary theory and revolutionary experience from books. But for the movement to succeed, you must go among the workers…

VII. Personal Distrust of Intellectuals

Despite Mao's accent on youth and the fact that, as noted above, university students are regarded as high intellectuals in China, Mao carries a deep personal distrust of intellectuals. As a university student in Peking just “up from the provinces” in 1918, Mao was ridiculed by the big-city intellectuals for his heavy rural accent and his status as a librarian's assistant. The sense of personal humiliation he drew from this experience found expression in the 1940s when he criticized intellectuals who came to Yenan to aid in the war against Japan for their arrogance and aloofness from peasants and workers.

In addition, China's intellectual traditionally have applied themselves well to their studies, but have lagged in practical work, disdaining to dirty their hands and looking down on those who engage in physical labor. Mao has great contempt for such attitudes.

After coming to power, Mao was faced with the problem of at once needing the intellectuals for their technical skills in the process of modernizing China, yet fearing that their “bourgeois” and “antisocialist” attitudes would make them unreliable allies—or worse that they would dilute the revolutionary enthusiasm of Party members with whom they worked. To deal with this problem, in 1956-1957 Mao launched a campaign to “let a hundred flowers bloom, and a hundred schools of thought contend.” This was an effort to encourage intellectuals to lend their creativity to China's development, and to criticize bureaucratic behavior on the part of Party and state functionaries, yet to be subject themselves to criticism for their “backward” thinking and behavior. This approach backfired on Mao in May of 1957 when China's intellectuals, many of whom had been educated in the West, criticized the very basis of Communist Party rule in China. Mao was forced to call a halt to the mutual-criticism campaign.

In the early 1960s, however, intellectuals again became critical of Communist Party rule in the context of the agricultural crisis created by the Great Leap Forward. Some even published indirect criticisms of Mao himself, comparing him to Stalin(*) or characterizing him as a mental case. Stung by their ridicule, Mao initiated the Cultural Revolution in late 1965 by attacking a playright who had compared him to a dictatorial emperor of old; and in the summer of 1966 the Chairman manifested his complete disgust with intellectual life in the PRC by closing down China's university system and having the professors subject to mass criticism by their Red Guard students.

[footnote] (*) It should be noted that Mao continues to pay respect to Stalin as a great national leader and revolutionary. He has said that despite the “30%” of Stalin's deeds which were in error, the 70% of things he did which were good for the revolution in Russia deserve recognition and honor

At present intellectual life in the PRC is just beginning to recover from the Cultural Revolution discipline of mass rote memorization of Mao's “little red book.” Universities are beginning to reopen, yet students and teachers are still required to spend months or years on farms or in factories reforming their elitist and “anti-socialist” attitudes through physical labor. We do not know whether Mao has found a way to deal with the paradox of needing the intellectuals to develop China, yet controlling their attitudes of elitism, aloofness from physical labor, and bureaucratic tendencies (see below) which have for so long been a part of China's Mandarin heritage.

VIII. Man in a Bureaucratic Society

In contrast to many other Communists, Mao has doubts about the virtue of a Party and governmental bureaucracy as instruments of national development. His provincial peasant background has given him a deep distrust of the Mandarin class, and its traditional role as a bureaucratic administrative elite. As early as 1955 Mao complained to other Party leaders of the way in which the CCP was building a bureaucratic machine that was strangling local initiative:

Now there are dozens of hands interfering with local administration, making things difficult for the regions. Although neither the [Party] Center nor the State Council knows anything about it, the departments [of the Central Government] issue orders to the provincial and municipal governments… Forms and reports are like floods. This situation must change, and we must find a way to deal with it.

Mao initially tried to decentralize the government system during the Great Leap Forward (1958-1960) by creating self-sufficient “people's communes' and organizing the population into “guerrilla warfare"-style semi-autonomous units structured along military lines. When this movement ran into deep trouble in the early 1960s, leaders of the Party and state resisted Mao's policies. In the Cultural Revolution Mao finally decided to pull apart these bureaucracies which were thwarting his efforts to decentralize administration.

This enduring effort of the Chairman is based on a view that bureaucracy thwarts popular initiative, making people passive and dependent on guidance from organizational superiors. His own activist and “struggle” approach to life makes him convinced that if China's people are only given greater opportunity to take initiative, a tremendous creative force of 800,000,000 people will be released to modernize Chinese society.

For all of Mao's almost romantic beliefs in the creative energies of his people, however, he exhibits a basic distrust of genuine popular political initiative. While he has repeatedly encouraged “mass campaigns” such as the Cultural Revolution in which people are directed to criticize Party bureaucrats, these are consciously structured and manipulated affairs organized by Mao at the political “center.”

In this regard, Mao has indicated that he feels China has something to learn from the U.S. in developing a decentralized and relatively unbureaucratic system of government. As Edgar Snow paraphrased Mao in late 1970:

Chairman Mao said that China should learn from the way that America developed, by decentralizing and spreading responsibility and 'wealth among the 50 states. A central government could not do everything. China must depend on regional and local initiatives. It would not do to leave everything up to him [Mao].

IX. Distrust of Peasant Initiative

Part of Mao's unwillingness to tolerate genuine mass initiative seems to be based on the fact that China's “masses” are largely peasants with minimal education, potentially conservative attitudes, local economic interests, and parochial family social ties. As a Marxist he sees the working class as the only group really committed to industrialization; and as a Chinese he understands that the peasants have a “spontaneous tendency toward capitalism” characteristic of small producers.

A further reason for Mao's distrust of peasant initiative is his fear that they are vulnerable to manipulation by intellectuals and bureaucrats. Being of peasant background himself, Mao is aware of the rural population's traditional sense of inferiority before men of literacy, given the age-old prestige of the Confucian scholar-official in Chinese society.

X. Collective Life Versus Individualism

Like most Chinese, Mao equates “individualism with “selfishness.” One of the more distorted American interpretations of Chinese culture with a Western bias has been the view of the Chinese as rugged individualists. As late as 1949, even an American Secretary of State (Dean Acheson, in the White Paper on China), looked forward to a time when the Chinese people, only recently come under Communist control, would reassert their “democratic individualism.” In fact, group life—whether it be that of the family, school class, or clan—has always predominated over individual liberty.

In Mao's China, group pressures are constantly brought to bear on the individual through “criticism—self-criticism” meetings and political study groups. This situation is further manifest in a downplaying of competition between individuals (as in sporting events) which is seen as fostering “individualism, “ and a disdain of material incentives for labor, which is denounced as promoting selfishness and personal greed.

At the same time, however, Mao lays great stress on “self-reliance” and individual effort. His vision of China is of a country organized into self-sufficient rural communes where a strong collective spirit will encourage each individual to give his all for the progress of the group—and thus himself. But Mao does not see individual achievement as worthy apart from group collective purposes.

Thus, you are unlikely to find Mao responsive to assertions of the virtue of such Western economic concepts as wage incentives and the competition of the marketplace as methods to promoting economic development. Indeed, Mao has attacked the Yugoslavs and Soviets for “restoring capitalism” in their countries by resorting to market competition and wage incentives.

(It remains a fact, however, that a great many Chinese today would fall into the category of “selfishness” decried by Mao. In places such as Hong Kong, for example, where the rigid social organization of Mao's China is not present, there is a constant scramble by individual Chinese for financial advantage. This is often at the expense of other Chinese. To be sure, those engaged in the scramble may be seeking benefits for their families rather than individual advantage, but the net effect is the same. The phenomenon exists even in Mao's China, as demonstrated by references to the “spontaneous tendency toward capitalism” of the peasantry, and the self-seeking struggles for power of the Red Guards.)

1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical Files, China, Trips, February 1972, Briefing Book. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Published from an undated draft. Kissinger transmitted the paper to Nixon under a February 15 covering memorandum. A handwritten note reads “Put in President's Mao/Chou book Feb. 15 AM.” Tab A, Mao Tse-tung's 1949 article, is attached but not published. Brackets and ellipses are the source text.

87. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, February 17, 1972, 5 p.m. 87. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, February 17, 1972, 5 p.m.1

Paris, February 17, 1972, 5 p.m.

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD

Subject: 43rd Meeting with the Chinese in Paris, 17 February 1972, 1800

I went to the Chinese Embassy in Neuilly at the appointed time and was greeted as usual by Tsao and Wei. The Ambassador was not present and they apologized for this. I brought them a large box of candy as a New Year present and they were pleased.

Tsao said that the President was on his way to China and there was much coverage in the press. He was disappointed that I did not go. I said that I shared his disappointment, perhaps to a greater degree. But I hoped to visit China, maybe after I retired. He said that I would always be welcome as I had been a “shadow Ambassador”. He mentioned that he was 51 and Wei said he was 31 and they would greet me whenever I came.

Tsao then said that President Nixon had been attacked on both sides for his decision to open the dialogue with China. On the right by “Fascist militarist” elements and on the left by pro-Soviet intellectuals and so-called leftists who were really not leftists at all. I replied that Mr. Nixon was a man who had been much attacked but was not swayed by such attacks from doing what he thought was right. If he was attacked by extremists it was not to our or their advantage.

Tsao then asked whether our relations with West Germany were not better this year than last year, especially since the meeting between the President and Chancellor Brandt. I said that as far as I knew our relations with the Federal Republic were good both last year and this year. This did not mean that we agreed on every single question, but we accepted that our friends might not always agree with us. Personally, I felt we were not hostile to better relations in Europe. We just did not want the Soviets to take over Europe. If they did, it would be bad for us and bad for the Chinese.

Wei then said he had seen on French television the night before “30 Seconds Over Tokyo” and said that we were allies at that time. He asked whether I did not fear a resurrection of Japanese militarism. I said I personally did not for two reasons: First, the Japanese had discovered that they could achieve far more prosperity from work than from war and secondly, a new generation had grown up that was quite different from the old Samurai spirit. Young Japanese wanted cars, travel, vacations—not territorial expansion. Surprisingly, they both nodded.

I then judged we had had sufficient small talk and read our message replying to their somewhat harsh reactions on Vietnam. Tsao smiled and said, “Perhaps you think we got too excited.” I smiled and said, “Perhaps.” He promised to transmit it at once and with many “Happy New Years” I left.

VERNON A. WALTERS
Major General, USA Defense Attache

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, January 1-February 29, 1972. No classification marking. The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly.

88. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 21, 1972, 2:30-2:40 p.m. 88. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 21, 1972, 2:30-2:40 p.m.1

Beijing, February 21, 1972, 2:30-2:40 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Prime Minister Chou En-lai

T'ang Wen-Sheng, Interpreter

DATE & TIME: Monday, February 21, 1972 - 2:30-2:40 p.m.

PLACE: The President's Guest House, Peking

PM Chou: Chairman Mao would like to see the President.

Dr. Kissinger : Can I bring Winston Lord?

PM Chou: Won't the Secretary be mad?

Dr. Kissinger : We tell him. We can announce it a little later.

PM Chou: Since the Chairman is inviting him he wants to see him fairly soon.

Dr. Kissinger : The President will be coming. Will you be reading your toast tonight?

PM Chou: I will be reading it. Will you have a written text?

Dr. Kissinger : I will have it for you by the plenary session—in the next hour or so. But will you read it?

PM Chou: We will read it.

Dr. Kissinger : You are not memorizing it. Should ours be mild or tough since you will speak first?

PM Chou: We will give you a copy of our text.

Dr. Kissinger : I will get the President. He will be ready in two minutes.

[The President arrived and then went on to meet with Chairman Mao.]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Lord. Another set of these documents is ibid., President's Trip, February 1972, HAK Conversations. Unless noted otherwise, the versions are identical. The meeting was held at the President's Guest House, Beijing. All brackets are in the source text.

89. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 21, 1972, 4:15-5:30 p.m. 89. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 21, 1972, 4:15-5:30 p.m.1

Beijing, February 21, 1972, 4:15-5:30 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Prime Minister Chou En-lai

Ch'iao Kuan-hua, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Chang Wen-chin, Director of Western Europe, North American, and Australasian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chi Chao-chu, Interpreter

One Notetaker

DATE & TIME: Monday, February 21, 1972 - 4:15-5:30 p.m.

PLACE: Guest House, Villa 2, Peking

[There were some opening pleasantries.]

Kissinger: Mr. Prime Minister could I settle the matter of the press with the Chairman?

Chou: We have just drafted something.

Kissinger: What I would like to do, if you agree, Mr. Prime Minister,—our press is wondering why the Plenary Session was delayed and were thinking maybe it was because you and the President had started quarreling in the car (laughter). So, what we would like … (Chou asked Jack Reedy to sit on the sofa) … we would like to say reasonably soon that there was a meeting and that that's why the Plenary Session was delayed; perhaps before the Plenary Session begins. Concerning the pictures, could we make sure our press gets the pictures?

Chou: We will give the pictures first to you.

Kissinger: Our public relations people are going to be charmed by you.

I want to discuss the agenda. We have a complicated system of government. I want to tell you who knows what among our group. Nobody from the State Department knows that there is a draft of the Communique except for the two paragraphs on Taiwan which we have shown to Secretary Rogers. But nobody has seen anything else. We did that so that we could say it was discussed by the President and the Chairman and you.

No one else knows the five assurances I have given you on Taiwan. But the President will repeat them to you.

Chou: The President will repeat them in the private discussions or in the Plenary?

Kissinger: In the private discussions, and after we come back to America we will inform the bureaucracy of it.

No one knows what we have discussed—how much we cooperated during the India/Pakistan situation, or you would have read it in the newspaper.

And no one knows how much we have told you about our relations with the Soviet Union.

No one knows about my trips to New York City to talk with your Ambassador. Secretary Rogers knows that our contact point is Paris, but he does not know of any of the messages that have come back and forth.

I say this so that by inadvertence your people do not say anything in the private meetings with the State Department that will be a surprise to them. After the election in November we plan to bring the two bureaucracies into closer harmony. But it would be foolish to do it now and have them leak to the press. And you may have noticed what they did to me.

Now in our discussions, Mr. Prime Minister, I recommend—the President recommends that we proceed as we did in October. At the Plenary Session the President will make a fairly general statement, a very general statement, and he will list some topics and he will then propose that we break up into private groups.

We recommend that the Foreign Minister discuss first the issues of exchanges, diplomatic contacts and trade in these private meetings while you talk to the President about whatever you decided to discuss, including Taiwan. When they are finished with this, we recommend the Foreign Minister discuss Taiwan—not the Communique so much, but the subject, because we want quite frankly that the archives of our State Department have your position.

The American folklore has said that the Chinese are complicated and we are simple, but when I hear myself talk I think we are complicated and you are much easier. We should schedule the meetings of the Foreign Minister and our staffs for the same time that you meet with the President so that both parties are occupied. And after these issues are discussed we can then decide—the President and you—what other subjects should be given to the Foreign Minister. This is, of course, subject to your approval.

If you would in the Plenary Session suggest that perhaps they should begin discussing all these issues we will agree, and we have already told the Secretary of State that we will do this so there would be no difficulty and embarrassment.

The second problem we have is that of the Joint Communique. We have to work out a schedule of how to complete it. I am responsible for it on our side, and the President wants to be involved only if a very great issue of principle arises. As I understand it there are the following issues we still have to discuss. We have to change the language on South Asia because it is now no longer relevant. We told you we would bring some new language on exchanges and trade, and we have brought that. We have to have some more discussion on Taiwan, not that we want to change our agreement on what I told you privately but on the issue of how we can present something publicly. General Haig already told you that. He left some language with you.

Chou: General Haig brought back our replies.

Kissinger: You said you would consider it.

Chou: We said we did not agree with the wording brought by General Haig. We still have our wording, but we said that we would consider the matter.

Kissinger: That's exactly right. We don't think you agreed to General Haig's wording. We recognize we need more discussions and need to approach it in a more constructive spirit. But we have to set some time when we can do it, and therefore I have raised it as one of the agenda items.

I have brought with me two items I want to discuss with you. One, I have a list of all the negotiations we are conducting with the Soviet Union of which we simply want to inform you, or whomever you designate, so that you know of them for the purpose of the Moscow trip so that no misunderstanding will arise between us. This is no request for reciprocity. And secondly, we are prepared if you wish, and I have the information here, to give you on a very restricted basis some information on dangers we both confront in the military field in order that we both will understand any situations like the India/Pakistan situation if it should arise again.

Both of these items will take time and I mention it only so we can schedule it properly.

The only other item I have—and I have already mentioned it to the Vice Minister—usually we have somebody in the car with the President when he travels with somebody like yourself. In this case we would require only an interpreter. If you would be good enough to give me your notes so we will know what the President discussed. If we can also in the meetings with you and with the Chairman, we will not use our interpreters but will rely on your interpreters. We will tell the press that we have Mr. Holdridge there to check on your interpreter, and I apologize to your interpreter. It is only so our people won't say we put ourselves at your mercy—which we are doing.

Chou: No question about that.

Kissinger: One final point. We have exchanged some notes on Vietnam and this is not the time to discuss the circumstances, but I want the Prime Minister to know we are aware of the criticism to which the PRC is exposed. You can be sure we never send a communication to you without sending a similar one or identical one to your northern neighbor. If I can tell the Prime Minister informally, they have replied somewhat more gently to us lately than the Prime Minister (laughter).

Chou: So after the Plenary Session we will be divided into two groups. Would it not be better for the Foreign Minister and the Secretary of State to start discussing the overall international situation, and how to promote Sino-American relations, and how to get relaxation of tensions in the Far East, and to have that as a start and then to go on into specific matters? If we went into specific matters first it appears rather sudden.

Kissinger: We would prefer, Mr. Prime Minister, if you agree, if we could first have the general discussion with the President so that we could instruct our Secretary on the basis of these discussions, and this is why we took the liberty of suggesting first to discuss concrete issues. Logically you are correct, but bureaucratically it would be easier for us the other way. But the President is prepared to discuss normalization issues first, and then when he has discussed it with you, we can instruct the Secretary of State to discuss it with the Foreign Minister on the third day.

Chou: That means it is alright for the discussion by the Secretary of State and Foreign Minister to be held one day after the meeting with the Prime Minister and you.

Kissinger: We would prefer if they could talk tomorrow about these concrete issues and then the next day they can talk about the normalization issue. We will not release to the press what the subjects are so there will be no embarrassment.

Chou: When you say you won't release anything to the press, you mean on the talks with the Secretary of State and the Foreign Minister?

Kissinger: That's right.

Chou: That would be better.

Kissinger: All we will say is that they met for three or two hours. Our proposal is to tell the press at the end of each day that we met for X number of hours and give them no topic.

Chou: The Plenary Session this afternoon cannot be too long.

Kissinger: If the Prime Minister agrees, when he and the President meet, they can start with normalization issue and then go on to another issue. Then the Foreign Minister and the Secretary of State can take it up the next day. We will not say anything to the press.

Chou: Another way is if your President is not going to go on a sightseeing tour tomorrow morning we can have the Secretary of State and other officials of the State Department go on a sightseeing tour tomorrow morning, and the Secretary of State and the Foreign Minister can have discussions tomorrow afternoon. And then would it be possible for us to have discussions with your President both tomorrow morning and afternoon. When I say morning, I mean after 10:00.

Kissinger: I have to check because he had planned to do governmental work on Washington tomorrow morning.

Chou: In that case we can also have the discussion in the afternoon only, and then have it held for a longer period of time.

Kissinger: That's alright.

Chou: Then as for the drafting of the Joint Communique, our side will be Ch'iao Kuan-hua and Chang Wen-chin. And I still have to accompany the President on the other meetings.

Kissinger: Then I will work out with them when we should meet. I can meet with them tomorrow morning.

Chou: Yes, both of them can meet with you tomorrow morning.

Kissinger: Just so he will treat me better than he treats Mr. Malik.

Chou: I cannot guarantee that.

Kissinger: Then I nominate Mr. Lord. On this special information —

Chou: We can consider that after tomorrow, because your President will be still working on his Washington business. You can discuss it with Mr. Ch'iao. He will not speak to you like he speaks to Mr. Malik.

Kissinger: I will remind him of that.

Chou: And then I heard your President planned to sign some Labor Act. We don't know the content—we don't know whether we need take part in it.

Kissinger No, it is domestic.

Chou: You wanted to send a fountain pen to us.

Kissinger: We will send you a fountain pen from another time. This has nothing to do with you. It is a Labor Act—this is something that has to be done at a certain time, and you are not to be involved in any way in any publicity.

Chou: Otherwise we will be interfering in your internal affairs.

Kissinger: We had already cancelled sending the pen. The signing has to take place—or do you object?

Chou: We don't care at all. You may use the Guest House.

Kissinger: We will sign it in your Guest House.

Chou: There will be only American correspondents that will cover it.

Kissinger: Right. And we will make it perfectly clear. Quite frankly, it is the only piece of legislation we have at this moment, and it was important for the President to show that the Government could be functioning even when he was away. It is also a way to show the citizens that he was running the Government when he was away. We will not involve you in any way.

Chou: And then on the question of the South Asian subcontinent and the part relevant to our Joint Communique—what do you know? We will be most grateful.

Kissinger: As I told you in the message I sent to you, the President will also want to discuss it with you because we have the problem of recognition of Bangladesh, and the problem of future relations with India, and we want to do it in a parallel direction with you—separately but parallel.

Chou: And we would like to know your views on these matters.

Kissinger: I will discuss it with Mr. Ch'iao. When will we meet tomorrow -11:00 or 10:00?

Chou: 10:00.

Kissinger: Where? Here?

Chou: Meet here.

Now I will tell you what we plan to publish about the meeting with the President and Chairman Mao. “Chairman Mao Tse-tung meets President Nixon February 21, New China News Agency.” “Chairman Mao Tse-tung met with the President of the United States of America, Richard M. Nixon, this afternoon in Chungnan hai and held serious and frank discussions with him. Taking part on the American side were Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, (Chou asked if Dr. Kissinger wanted the 'A' included in his name, and Dr. Kissinger said why not, it would please his father.) Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, and Winston Lord, Senior Assistant to Dr. Kissinger….”

Kissinger: We better leave him out. We will leave it open.

Chou: We have it. If you don't plan to use it, let us know. (Back to the press release) “Taking part on the Chinese side were Premier of the State Council Chou En-lai, Deputy Director of the Protocol of the Foreign Ministry Wang Hai-jung and the interpreter Tang Wen-shen.” It is our practice to include in these the names of our working people because if there was no interpreter it would be impossible to do this work.

Kissinger: I think it is better not to list Mr. Lord for reasons which are too complex.

Chou: Okay. But you would report this to the President that Mr. Lord will not be mentioned.

Kissinger: Yes, he will not object. Do you mind if in our release we just said the President because in America?

Chou: You can change the sentence structure—the position of the wording.

Kissinger: I will discuss it with our people. If we can do this, I think they would prefer this.

Chou: No problem on our side.

Kissinger: They will ask us how long they met.

Chou: One hour.

Kissinger: They will ask us, will they meet again?

Chou: No reply. It has not been set.

Kissinger: Not when, but whether.

Chou: It is his health you see, because he is convalescing. Chairman Mao told you and the President that he had a problem with bronchitis for a month, and he is convalescing.

Kissinger: The problem is not having been present. They will be very anxious if they don't get one picture with the President. I mean if we can say there will be another meeting in which they can get their picture it will ease our position.

Chou: But if we cannot guarantee that and it cannot take place…. But at the same time it will not be good to tell them the Chairman has suffered from bronchitis.

Kissinger: I did not know we were going to see the Chairman today. I was going to raise this problem with you. It is not right for the President to wait until he is summoned to see the Chairman. This is not in conformity with the dignity of the President, and therefore if we say we don't know, they will say why don't we know? I am just telling you what the press will ask us. How should we answer them?

Chou: Well maybe you can say that the next meeting has not yet been determined.

Kissinger: That would be fine.

Chou: As for our press release, why don't we have it translated and give you a copy of it and also the pictures?

Kissinger: Can we use the text you gave us? I will, have the secretary read it back to you. (Secretary reads text.) Do you mind if we say at his residence?

Chou: Yes, you may say Chairman Mao's residence.

Kissinger: We can say the President met with Chairman Mao Tse-tung this afternoon at his residence. And say they had a serious and frank discussion.

Chou: When do you think it is better to release it?

Kissinger: It would be best to release it as quickly as possible to explain why the Plenary Session was delayed. And then we will release the pictures as soon as we have them.

Chou: Anyway, the pictures will not be published before you publish them. The newsreel will not be published before you publish it.

Kissinger: May Mrs. Gwyer type it? Should we say decisions were taken by majority vote?

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum, presumably Lord was the drafter. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2. All brackets and ellipses are in the source text.

90. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 22, 1972, 10:05-11:55 a.m. 90. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 22, 1972, 10:05-11:55 a.m.1

Beijing, February 22, 1972, 10:05-11:55 a.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger,

Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs John H. Holdridge,

NSC Staff Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Ch'iao Kuan-hua, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Chang Wen-chin, Director of Western Europe, North American, and Australasian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chao Chi-hua, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chi Chao-chu, Interpreter

Two Notetakers

DATE & TIME: Tuesday, February 22, 1972 - 10:05-11:55a.m.

PLACE: Guest House, Villa 2, Peking

Kissinger: Here is a letter from Governor Rockefeller to the Prime Minister.

How should we proceed, Mr. Vice Foreign Minister?

Ch'iao: If it is not lacking in courtesy, our idea is to first hear your ideas and suggestions.

Kissinger: May I suggest that we do the following? We are discussing the Communique now. May I suggest that we go through it page by page to see whether there is any part of it that either side wants to change, and then we can go back to those parts.

Ch'iao: Well there are actually two ways to go about it. One way would be to first bring out those principal questions, that is to say some parts of the Communique already have been changed—for instance the question of the South Asian subcontinent, and then there is the question of the crucial question which Dr. Kissinger talked with the Prime Minister about yesterday and you can offer us your thinking on that. And then the other way is as you suggested, the methodical way from the beginning to the end. We want to hear your views on that.

Kissinger: We have a number of which may be minor suggestions as we go through it, and then we have, I think, the major question of South Asia, simply because it is now outdated, but I think we will agree that it will not take us long. What you call the crucial question is very difficult. My deputy General Haig had told the Prime Minister that we would come with some additional suggestions on exchanges and trade which we could also use, which I don't think are questions of principle but more a form of expression. We have a few editorial suggestions for changing the word “would” to “will” in a few places—for instance where we say commitments “would be honored” we would like to say “will be honored.” It is purely grammatical, and I don't think it makes any difference. And we have one suggestion how to underline—as I understand this Communique—we are saying that People's Republic and the U.S. will not resort to the use or threat of force with each other. This is in the Communique now, and we have one suggestion for your consideration of how we could emphasize this a little more, but that is again not an issue of principle.

Ch'iao: We agree to your suggested procedure, that is we can go through the entire Communique page by page, and this is only a preliminary review, because the talks between the leaders have not started, and these are matters which can be agreed to.

Kissinger: We should talk about Taiwan today, too.

Ch'iao: Our side may also have some ideas and some changes, and some of them may be minor suggestions. We will mention them later.

Kissinger: Let me give you our suggestions. Would you like a copy so that you have the same page number that we have? This should be the same text as yours, but I can never guarantee the typing.

Ch'iao: It does not matter, if there is an error on our part.

Kissinger: We don't have to bother with the first page. Then on the second page of this we would like to suggest—this is a purely rhetorical device—to substitute for the first paragraph a sentence from the last paragraph of the Communique—this paragraph in English is not very strong—to say “the two sides were gratified to have this opportunity after so many years without contact to present their points of view.”

Ch'iao: Then on “variety of issues” … You prefer to leave it out.

Kissinger: If you want to keep that paragraph, this is not a big issue. It is just to begin the Communique with a slightly stronger sentence. “During our talks”—this sentence can be either kept or dropped. We prefer to leave it out but only for the English. If it means a lot to you we can keep it in. Maybe if we dropped “during their talks …”

Ch'iao: After that “the leaders of China and the US”—we will consider it.

Kissinger: It is only to begin it with a stronger sentence.

Ch'iao: I approve of that. From our side we think it is better to maintain these words—“important changes taking place.”

Kissinger: We can tighten up the sentence a little bit. We can just say “expounded their respective views” but “views” and “positions” in English just repeats itself.

Ch'iao: Would you kindly prepare a text as a preliminary exchange?

Kissinger: Then no comments on the rest except you will want to change the last three lines on page 3 about India/Pakistan.

Ch'iao: We plan to bring it up to date.

Kissinger: No change in the US position.

Ch'iao: On the question of South Asia—on the Chinese side, in addition to the necessary change in South Asia, we have some minor changes on some other parts of our statement—not substantive.

Kissinger: We may do this, too, but I won't discuss it now. On the US side, on pages 3 and 4 of the text you have that I gave you, the only change we made is to put everything in the past tense and conditional into the present tense—on page 4 put everything in the present tense. For instance “envisages” rather than “envisaged.”

Ch'iao: Where it says “would be honored”—“will be honored.”

Kissinger: Yes. It means the same thing. The reason that we had “would” was because it referred back to “stated, “and it is the correct English, but the word “stated” is four lines back and people forget. It changes no meaning. If my assistant had been from Harvard rather than Yale it would have been right the first time. You don't know what I have to put up with, Mr. Vice Foreign Minister.

Ch'iao: If you bully him like that, I will have objections about you.

Kissinger: The only way I keep my staff is that they hope they will be around when I collapse. They have invested so much time in being bullied now that they have to be present when I have a breakdown (laughter).

No other change on page 4 of our text except on South Asia. One page 5 we have a suggestion on how we could emphasize this point of renouncing force, and we would put it in the middle here. The underlined part is new. It really repeats what we are saying on top of the page. It really repeats it.

Ch'iao: We will consider that.

Kissinger: The Taiwan section we will discuss, so I will skip this. On the next paragraph, alter the Taiwan section, we promised we would bring you some language which we would like to submit. This is just for discussion.

Ch'iao: On this matter we will further discuss it and study it. It is a question of wording, and at the same time involves matters of substance. Normalization should be handled on the basis of normalization of state relations.

Kissinger: That's the issue that the Prime Minister and the President discussed yesterday which should come first. Perhaps we should not use the word “normalization” at all here. Let me suggest, in order not to have that word an issue, let us leave it out.

Ch'iao: We will study that.

Kissinger: We are here now just discussing it—you usually come back with a better draft than we do.

Ch'iao: You have praised us on so many occasions, you have overpraised us. It is a pity that there are no Yale graduates. I put the issue in a very simple way, but my colleagues put it in a very complicated way.

Lord: He must have gone to Harvard (laughter).

Kissinger: One more suggestion, and then I am finished. In the last paragraph we would like to add one sentence. We would like to say “the two sides agreed that they will stay in contact through various channels,” and then we would say, “In addition the U.S. Government will send a senior representative to Peking from time to time” instead of “at irregular intervals.” The reason we would like to add this, Mr. Vice Foreign Minister, is because as it is now written it gives the impression that the only way we will be in contact with you is to send a senior representative to Peking, and that gives the wrong impression to our people. And it does not reflect the reality of the situation.

These are all the changes we have except for the issue of Taiwan.

Ch'iao: Just out of asking, what is your suggestion about South Asia.

Kissinger: We do not have a very good text yet because we want to discuss it with you. What we will say is that we support the right of the people of South Asia to determine their future without the threat or use of military force, and that we believe that their future should not be subjected to interference from countries outside of the region—something like that. We have not phrased it yet, but that is the thought we are expressing.

Ch'iao: We are very grateful to you for telling us your preliminary thinking. And we also would like to tell you our preliminary thinking on this matter. We consider this to be a realistic question. The Indian armed forces are still occupying East Pakistan. The resolution passed by the UN Security Council and the UN General Assembly is not being implemented, so there is a question of the withdrawal of the Indian armed forces, so we are considering reflecting this thinking in our statement. This is only for some preliminary ideas, and we have not yet really worked out a phrase. We will still have further exchanges on this matter.

Kissinger: I think the President and the Prime Minister will want to discuss this matter.

Ch'iao: What you have in writing you have already given us.

Kissinger: That's right. I have now given you all our suggestions except for the crucial issue.

Ch'iao: We will, of course, study all these views. Our preliminary impression of these changes suggested is to make it stronger, and in some places it is merely a matter of wording, and in some places it involves the matter of substance. We will study these and give you our views.

Kissinger: Mr. Vice Foreign Minister, how should we discuss the issue of Taiwan which is probably the crucial issue in the Communique?

Ch'iao: Dr. Kissinger asked General Haig to bring wording on this crucial matter during General Haig's visit, and at that time we already made clear our position which is that we do not approve of that suggestion. If you have any new proposals to make on that matter it would facilitate our further consideration of this matter.

Kissinger: You have no counter-proposal?

Ch'iao: Our position remains as follows—that is, the proposal for this Taiwan question which we put forward and asked Dr. Kissinger to bring back is the wording we consider to be necessary. The thinking reflected in that we consider cannot be deducted—the ideas. We consider that our proposal. In that proposal we already had taken into account your various difficulties. So, frankly, speaking, we are persisting on that proposal.

Kissinger: Let me explain again what our difficulties are. I think we have a fair understanding of the direction in which we want to go. I think we realize that both of our countries are engaged in an extremely delicate process. We are breaking our established patterns and really changing the fact of international relations. Each of us no doubt has domestic considerations which affect the freedom of maneuver we have on specific matters. But I can only speak for ourselves; this is the case with us. And we are approaching this with the attitude of moving from contact to cooperation.

We are confronting also, as General Haig pointed out to you, a very complex domestic situation. The right and the traditional China Lobby is not itself very strong anymore, but it still is more powerful than it looks. But if it can ally itself with the pro-Soviet left and with the other forces that are pro-Japan, pro-India, it can create tremendous pressure against the President's present course. You must have noticed that during January a quite systematic anti-Chinese campaign developed in the American press, based on the India policy, and broke this in part through a step which you don't approve—the speech on our negotiations on Vietnam.

So I simply want to explain to you what we confront, and we quite frankly want to avoid a situation where the President comes back from Peking and is accused of having been taken in, and therefore will not be able to do the things which he has undertaken to do and which he will do.

So what we are looking for on Taiwan—and we recognize it is very difficult, and I don't think your formulation was reasonable in the abstract—but we are looking for something that indicates a general direction without creating a tremendous domestic furor. We will carry out all the commitments we have made, and indeed we have already carried out some things such as not basing nuclear weapons on Taiwan and storage, which is something which we did unilaterally. So we are not talking about substance—we are talking about language.

Let me give you an example of what our problem is. I am sorry I am talking at such great length. Harvard professors always speak 50 minutes.

Ch'iao: So long as it does not exceed 50 minutes. And Yale professors …

Lord: We are much more concise.

Kissinger: Do you need a junior assistant in your foreign office (laughter)? I have always dealt with you with sincerity and honesty, and let me tell you what we did when we came back from our trip the last time. We did not show the Communique or the existence of the Communique to anybody, but we did send the two paragraphs on Taiwan to the Secretary of State. Those are the only two paragraphs he has seen. He wrote a memo to the President with his suggestion of what these two paragraphs should contain, and when you see them you will realize that what we sent you with General Haig is relatively mild compared to what the State Department has recommended to the President.

And this is, of course, a rather sensitive matter to show you an internal document, but I have never seen any Anderson papers in the Peking Daily (laughter). So if I could give this to you unofficially and confidentially for the Prime Minister you might want to take a look at it. Of course, if you accept them, our problems will be finished. Much of this is—the underlined part is what he added.

Ch'iao: I am grateful to Dr. Kissinger for your confidence in us. I can guarantee you there are no Anderson papers. This is just an expression of our sincerity.

Kissinger: I am not tabling this as a proposal even though you see this is what I am supposed to do. I want to show you we are making a sincere effort. But if we separate ourselves too far we will have another set of Anderson papers, and we will be very vulnerable to criticism that will limit our ability to do what we have undertaken to do.

Ch'iao: Please go on.

Kissinger: This is our problem, and I have actually not brought a text other than the one that General Haig gave you. We are willing to modify that text. I am a bad negotiator by telling you we are willing to modify. But I thought we should have a preliminary discussion before we attempt to play with it. If I could have your objections… what is it you object to most in that text?… so that we could make an effort.

Ch'iao: I am thankful to you for telling us in such a frank way the difficulties you are facing. And we, too, would like to very frankly tell you our views on this matter. In speaking generally from both your side and our side, we look upon this as a major step, particularly from your side and from the side of your President. It is a major action, and as the President and Chou said yesterday, from our point of view we appreciate this action.

Kissinger: Which action?

Ch'iao: The visit from your President. We look at it as an event which is unprecedented from our two countries.

As for the specific matters, you, of course, are more clear about the entire process than I am. I am not as well acquainted as Mr. Chang, who took part in all these discussions. As for me, it is my first contact with this, and I would want to be very frank with you in our discussions and I hope you will not look upon frankness as being crude.

Kissinger: That adjective has never crossed my mind with the Chinese.

Chiao: Well, but you said yesterday you hoped I will not use the methods I used against Malik with you.

Kissinger: Yes, but not because they were crude, but because they were very subtle.

Ch'iao: But actually I am a very bad negotiator and worse than you.

Kissinger: I thought the Vice Foreign Minister treated Mr. Malik like a bullfighter treats a bull - you had him charging all the time.

Ch'iao: He had too great self-confidence and arrogance.

So in a very frank way I would say my ideas in this matter. In the draft which Dr. Kissinger put forward at the end of the interim visit, you mentioned still in that draft “the U.S. accepts the ultimate objective of withdrawal of forces on Taiwan.” And why is it that we do not agree to that suggested version? We did not agree to it because Dr. Kissinger said we must be clear on our direction, but we must also be clear about our final objective. If we don't have that objective in mind where will be the direction?

So, when I say I want to be frank I mean to say that the proposal put forth by General Haig was a backward step in comparison to the proposal you put forward in the interim. You say you have your difficulties, but you can't say we don't have our difficulties. And in our wording we put it—that is in the reply to you on the question of our side also having difficulties—we put it in a very mild way, because you should know, whether it would be a question of substance or whether it would be a question of how to express it in words, the Chinese people have very strong feelings.

While I was in New York, in many of the speeches made by your side—a number of your speeches—it was always emphasized that your treaty obligations with Chiang Kai-shek remain valid, but you see in our version we do not mention the question of this so-called treaty. And so our Chinese people would also ask us, why is it it was not mentioned? So we can say that on our version it is already the lowest key version which we could put forward.

Now, where are the differences? The difference is that in your version you only talk about a reduction of forces without mentioning the final objective. This is a point which we cannot agree. And then as to why you are going to do this, it is not clearly stated in the version submitted by General Haig.

Kissinger: Can you explain that?

Ch'iao: Let me finish. Since you are to acknowledge that the Taiwan question is a question of the Chinese people themselves, then the logical and inescapeable conclusion would be the final and complete withdrawal of American forces.

So, there are two points. One is that this final objective must be made clear, that is, complete withdrawal, and that is not made clear in this proposal, and in that way it is not possible for us to make an accounting to our people.

Kissinger: The second point?

Ch'iao: And the second point is that in the version submitted by General Haig it was not made clear as to why there will be this progressive reduction. The logical and the inevitable reason for that should be—as you said—because you acknowledge all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Strait maintain there is one China—that should be the reason for the complete and final withdrawal. But in General Haig's version there is no connection between the two, and it appears as if Taiwan is merely a tool of the U.S.

We do understand you do have your difficulties. It is not that we do not understand. But you should also consider the fact that for our side we have made great efforts.

Kissinger: I am not criticizing the good faith, the seriousness, and fairness of your side. We have an objective problem here which concerns less the actions than the words. We are not attempting to take away from what I said to the Prime Minister, and what the President will reaffirm to the Prime Minister, but we are trying to find a formulation that maintains our authority to continue on this road.

Ch'iao: On the other aspect, and also very frankly, we say that you did have your difficulties, but that at the same time you were able to overcome your difficulties with people like JACK ANDERSON and company. They cannot play such a high and mighty role. People came to your support.

Kissinger: It is not Anderson. It is that on this issue many of the President's oldest supporters have very passionate feelings, and that they ally themselves with pro-Soviet elements. They may try to use our Communique as an example to discredit everything. Anderson we can handle.

Ch'iao: I think I have already made clear our reasons why we are not able to agree either to the version Dr. Kissinger put forward in the interim visit or the version put forward by General Haig. To put it in a nutshell, we are persisting in the substantive thing which I have already elaborated. As for specific wording, however, for my side we will be willing to consider that.

Kissinger: My Yale colleague gave you our last copy so you know more about it than I do. Let me ask it in an informal way—is it possible for you to state that you want to assert your sovereignty of Taiwan by peaceful means and not military means?

Ch'iao: Frankly speaking, we cannot agree to that because that is a fundamental violation of our principle—that it is an internal affair. It is not possible for us to agree to have such a formulation.

Kissinger: I have not put it forward for that reason.

Ch'iao: No misunderstanding.

Kissinger: I thought this would be your position.

Ch'iao: Of course, you know we have been talking about this for many years—16 years.

Kissinger: The dilemma we face is that, while your formulation is not unjust, it is for this year impossible for us to say this. And therefore we have a question how to proceed. That's really our problem. We are not debating the actions—we are now debating the words, as I said before.

Ch'iao: Today is a preliminary discussion. And then you also raise some other questions. I will study these. And then there is this crucial question about Taiwan. You look upon it as a question of expression. As we see it, it also concerns substance.

For instance, the President said neither the Chinese nor the US had territorial designs against the other, and so our people will then ask us since that is the case, how is it you cannot agree to a final, complete withdrawal of your forces from Taiwan? Because you know all our people will be reading the speech made by your President yesterday. And in our version we merely put forward the objective—there is no time limit and there are no other considerations which I have mentioned. No mention of the treaty. We know, of course, your difficulties in having to repeat that.

Our people constantly ask, and so this matter, I believe, the leaders of the two governments will continue to discuss.

Kissinger: The difficulty is that the American Congress lacks your subtly, and the American press lacks your goodwill. They do not understand the absence of a reference on your part to the treaty, nor that there is no time limit set on the withdrawal.

But let me understand again. Your two major objections are the absence of the statement of the ultimate objective, and the seemingly conditional formulation of the withdrawal which makes it appear as if Taiwan is held for ransom by us.

Ch'iao: The ultimate objective of complete withdrawal. To make even more clear our objectives: on the first question of wording but which also involves substance, that is in our version it says “it hopes that a settlement on the Taiwan question… ”, whereas in General Haig's version it says “reaffirms its abiding interest.” And there is “an abiding interest,” where it says “it hopes,” and there is “an abiding interest …. “ “Consistent with this position”—the “position” means the position of the Chinese on either side of the Straits—“that there is but one China.” This is not mentioned in your version. But on your side, on the contrary, it is not linked up with that position, but linked up with reduction of “tensions in the area” which makes people think of Southeast Asia, China, etc. It makes it appear that Taiwan, although it is Chinese territory, that it is being used as a base by the U.S., and that doesn't conform to the position of the U.S. as stated before in the Communique. And certainly it does not conform to our position.

And then the third point is that we mentioned “the U.S. will progressively reduce and finally withdraw U.S. forces from Taiwan,” whereas in General Haig's version it says “as tensions diminish…”

Kissinger: Okay. I understand. We have a difficult problem.

Ch'iao: That is so.

Kissinger: And we understand your concern. I think we fundamentally agree that this is a problem which we both hope will be solved, and you have shown restraint in connection with it. But we have necessities which are partly self-inflicted, but which nevertheless, particularly this year, are very great.

Let me see whether I can do something to the version General Haig gave you to take account of as many of your concerns as is bearable to us. And maybe we can give you something after the cultural event tonight. Do you have the Prime Minister's bad habits?

Ch'iao: The only thing is I smoke as well.

Kissinger All right, shall we meet here after the performance tonight? Or rather wait for the translation.

Ch'iao: I think we will work it this way, to speed up the process. If you can find the time to give us a written version of your thinking, because we too need some time to study it, and our purpose is common. Both of us want to find a way out. The Premier meets with the President, so there will not be much time—so if you can give us something in writing.

Kissinger: Should I meet someone here tonight just for ten minutes? We will just give you the paper.

Ch'iao: Yes.

Kissinger: May I raise one more little quick question? Tomorrow night we shall meet, and we shall give you what negotiations we are conducting prior to our meeting in Moscow, which will take a little longer. There are details and schedules as I told the Prime Minister yesterday. The President has asked me to give you some information of a more sensitive nature on the dangers we think we both face. So, it might be that you might want to have somebody here who understands some of the military issues involves so that we can explain it to him. It is entirely up to you. I think it would be more beneficial to your side to have somebody here with technological experience for me to give this information to. It is entirely up to you.

Ch'iao: We will study that.

Kissinger: We do it so that in any future crisis we both know militarily what the problem is, such as that which confronted on the subcontinent.

Ch'iao: Good. Then when shall we meet tomorrow morning?

Kissinger: 10:00. So we will meet briefly tonight after the cultural performance, and then again tomorrow at 10:00 a.m.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum, presumably drafted by Lord. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

91. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 22, 1972, 2 p.m. 91. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 22, 1972, 2 p.m.1

Beijing, February 22, 1972, 2 p.m.

Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: February 22, 1972

TIME: 2:00 p.m.

SUBJECT:

Counterpart Meetings Between the Secretary of State and the Foreign Minister of the People's Republic of China - I

PARTICIPANTS:

Chi P'eng-fei - Foreign Minister

Hsiung Hsiang-hui - Secretary to the Premier (Foreign Affairs)

Wang Chen - Deputy Director, Information Department

Ch'ien Ta-yung - Deputy Director, West European, American and Australasian Affairs

Li Tsung-ying - Leading Member, Research Group

Ting Yuan-hung - Member, Delegation to the UNGA

SHEN JO-YUN - Interpreter

Hu Chuan-chung - Interpreter

Hu Fang Hsien - Stenographer

William P. Rogers - Secretary of State

Marshall Green - Assistant Secretary of State - EA

Ron Ziegler - Press Secretary to the President

John Scali - Special Consultant to the President

Alfred le S. Jenkins - Director for Asian Communist Affairs - EA

Nicholas Platt - Assistant to the Secretary Charles W. Freeman, Jr. - Interpreter

PLACE: Sinkiang Room, Great Hall of the People, Peking, PRC

COPIES TO: S S/S U EA J

White House - Dr. Kissinger

After an initial exchange of greetings, the Secretary opened the meeting by thanking the Chinese for the graciousness of their welcome. One has to experience Chinese hospitality to understand how well deserved is their world-wide reputation in this regard. It was also now clear to him why the Chinese and American people had such a high regard for each other.

The talks held between Chairman Mao and President Nixon have set the stage for our talks, the Secretary continued. He hoped that the talks could reflect the favorable attitudes of the two peoples for each other. The history of the last 20 years have, he liked to think, been an aberration and not the norm. It was time that we returned to the norm.

Expressing a personal note, the Secretary told the Foreign Minister that everyone on the American side of the table had long felt the need for better relations with the People's Republic of China (PRC). Of course differences would remain, but the purpose of the talks was to find common ground and make what progress we could. As he had told the Foreign Minister on the way from the airport, the United States is prepared to proceed in any way the Chinese see fit, and at a pace of their choosing. We recognize that the dramatic events we are involved in create practical political problems for both of us. The U.S. is prepared to take these problems into account and accommodate the Chinese standpoint in the actions we take.

It is important, the Secretary continued, to develop a spirit of trust. We are prepared to be both candid and discreet, disclosing only the information about the talks upon which both sides agree. Hoping that both sides could develop procedures for discussing questions informally and tentatively without treating each idea as a firm proposal. The Secretary closed by asking the Chinese how they wished to proceed.

Foreign Minister Chi responded by welcoming the Secretary and his delegation and expressing pleasure at the opportunity to exchange views. The task for the counterpart talks, as outlined at the plenary, had been to discuss the specifics of the normalization process. Matters of principle can be touched upon in the course of the specific discussions. As the Premier and President had said, our discussions should be a frank search for common ground which recognized the differences between us.

After an exchange on whether to discuss principles or specifics first, it was agreed that specifics would be the first topic.

The Secretary stated that we could not expect complete normalization. We are looking for an improvement in relations which will move us in the direction of normalization. “Normal” is a difficult word to define. We have relations with some 140 countries. We have problems with all of them. It is difficult to say with which ones of them our relations could be called “normal.” The question before us now is how we can achieve better relations, while recognizing that we have problems and that the difficulties will continue.

The most important gesture, the Secretary continued, has already been made. Your country has invited our President to visit. That beginning having been made, it is now important that we set up some arrangement which will provide for further communication and contacts. These are the points upon which we should begin our specific discussions.

There are a number of ways to achieve better communication and contacts. Before discussing these, the Secretary asked whether the Foreign Minister agreed that this is the topic which should be discussed first.

The Foreign Minister responded that exchanges between peoples were a good way of improving contacts, and that in the absence of diplomatic relations it would be better to concentrate on this means. To the Chinese, normalization means establishment of diplomatic relations. Since we have none, our relations are not normal. We believe that we can take some gradual steps to promote normalization. In the process prior to normalization and the establishment of diplomatic relations we prefer to stick to improvement of people-to-people contacts. The Governments should assist in the process of improving people-to-people contacts, the Foreign Minister concluded.

The Secretary agreed that an improvement in people-to-people contacts was a step towards normalization, and that the United States was prepared to move as fast as the PRC wished in facilitating exchanges. At the same time he recognized that more people-to-people contacts will involve increased government action. Let us start on the principle of increased people-to-people contacts, while recognizing that we will have to improve governmental communications and contacts at the same time.

The Foreign Minister responded that this is why he had said it was necessary for governments to provide support so that people-to-people relations may develop.

At this point the Foreign Minister said he understood that there was a fingerprinting requirement for some people traveling to the United States. After consulting with the U.S. delegation, the Secretary replied that he believed the requirement no longer existed, but he would look into it. (Mr. Platt was sent to phone Washington.)

The Foreign Minister observed that fingerprinting was a sensitive subject in China, because in the old days landlords required the fingerprint of their tenants on feudal agreements.

(Mr. Platt returned and reported that there is no longer any fingerprinting requirement.)

The Foreign Minister asked if the Secretary had any suggestions on the means of improving communications.

The Seretary responded that we were flexible on this point, but thinks it would be helpful if we had direct communications between the governments and personnel to facilitate contacts. It did not matter how it was done or the labels applied, e.g., trade office or interest section, as long as we can agree on the principle. We will implement it in any way the PRC wishes in order to avoid impairing the PRC's status. What is important is that there be a few people in the U.S. and in Peking to take care of the practical problems of communication. (At this point Hsiung Hsiang-hui got up and left the room for a moment.)

Mr. Platt's experience just now in calling Washington is a clear case in point the Secretary continued. Through good communications, we were able to clear up instantly a misunderstanding. The U.S., the Secretary continued, has good relations with Algeria without formal diplomatic ties. In the case of Japan, the PRC has worked out a channel of communication through trade offices.

The Foreign Minister responded that this was a question we should mark for further study. We should try to work out some way to improve contacts and communication. However, the Taiwan question does present problems. It does not matter much if you have an organization in our country, but we can't have one in yours, because there is a Chiang Kai-shek embassy in Washington. Japan is a different case. There, we have only a non-governmental trade organization.

The Secretary asked why the U.S. couldn't have a non-governmental trade organization in Peking.

Foreign Minister Chi replied that the Taiwan question is central to our relationship. We may talk about exchanges and contacts, but we always get back to Taiwan.

Hsiung Hsiang-hui interjected that these questions had been discussed during previous trips with Mr. Jenkins and Mr. Ziegler. The problem of the Taiwan table tennis team was a case in point. Last year the U.S. table tennis team visited China, and the PRC was all set to reciprocate. All of a sudden in August the Chinese heard that a Taiwan table tennis team was touring eight U.S. cities. Where did they get the visas?

The Secretary told Mr. Hsiung that he got the point and would do everything possible to avoid embarrassment in the future. He explained that under our system travel to and from the U.S. is made as easy as possible, and that a case such as that of the Taiwan table tennis team might not, and in this instance certainly did not come to his attention. (Mr. Green interjected that the incident was an error.) The incident, however, did not change the fact that better contacts were needed. On the contrary, it was just the kind of problem that could be avoided through better contact. The Secretary added that he was in telephone contact with a large number of foreign ministers who got in immediate touch with him when they had problems. While this might not be possible now with China, it was something to think about for the future.

The Foreign Minister replied that the question needed further study, but agreed to look for further ways.

Exchanges

The Foreign Minister asked for the Secretary's views on exchanges.

The Secretary replied that the U.S. table tennis team had been beaten so badly that we now acting under the principle of reciprocity had to find programs in which American teams could beat the Chinese.

The Foreign Minister laughed and said that the PRC believed in friendship first and competition second. In any case they would arrange to have the U.S. beaten by only a little bit.

The Secretary replied that that was not good enough.

In the course of the free flowing conversation that followed, the Chinese expressed interest in exchanges involving basketball, tennis, badminton, and gymnastics. The Secretary agreed that gymnastics would be popular in the U.S., and suggested touring tennis teams and clinics like the one run by Arthur Ashe in Africa last year. He also suggested that some young American swimmers might be a good contact point with Chinese youth.

The Secretary asked whether exchanges might be possible in the medical and scientific fields and Foreign Minister Chi replied, that Chinese doctors were interested in travelling to the U.S. Furthermore, the PRC was preparing to send delegates to the environmental conferences in Stockholm.

Trade

The Foreign Minister asked for the Secretary's views on trade.

The Secretary expressed the view that an expansion of trade, at whatever rate the PRC wished, would improve relations between the two countries. President Nixon had taken a number of steps to indicate our willingness to expand trade. The U.S. thinks of trade with the PRC both in terms of political and economic significance.

Speaking very frankly, the Secretary continued, the PRC has developed a remarkable self-reliance and does not really need trade with the U.S. For its part, the U.S. has developed its tremendous industrial potential and trade contacts all over the world and trade with China initially would have little economic significance. Thus trade, the Secretary repeated, probably will have minimal commercial effect. Rather, it is important as evidence of the improvement in our relationship. If the PRC decided that it did not wish trade with the U.S. that was acceptable too. The U.S. is prepared to build on the Presidentes and Chairman Mao's initiative by other means. While relaxed about it, the U.S. believes trade would nonetheless be of considerable mutual benefit, the Secretary concluded, and asked the Foreign Minister for his views.

The Foreign Minister said that the PRC's foreign trade was guided by the principles of equality and mutual benefit and the exchange of needed goods. PRC foreign trade volume was not large and depended upon domestic requirements. The PRC trades now with 120 countries, some of which have no diplomatic relations with it. The PRC would be willing to carry out a very limited amount of trade with the U.S. on a non-governmental basis.

The Secretary stated that U.S. businessmen like to compete. Where they think there is a market they will try to supply it. There is no way the U.S. Government can keep them from expressing their interest.

Foreign Minister Chi then raised the issue of Most Favored Nation status, saying that he understood the U.S. would allow trade but impose tariffs several fold by comparison with those imposed on the goods of trading partners like Hong Kong which enjoy Most Favored Nation status.

The Secretary said that many goods were under no tariff at all but he would check on the details of Most Favored Nation tariff rates and inform the Foreign Minister the next day. The important question was whether or not the PRC wished to increase trade with the U.S.

The Foreign Minister replied that the question of MFN treatment was of importance. The materials which the Chinese side had on U.S. trade reflected policies developed when the U.S. and the PRC were hostile. However, the PRC does not demand MFN treatment in order to expand trade relations on a limited basis.

The Secretary stated that U.S. tariff statutes were not aimed at China.

The Foreign Minister replied that a significant expansion of trade would require a change in the U.S statutes.

The Secretary answered that the U.S. could not simply change its laws. In any case, mutual benefit should rule. If the PRC can benefit from trade with the U.S. and vice versa, let us have it. If not, let's not. He did not wish to give the impression that the U.S. was pressing for trade.

The Foreign Minister told the Secretary that there were many corporations in the U.S. which were anxious for trade with the PRC and were pressing the Ministry of Foreign Trade. The government might be relaxed about trade, but the corporation clearly wanted it.

The Secretary replied that the U.S. Government had no control over private companies. They exist to do business, and their eagerness has nothing to do with the government. The Secretary then reiterated that the U.S. wanted trade, but that it was not essential to an improvement in U.S.-PRC relations. Experience in trading with communist countries had shown that they liked to trade with the United States. The Yugoslavians and the Romanians were constantly in touch with the U.S. on ways to increase trade.

The Foreign Minister stated that he was now clear on the U.S. position and felt that both sides understood each other better.

The Secretary replied that some trade experience would be required to eliminate the misunderstandings that were bound to crop up between communist and democratic trading partners.

The Foreign Minister stated that the PRC was prepared to issue invitations to a small number of companies to attend the Canton Fair this spring. The PRC has total control and the problem will be easy to tackle.

The Secretary expressed his pleasure at this, and offerred to consult on any problems that might arise with American companies or businessmen. American businessmen, the Secretary continued, are competitive, but they supply good products and keep their word.

The meeting ended with the Foreign Minister expressing a desire to exchange views on general questions at the next meeting.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 7 US/NIXON. Secret;Nodis; Homer. Drafted by Nicholas Platt and approved in S on February 28. The meeting was held in the Sinkiang Room, Great Hall of the People. The third, fourth, and fifth counterpart meetings are published as Documents 94, 101, and 107. Part II is Document 198, Foreign Relations, 1969-1972, volume XVII, China, 1969-1972.

92. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing February 23, 1972, 9:35 a.m.-12:34 p.m. 92. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing February 23, 1972, 9:35 a.m.-12:34 p.m.1

Beijing, February 23, 1972, 9:35 a.m.-12:34 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John H. Holdridge, NSC Staff

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Jonathan T. Howe, NSC Staff

Yeh Chien-ying, Vice Chairman of the Military Commission

Chiao Kuan-Hua, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Chang Wen-chin, Director of Western Europe, North American, and Australasian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Assistant to Yen Chien-ying

Chao Chi-hua, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chi Chao-chu, Interpreter

One Notetaker

DATE & TIME: Wednesday, February 23, 1972 - 9:35 a.m. - 12:34 p.m.

PLACE: Guest House, Villa 2, Peking

VM Chiao: This is the assistant to Marshall Yeh. You know about the other Chinese friends.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, I know about the others. Mr. Vice Foreign Minister, I have brought a suggestion on Taiwan. Should we put this aside to do the other thing first or which do you prefer?

VM Chiao: I would be happy if you would give it to me first, and then we can translate it.

Dr. Kissinger : I will give you this (copy at Tab A), and I want to explain to you what we attempted to do. It may not meet your full suggestions, but we wanted to do what we could in the light of your discussion yesterday. We have taken the version that General Haig brought to you and changed the word “abiding interest” to “position.” Where it says “it reaffirms its abiding interest,” we have said “it reaffirms its position.” And it added the phrase “through peaceful negotiations between the parties directly concerned,” to make clear that we don't consider ourselves a party to that negotiation. And we have substituted the word “removal” for “reduction”—“the progressive removal,” rather than “the progressive reduction.” And we have modified this phrase “as tensions decrease.”

I have just tried to explain to the Vice Foreign Minister the spirit with which we approached it, and why we did what we did. And I am certain—don't insist on it but I am certain—he will have a counter-suggestion once he has studied it.

VM Chiao: Thank you. After we have studied this matter then we will continue our discussions further.

Dr. Kissinger : I don't want to leave the wrong impression. I am, of course, delighted if he accepts it. I don't want to encourage him to reject it.

(Laughter)

VM Chiao: I only hope that it would be possible for us to accept it. I am only fearing that it may not be possible. That's just joking.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, of course. I have two sets of subjects to discuss, one concerning some military information which we wanted to pass on to you and secondly, a list of all the discussions that are going on with the Soviet Union in preparation for the summit and afterwards. Because my friend the Vice Chairman is here, I will perhaps start with the military issues if this is agreeable to you. I do this with apologies because I am not the expert on it, he is. I am a doctrinaire; he is a practitioner.

VC Yeh: Well, you are a military theorist.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, but not a practitioner. I have very complicated theories that can never be applied.

(Laughter)

Dr. Kissinger : May I give you, for a minute, the origin of why the President thought we should have this discussion. On December 10, I had a meeting with Ambassador Huang Hua, as the Vice Foreign Minister remembers, in which the Ambassador expressed the view that perhaps on the crisis in the Subcontinent we were not taking as strong a position as the People's Republic. And I told him that we would pursue a parallel course, and that we were going to make some preliminary military dispositions. On the morning of December 12, we received a message from your Mission that you wanted to see General Haig—you knew I was going to the Azores and therefore you asked for General Haig. We thought, and I will be honest with you, we thought you were calling to inform us that you might intervene militarily. I am explaining to you our thinking, not what you should have done. We, the President and I, then had a discussion on what we would do if you intervened, and if your northern neighbor then brought pressure on you. You should know that we decided that if you came under military attack yourself that we would take whatever measures were necessary to prevent it.

VM Chiao: You mean if we were under pressure or attack?

Dr. Kissinger : Both, You had not requested this, and we did not do this for you, but for ourselves. I mention this because it was a practical reality at this moment and not a theoretical issue. And we had already told you this on the 10th, but General Haig was instructed to reaffirm it if your message had been what we incorrectly thought it was. We then, however, as we were planning the practical side of this, did not know whether you knew all the details of the dangers you faced or whether you could tell us what would be most helpful to do if the greatest danger should happen. So the President asked me on, obviously, an extremely confidential basis to give you some of the information we possess and to tell you also that we are prepared, without reciprocity, to give you additional information if you request it.

VC Yeh: Thank you.

Dr. Kissinger : We are not… I am obviously not an intelligence expert, but we are willing, if you want us to, to establish a very confidential channel; or if you want to do it through me, if you ask additional questions to attempt to reply to them. Now, I repeat, we do this without any request for reciprocity, but with a request for complete discretion. I think the Vice Chairman speaks better English than he admits.

(Laughter)

VC Yeh: Well, the ability of our two sides to maintain secrecy has already been tested on several occasions.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

VC Yeh: We must first of all maintain confidence; only then is it possible to keep a secret.

Dr. Kissinger : I think we have taken big steps toward establishing confidence.

VC Yeh: On that you can rest assured.

Dr. Kissinger : Now, Mr. Vice Chairman, we have broken down this information by manpower and by various weapons. We have information on the following: Ground Forces, Tactical Aviation, Strategic Air Defenses, Strategic Bomber Forces, Strategic Rocket Forces and some characteristics of weapons with nuclear warheads that are capable of reaching you.

Let me begin with divisions. And we have a map of their approximate location here. In the Far East Military District… do you know the boundaries of these districts?

VC Yeh: Somewhat.

Dr. Kissinger : This is the Far East Military District (showing map)—it's this area.

VC Yeh: Up to Vladivostok.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes. There are up to 21 motorized rifle divisions; no less than 17, and they are building toward 21. The uncertainty is because they move the headquarters first and then they fill it out.

VC Yeh: May I ask some questions now?

Dr. Kissinger : Please. If I don't know the answer, I will get you an answer.

VC Yeh: These divisions, they are divided into infantry divisions, motorized divisions, and tank divisions?

Dr. Kissinger Yes, I will give you the tank divisions in a minute. The motorized rifle division has tanks also. It's not moving on foot. It's moving by truck and carrier, and it has a substantial number of tanks. But I cannot tell you how many tanks each of the motorized rifle divisions have. What I can give you first are the divisions ready to be used almost immediately; that is what I am giving you now. What I will then give you is what can be used in a very brief time, say one week; and then I will give you what can be used in one to three weeks.

In addition, in the Far East Military District there are two tank divisions. And the total number of tanks is between 4,300 and 5,000.

In the Trans-Baikal Military District—that's this one here (showing map)—there are eight motorized rifle divisions, and two tank divisions, and between 2,700 and 2,900 tanks.

In Mongolia - I don't have to show that to you on the map.

(Laughter)

…there are two motorized rifle divisions and one tank division and a total of 700 tanks.

In the Central Asian military district, which is here (showing map), there are six motorized rifle divisions, one tank division, and a total of 1,900 tanks.

So the total in these districts is some 43 divisions, in all four districts, and about between 9,600 and 10,500 tanks. In addition, in the Siberian military district, which is right behind Mongolia, and therefore available within less than a week, are three motorized rifle divisions and one tank division and 900 tanks. In the Turkestan military district—the Turkestan military district we consider a one-week reinforcement to the Central Asian military district—there are five motorized rifle divisions, one tank division and 1, 200 tanks. In the Far East military district, but not right on your border—we are talking about reinforcements now, there are three motorized rifle divisions in addition to the 23 divisions I gave you before. And they have 600 tanks.

The second category now was reinforcement, and thirdly is what we consider the strategic reserve which can be used for these purposes. We are not counting Western Russia. These divisions would have to call up reserves. There are 12 motorized rifle divisions, nine tank divisions, and 5,000 tanks. And then, of course, you know that there are seven airborne divisions which are hard to count because they can be moved. They are not located near your borders, but they could be moved. So if you count all of these reinforcement divisions, the total number—and all the strategic reserve—our estimate is that there is a total of 55-60 motorized rifle divisions, and 17 tank divisions. This includes 17,300 to 18,200 tanks. And our estimate is that including ground forces, KGB border guards, the border guards of the secret police (there are 70,000 of these), military transport, strategic defense—everything that is currently available for deployment against the PRC is between 1,115,000 and 1,170,000 men. And in wartime, it would be 1,865,000 to 1,915,000, that is if reserves are called up. This is without shifting forces from western Russia. These are the numbers. Let me now turn to … do you have any questions?

VC Yeh: That is all the ground forces?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

VC Yeh: Thank you.

Dr. Kissinger : We have a map here of the approximate locations of the divisions, but I will discuss that afterward. Oh, the total number I gave you included also air forces. When I gave you over a million, that included everything. That included also the air forces and others … and naval that I am going to give you. It included some 100 thousand naval personnel. The divisions were obviously only ground forces. The total number included air forces, but apparently not the combat air force, not the tactical air force. Everything except the tactical air force. The one million 115 thousand included all the military personnel available for action except the tactical air force. The tactical air force has about 40,000 personnel… oh no, excuse me, it is included, Commander Howe is my military expert here.

Let me now turn to two categories, tactical air force adjacent to China plus tactical rockets adjacent to China. Of course, here it is very easy to reinforce. And there are very large air forces in Europe. So we are talking only of what is permanently stationed adjacent to China. First, I would talk about tactical interceptors. That's MIG-17,MIG-19 and MIG-21. In the Far East military district there are 144; in the Trans-Baikal military district there are 144; in Mongolia there are 108; in the Central Asian military district there are 144; in the Turkestan military district there are 72. In the strategic reserve, suitable for this purpose, there are 174 and the total available is 786. I don't have here what they have in Europe in tactical aircraft. Before I leave here I will find out from Washington what of the air force in Western Russia we think could be shifted. It isn't included here.

The second category is fighter bombers. That includes MUG-17 and SU-7. The numbers are as follows: Far East military district 72, Trans-baikal military district 108, Mongolia 36; Central Asian military district 36; Turkestan military district 36; strategic reserve 36, and a total of 324.

For light bombers, which are the IL-28 and YAK-28, the numbers are as follows: Far East military district 40, Trans-Baikal military district 40, none in Mongolia or the Central Asian military district. In fact, that's 80 all together.

Now for reconnaissance aircraft, but some of these could be used for dual purposes, most of them

Interpreter (Chi): Most?

Dr. Kissinger : Some, we could get the figures on how many bombers could be converted for reconnaissance purposes. These are MUG-21, IL-28, and YAK-28. There are 88 in the Far East military district; 72 in the Transbaikal military district; 30 in the Central Asian military district; 16 in the Turkestan military district; 30 in the strategic reserve, for a total of 236.

The total number of aircraft therefore facing you—this is without reinforcement from western Russia and Europe—is 1,426. And the total number of personnel is 45,000 plus 10,000 in the strategic reserve, or 55,000.

As for helicopters, there are 211 in the Far East military district. I will tell you the truth. I can't believe our intelligence is so good that we can say 211 rather than about 210. I am impressed.

(Laughter)

I don't think we have a man there who counts them every month, but maybe. 132 in the Trans-Baikal military district; 40 in Mongolia; 25 in the Central Asian military district; 48 in the Turkestan military district; 66 in the strategic reserve, or a total of 522. This does not include naval helicopters or naval aircraft, none of this.

Now, as long as we are speaking of tactical weapons, there are three others that are missiles, that are not aircraft. There is one tactical weapon to which we give the name of “FROG” that has a range of 155 miles. It's on a track; it's mobile. The newest version of it has wheels and most of it is in the newest version. The old version has a range of 155 miles, and the new version has a range of about 311 miles. This can have both a conventional and a nuclear warhead. And if it has a nuclear warhead it can range from 3 kilotons to 20 kilotons in the old version and 40 to 90 kilotons in the new version. This is what the old version looks like (shows picture). This is what the new version looks like (shows picture).

VC Yeh (In English): Rocket.

Dr. Kissinger : The way these are assigned is each division has four launchers. That means that in the Far East military district there are 76 to 84. In the Trans-Baikal military district there are 28 or 32. In Mongolia there are 12. In the Central Asian military district there are 28. Or a total of 144 to 156 are in these four districts. Then in the Siberian military district there are 28. In the Turkestan military district there are 18. Then in the Far East military district, farther back than can reach you but available for reinforcement, are 9. In interior districts, east of the Urals, are 73. Or a total of 272-284.

Now let me turn to another tactical missile. It doesn't matter what we call it, because I don't even know what the name we give it means in English. It's a short-range ballistic missile which has a range of 160 nautical miles. This is more modern than the “FROG” and it has an accuracy of about a quarter of a mile. This is newer than the old version of the “FROG,” but the new version of the “FROG” is newer than this. This can be used with both conventional and nuclear warheads, but we think that all of these weapons I am giving you have nuclear warheads. This has tracks.

VC Yeh: Two-stage or one-stage?

Dr. Kissinger : One-stage.

VC Yeh: And on the nuclear version, how many kilotons?

Dr. Kissinger : From ten to 100. They have four different warheads, 10, 20, 40, or 100 kilotons, but we don't know which they have on which. In the Far East military district, of this type missile they have 12 to 18. In the Trans-Baikal military district, they have six. In the Siberian military district they have six. In the Turkestan military district they also have six. There is a total of 30 to 36. We know the locations. All of these are nautical mile ranges. It's also true of the range we gave for the “FROG.”

Then there is the third missile. When I get back I will ask to be introduced to the man who gives them names. I want to know his mind.

(Laughter)

But I can tell the Vice Chairman it's a good way to learn English because I am learning words that I didn't know.

(Laughter)

This is a single-stage rocket which has liquid fuel and which has a range of 500 nautical miles. It has warhead which has an accuracy of between a quarter of a mile to a half mile, and a warhead of up to one megaton. They seem to like to put them very close to your border. They are not designed to travel over much of Soviet territory. The following face you: In the Far East military district nine, mostly in the southern part, here (pointing to map), and very close to the southern border. It's that blue dot here. In the Trans-Baikal military district, nine, about here (pointing); it's the blue dot. In the Central Asian military district, nine near Sary Ozek. Each of them has nine to twelve launchers; we gave you the lower figure. In the Siberian military district, there are also nine; so all together it's either 36 or 48. We think 36, but it could be 48.

There is one other which is like a naval missile of which they have four, which has a range of 300 nautical miles.

VC Yeh: All together four?

Dr. Kissinger : Four, that's all we have found. It's unreasonable that they have only four, but that's all we have seen. It's illogical but that's all we know about. It goes at low latitude and 300 nautical miles and has a warhead of from ten to lOO kilotons, and it's on a track. It's located here, the one we know about. It's the green dot.

Now with regard to air defense forces, these were not in the total. The numbers I give you now are in addition to the numbers I gave you before. No, excuse me, the number of troops are in, the number of planes are in addition. The air defense is different; they have different military districts for air defense than they have for ground. These are the air defense districts. So when we talk about Far East military district, you will know what we mean (shows map). But they have different names for these districts than for the other districts I have given you.

Airplanes for air defense are as follows: in the Far East air defense district, 490; in the Trans Siberian air defense district 200; and in the Tashkent air defense district, 230. About half of them are all-weather MACH-2 aircraft. These are all the air forces that are within 300 miles. The forces I am giving you are 'within 300 miles of the Chinese border.

Interpreter (Chi): Nautical miles?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

Interpreter (Chi): Speed is MACH 2?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes. In addition to this there are 560 interceptor aircraft that are in central Russia that could be used here. Now, turning to surface-to-air missiles within 300 miles of your border, in the Far East air defense district …

Interpreter (Chi): The distance is all in nautical miles?

Dr. Kissinger : I suppose, but what is the difference?

Interpreter (Chi): A little bigger than a mile.

Dr. Kissinger : I am not absolutely sure, but it doesn't make any difference for air defense. In the Far East air defense district there are 130 SAMs. Eighty-one of these are what we call SA-2; 34 are SA-3's; and 15 are SA-5's. The 2's and 3's are what they have in Vietnam. You may have some of them yourselves, but at any rate that's what they are. In the Trans-Siberian air defense district there are 76 SA-2's and 19 SA-5's. These are sites; each site has more than one of these missiles. We are talking about sites, I think each site has four missiles. Well, they certainly have more than one missile at each site—I know that;— we are going to check. For example, on the SA-2's, there are two launchers on one truck. On the SA-3's there are two launchers on one truck. But it is impossible that they would have only one missile at one site. And there are 63 in the Tashkent district, 63 SA-2 sites. One SA-3 site, and 11 SA-5 sites. And there are five SA-2 sites in Mongolia.

With respect to radar, there are 155 radar sites in the Far East district, 140 in the Trans-Siberian district; and 80 in the Tashkent district. So altogether, there are 375 radar sites facing you.

I will just give you a few other items and then we will let it go. About naval forces, the Pacific fleet has 155 medium bombers; 16 ballistic missile submarines; which have a total of 113 missiles; and 23 cruise missile units which have altogether 150 launchers.

Interpreter (Chi): Surface aircraft?

Dr. Kissinger : No, launchers.

Interpreter (Chi): But surface?

Dr. Kissinger : No, these are all on submarines.

Interpreter (Chi): What do you mean by 23 cruise …

Comdr. Howe: Guided by radar rather than a ballistic missile.

Dr. Kissinger : Most of these are based in Vladivostock except for the ballistic missile submarines which operate out of Petropavlovsk. That's what a cruise missile submarine looks like. Commander Howe is a submariner. So every time the Soviet Union gets one more he comes to my office. To make him feel at home he has an office without windows.

Comdr. Howe: That's true.

Dr. Kissinger : He stays in it for two months at a time so he remains in training.

Comdr. Howe: That's also true.

Dr. Kissinger These are the major forces. When we go to strategic forces there is no sense listing what's adjacent to you because when we cometo strategic forces—bombers, missile submarines, and land based missiles they have long ranges. For example, there are 260 SS-9 missiles adjacent to China, but they have a range of 5, 000 nautical miles. I know they could reach the United States. It has a range of 5, 000 miles arid altogether they have 970 of them, so if they want to they can use them all against either China or the United States. They have a total of 1, 500 long-range missiles that can be used either against China or the U. S. and we don't want to discriminate. They may all be directed against you—perhaps they are all directed against us. 519 of them are in military districts adjacent to the PRC, but it would be incorrect to assume that these are the ones that are targeted on the People's Republic.

All this is the basic information. In addition, there are 205 heavy and medium bombers of the long-range aviation forces, and they are directed at you. In the Central Asian military district there are 45; in the Trans-Baikal military district there are 50, and in the Far East military district there are 110. The total if 205. Of these, 45 have a radius of 4,500 nautical miles, and they are turboprop, TU-45. And they can carry 30,000 pounds of bombs (shows picture). You must know it. There are 45 in the Central Asian military district. It's a turboprop.

Interpreter (Chi): 30 or 35 thousand pounds of bombs.

Dr. Kissinger : 30,000. Then they have medium bombers, 120 of these 205 have a range of 1,600 nautical miles. Fifty are in the Trans-Baikal military district and 70 in the Far East military district, and these are jets. The speed of the “BEAR” is about 450 kts, the maximum is 500 and the normal is 435 knots. That's of the former (BEAR) and on this one (Badger) it's 445 normal and 540 kts. maximum. Then in the Far East military district they have 40 of another plane which has a range of 3,000 nautical miles, and a speed of 445 knots normal and 540 maximum.

All this is the information we thought we should give you today. And none of our colleagues here know that we have given you this information and nobody in our government except for the President and these people here know that we have given you this information. The intelligence people do not know we have given it to you. We have only asked them to prepare it for us. It is a sign of… so that if we face other crises we have the same basic information on which to make decisions.

VC Yeh: I am grateful to Dr. Kissinger and our other American friends here for informing us of the most confidential information concerning the Soviet military strength.

First, I would like to have our American friends rest assured that we will certainly keep all this information absolutely secret, and secondly, I would like to say that this material which you provided us is very useful. And thirdly, I would like to say that in providing us with this most confidential information it is an important indication of the sincere desire of the United States Government to improve our relations and for this we would like to express our thanks to Dr. Kissinger and to President Nixon.

Dr. Kissinger : We did it for both of us.

VC Yeh: We understand.

Dr. Kissinger : If you have any additional questions, either while we are here or afterward, you can either contact me or we can set up a separate means of contact. And if we get indications of drastic changes in the deployments, it would be helpful if you could let us know whom we should inform. Paris may be a little too complex for that purpose. But actually we can send somebody to Paris to tell your Ambassador there, but it makes no difference. You tell us whom we should tell and where and what is your most secure place and we will send someone there. But perhaps you could give us either a word so you can get us a message or tell us how to do it in a more restricted way than normal in a place you designate. Perhaps before we leave.

VC Yeh: It is very necessary to keep constant contact. I will report all of this to Premier Chou En-lai and Chairman Mao and they will consider this matter.

Dr. Kissinger : Of course. Now I have brought along a discussion of every negotiation that is being conducted with the Soviet Union.

VM Chiao: Shall we take a break for five minutes. Or let's be generous, ten minutes.

Dr. Kissinger : Like Chairman Mao to Kosygin. You know what I mean.

A copy of the paper to which Dr. Kissinger referred to in making this presentation is at Tab B.

BREAK—11:25-11:34 a.m.

Dr. Kissinger : We wanted to inform you of all negotiations we are conducting with the Soviet Union. We understand that part of the Soviet strategy is to create the impression that they and we are establishing a two-power directory over the world. And therefore they have started negotiations on a whole range of topics, some of very secondary importance, especially since my visit to Peking last July. Our policy is to make those agreements that are also in our own interest, to inform you of every negotiation we are conducting, to do nothing that looks to us as if it could be collusion against you (and therefore we did not, for example, agree to that conference of the five nuclear powers), to be prepared to make any agreement with you that we are making with the Soviet Union and to, if you want to comment, to take your views very seriously. So should I run through what is going on?

VM Chiao: Please.

Dr. Kissinger : It could be that I am breaking the Harvard record for length again.

VC Yeh: Doesn't matter.

Dr. Kissinger : First, you are familiar with the negotiations on Berlin. We keep you informed of this. Incidentally, again, no one in our government knows the degree to which we have kept you informed. There are now negotiations between the East and West Germans on the practical implementation of the agreement and there are some convoluted German legalistic problems. But we think that these treaties will be concluded by the summer. Incidentally, it is our impression that the Soviet Union is saving a number of technical agreements so that they will all be signed at or near the summit in Moscow, but I am sure you are wise enough to understand that this does not signify anything in particular.

There are a number of technical agreements that the signature is being held up on and we are sure they will come to a head around that time. In any event, as you know, the President has offered the Prime Minister yesterday that he would send me to Peking if you agree in June and I would then give you an account in the frankness with which we have always treated you.

VC Yeh: Very good.

Dr. Kissinger : European Security Conference: The Soviet Union is being active both with us and with our European friends to convene a European Security Conference. They are more precise about the fact that they want a conference than what they want to discuss there. Their strategy is to get a general atmosphere of relaxation in Europe, partly to free their resources in that area. We are under great pressure from our European friends to go to such a conference. Our strategy is to say that we will not oppose it in principle, but that we want to see what is on the agenda first. So at the moment we are delaying. We may agree to exploratory, low-level talks later this year, but we do not expect a conference before 1973.

Mutual and Balanced Force Reductions: Again, the Soviet Union has talked about it in principle, but they have shied away from discussion of specifics. Our position is stated in the World Report, and that represents our actual position. I know. the Report didn't get a good review in the Peking publications …

(Laughter)

Our approach is to talk on very concrete issues in such a way that they cannot get disarmament just by talking about it but only by taking specific steps. I must be very honest with you in this regard. If the negotiations were to be successful—they will in any event take a long time, but if they are successful—the objective consequence will be for the Soviet Union to move some forces from Europe to the Far East, and we will have to make up for this in some way. In any event, I do not believe that negotiations will start in the first half of this year, if then. I don't think they will start before the end of this year, and they will certainly take two years to complete.

The next issue is the Chinese participation in the disarmament conference. When it reconvenes in February, we frankly do not know whether you want to be invited to be co-chairman, whether you want to participate; and therefore we have adopted a neutral position. I am talking about the 18-nation conference. If you want to participate … we will not put pressure on you to join, but also we don't want to oppose your joining and therefore we have avoided the issue. If you could let us know your preference we will be heavily influenced by it.

VM Chiao: Our delegation in the UN has expressed an attitude and our position has not changed from that attitude. That is, we do not plan to take part in that conference. And we have noted that you are taking a neutral interest on this matter.

Dr. Kissinger : You are in your history familiar with the American missionary instinct, and the members of our Arms Control Agency always hope that they can persuade you to be what they consider more reasonable. We shall maintain our position and you will not come under any pressure from us. The same is true of the Soviet proposal on a world disarmament conference—we will not join it.

VM Chiao: So the United Nations passed a resolution to postpone?

Dr. Kissinger : That's right, but we will undoubtedly be approached again by the Soviet Union before the next General Assembly.

Comprehensive Test Ban: Those negotiations are hung up on a technical issue whether you can discover underground explosions without inspection. If there are negotiations on that this year, we will move very slowly. You are familiar with the treaty banning nuclear weapons from the seabed?

VM Chiao: (Nods)

Dr. Kissinger : Rather than read it, why don't I give you its provisions and you can study it yourself. The same for the treaty banning biological weapons. I do it to save time. (The papers used by Dr. Kissinger in this briefing are at Tab C.) Don't you think that's better.

VM Chiao: Much better.

Dr. Kissinger : Chemical weapons … here is another discussion of the law of the seas.

VM Chiao: I have also looked at, in a preliminary way, your principles in approaching this matter in your State of the World message. It is very important for us to understand your positions on these matters.

Dr. Kissinger : Last year, the Prime Minister spoke to a group of Japanese about last year's Report. That was before it was known we had met, and I thought he made the best analysis of the Report I had seen anywhere. It's our experience with the Japanese that they cannot keep any secrets.

(Laughter)

VM Chiao: Do you feel that you were taken in by them?

Dr. Kissinger : No, but I find that anything we tell them they tell the press.

VM Chaio: For instance, your talk …

Dr. Kissinger Oh, I was not taken in by the socialist. First, I didn't want to see him, so the Japanese Ambassador called me and told me it would be a terrible loss of face for the Ambassador if I didn't see him. I did. I knew he would talk to the press because they always do. So I said nothing. Every time he asked me a question, I said read my press conference; it's all in our process conference. And I was astonished when the Prime Minister said to General Haig that I had given him my impressions on the Taiwan question, I wasn't taken in; they just invent things now.

(Laughter)

VM Chiao: Fabrications.

Dr. Kissinger : When I tell a Japanese diplomat something and he gives me his word of honor that it will be kept secret, that means 72 hours.

Director Chang: But you know that example of that Japanese socialist party leader showed the Japanese are very good at keeping secrets, because they said nothing about what you really told them.

Dr. Kissinger : I didn't tell them anything. Here is the status of the discussion on a draft treaty on the moon.

VM Chiao: The moon is too far away from us. The moon is closer to you than to us.

Dr. Kissinger : Here is the status on an agreement on exchanges with the Soviet Union. And here is the status of the agreement on health. We have an agreement to negotiate on health matters, and I wouldn't be surprised if the Soviets conducted that negotiation that the agreement is made at the time of the Summit. This is an agreement on civil aviation. I am just doing this to be correct—none of this is of any great importance. And on environmental cooperation. And on maritime matters. Some of these I have informed you of. Here is talks on preventing incidents at sea. I have told you of this through the other channel. These are technical diplomatic matters. I have some topics I would like to explain to you because they are of great importance.

The first is SALT. We believe that an agreement will be reached this spring. Right now, the Soviet Union has taken the position on defensive missiles—offering us a compromise, by which they can get four defensive sites and we can get one.

(Laughter)

But since even we know the difference between four and one we are not likely to accept that.

(Laughter)

And so we will probably … the agreement … we have not negotiated it yet, and in fact we have not yet adopted our own position, but it will have a more or less equal number of defensive missiles on both sides. The Soviet Union would defend Moscow and we would defend an offensive missile base, with each side having an option for another site, so we can defend Washington and they can defend an offensive site. This is what I think the agreement will be. And there will be also a limitation on offensive missiles. We have more or less agreed to stop building land-based missiles on both sides. We have not yet agreed on submarines. We will keep you informed through our channel but this is the present state of the negotiation. We know you are not interested in participating, but we will avoid positions which can be used as a pressure against you. And of course we will not participate in any pressure against you.

A second area in which the Soviet Union has been extremely active is in attempting to negotiate an economic agreement with us. They have offered to negotiate a settlement on the lend-lease issues and the purchase of grains.

VM Chiao: I would like to take this opportunity to ask Dr. Kissinger what is the figure of the lendlease which you paid the Soviet Union in the Second World War?

Dr. Kissinger : I don't have it here—I will get it for you before we leave. I will have it in 48 hours. I can give it to you very soon. The figure that is now being discussed, I think they have offered, is 300 million and I think we believe it is closer to a billion that they owe us.

Interpreter (Chi): Dollars?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes. Our figure I believe is 800 million on the debt, but I am sure we gave them more aid than this during the war. We will get you the figure.

VM Chiao: Thank you.

Dr. Kissinger : What they are now proposing is that we send our Secretary of Commerce to Moscow again to begin discussion of agreements including some credits and “most-favored-nation” status. We may do this, we may send the Secretary of Commerce there. Our general policy is to have the People's Republic on the same status in our legal considerations as the Soviet Union.

VM Chiao: May I interrupt a moment?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

VM Chiao: The question of trade between China and the United States was not mentioned in our original draft communique and only when General Haig came he mentioned your side desired we say a few words about this matter of the development of Sino-American trade. But now we are somewhat confused because in discussions between Secretary Rogers and Chi Peng-fei, our impression is you are not very interested in this matter.

Dr. Kissinger : No, what General Haig told you is correct. We would like to mention it in the communique and are prepared to discuss it. The difficulty is that not all of our people are familiar with every communication which has gone to you because we don't want to embarrass you through leaks. But we gave you a paragraph yesterday.

VM Chiao: Yes, we are studying it.

Dr. Kissinger : I know, but we are interested in it, and 1 will talk to the Secretary of State about clearing up this confusion.

VM Chiao: Just because you mentioned this question of trade, so I said it in passing.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes. As I told the Prime Minister, we are much more complicated than you are in our method of government. But after the election we will bring this into greater consistency.

On the Middle East, you are familiar with the discussions that we have attempted to be set up between the Egyptians and the Israelis, indirect discussions. The Soviet Union has told us that they would raise the issue at the Summit. But we don't know in what form, and with what proposals. But this will be one of the topics when I come here in June, if that is agreeable to you. We will give you a complete account of what was discussed.

Two more items, one which you can read yourself, is the technical problem of space exploration. That will probably be signed at the Summit, or just before or just after. It's been discussed for two years but there is a sudden acceleration on a lot of these things. There were reports in our press that we were discussing arms control in the Indian Ocean with the Soviet Union—that is correct.

These are the major items and we will keep you meticulously informed. Don't pay attention to press reports. If I have not told you, it isn't true. We believe that we must have a relationship of confidence, and we don't believe in trickery. We will inform you always well ahead of time so that if you wish to comment—which you have not up to now done—we are prepared to hear your views and take them very seriously.

Now I have only one other question which is, how we should handle the completion of the communique. Practically, not the details, the procedure.

VM Chiao: Well, first of all I will thank you for giving us this information. And this is also an indication of your wish to improve our relationship. I will say no more on that. I will report all this to Premier Chou En-lai and to Chairman Mao.

Now the question is how to work out the communique. It involves how to arrange our time.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

VM Chiao: First of all, we will want to study your new wording of the Taiwan question and then after we have studied it we can discuss it.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, of course.

VM Chiao: This afternoon there will be the discussions between the President and Prime Minister, and we are all taking part in that. As for tomorrow morning, are you going to that?

Dr. Kissinger : I am prepared not to go. I think in fact it would be better if we worked. Of course you could tell me tonight you are accepting all our proposals.

VM Chiao: Then you can go to the Great Wall.

Dr. Kissinger : Slip me a note at the gymnastics.

VM Chiao: It might be possible that Dr. Kissinger will have a stomach ache tomorrow.

Dr. Kissinger : I was ill in Key Biscayne in January; I was really ill with the flu, and the press insisted that one member talk with me on the telephone to make sure I wasn't in Cuba or someplace. But how about tomorrow morning?

VM Chiao: Our thinking is it would probably be more realistic to continue the work tomorrow because tomorrow is the 24th. As for the specific time when we will do the work tomorrow, I will tell you this afternoon.

Dr. Kissinger : It would be important if we could agree on something that I can show my colleagues so they are not too surprised at the last minute about how this came into being. So if we could agree, not on the whole thing, but on some key questions, that this is our position, it would help us. When do you think we should release the communique. This was one question I wanted to ask you.

VM Chiao: We have no particular inclination as to when it should be issued to the press.

Dr. Kissinger : Sunday night?

VM Chiao: When we are in Shanghai?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, or what is your thought?

VM Chiao: Once we have finalized it, it is up to you to say what date is better for you. We give you priority.

Dr. Kissinger : But at any rate, before we leave here.

VM Chiao: That's all right.

Dr. Kissinger : Two possibilities, Sunday night or Monday morning. But Monday morning our press will not have time to file it. Our plan is that when we release the communique—so far we haven't said there will be one—but our plan is I will meet with the press and explain it to them because otherwise they will write very confusing things.

VM Chiao: In Peking?

Dr. Kissinger : After we release it.

VM Chiao: But you will meet with the press in China?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes. We would give them the communique and then I Would explain to them how it came into being and what it means. And I would agree with you what I would say and I would say nothing that you and I and the Prime Minister haven't, agreed on.

VM Chiao: In Shanghai?

Dr. Kissinger : If we do not do this there will be the wildest speculation. We can do it as a joint one if you want to so you can correct me if I say anything wrong.

VM Chiao: Please, spare me this ordeal. You are more experienced in this matter.

Dr. Kissinger : As a Harvard professor, I can use many words to say nothing.

(Laughter)

When they don't understand it, they think I am very profound. I think it is in our common interest that I explain it so there is one major theme that emerges. That way I can work out exactly what I will say, and how I will explain it. We can go through how I will explain it paragraph by paragraph. That way it has the least possibility of embarrassment and the maximum possibility of a positive impact.

VM Chiao: Good, we understand. As for when we will work on the communique tomorrow, I will tell you this afternoon.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, but we are prepared not to go to the Great Wall. I have been there.

VC Yeh: Yes, we should have quite sufficient appraisal of the impact of the communique in the world. So it is a matter over which both sides should give serious consideration.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, that's why we shouldn't leave it to the end.

VM Chiao: It is not a matter of just saying something as we part, but something that is said for the whole world.

Dr. Kissinger : Exactly.

VC Yeh: Thank you once again.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, President's Trip, Feb 1972, HAK Conversations. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. Ellipses in the source text. Also present on the Chinese side was Yeh Chien-ying, Vice Chairman of the Military Commission. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2. Tabs A-C are attached but not published.

93. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 24, 1972, 9:59 a.m.-12:42 p.m. 93. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 24, 1972, 9:59 a.m.-12:42 p.m.1

Beijing, February 24, 1972, 9:59 a.m.-12:42 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John H. Holdridge, NSC Staff

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Jonathan T. Howe, NSC Staff

Ch'iao Kuan-hua, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Chang Wen-chin, Director of Western Europe, North American, and Australasian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chao Chi-hua, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chi Chao-chu, Interpreter

Two Notetakers

DATE & TIME: Thursday, February 24,1972 - 9:59 a.m. - 12:42 p.m.

PLACE: Guest House, Villa 2, Peking

VM Ch'iao: Let's get down to business now.

Dr. Kissinger : I was afraid he would say that. I was certain I would get a note last evening saying you had accepted every proposal and I should go to the Great Wall.

Mr. Chang: What he will propose will make you even more happy.

Dr. Kissinger : That's not his record. May I make a suggestion—the paragraph where we say, “The U. S. side stated . . “ (on our page 3 and 4). We have reordered the sentences. Every sentence is the same, but we have reordered them, moving the last sentence beginning, “The United States desires to work with …” We have moved that sentence and the next sentence to the beginning of the paragraph, to become the second sentence. I have it written here. It's purely stylistic. There is no new sentence in it. It reads better from an American point of view. And then the rest is exactly the same. There is nothing changed, and we put the subcontinent sentences in brackets only because we have agreed we will change them. That's the old text.

PM Ch'iao: My preliminary impression of that is that it is not a problem, but we would like to study it.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, study it. Our intention is not to change anything but to make the English sound better. I also have received the answers on some of these things that we discussed yesterday. We can either give it to you or you can schedule another half-hour with the Vice Chairman. Some questions that came up yesterday, such as how many missiles and so on, and I have the answers now. It will take about half an hour. We shouldn't do it now.

VM Ch'iao: We can discuss it directly between ourselves.

Dr. Kissinger : At the end of the meeting.

VM Ch'iao: If there is time.

Dr. Kissinger : Certainly.

VM Ch'iao: That is, we will work according to the draft submitted yesterday.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, I understand.

VM Ch'iao: On the first page. First is the question of mere factual presentation, and then if there are any changes necessary for specific facts we will change it. It is not impossible to discuss that. The question of the full names of the President or Secretary of State, whether that should be done or not. The full name Milhous, or M., and the middle name of the Secretary of State.

Dr. Kissinger : Since I have my middle name there?

VM Ch'iao: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : I am beginning to understand the Chinese mind. Either all middle names or no middle names. Thank you very much.

VM Ch'iao: Page 2, first paragraph, we agreed to your suggestion, and we agreed to say … to put the first sentence in front of this paragraph. 'The two sides are gratified to have this opportunity to present candidly to one another … The leaders of the PRC and the US reviewed the international situation”, and so on. We will type this out later on.

Dr. Kissinger : Do you mind if I delete one more thing, strictly for style? Could we just say, “expounded their respective positions"? Because we already said in the previous sentence ”… to present frankly to one another their views.” It's really stylistic. I would like to drop “and views” but I don't care. It's just not to repeat the same word twice.

VM Ch'iao: While basically accepting the former suggestion you put forward yesterday, we have one addition. That is to say, “The leaders of China and the United States …” because it is the beginning of a new paragraph. “The leaders of China and the United States were gratified to have this opportunity…”

Dr. Kissinger : Absolutely. You are quite right.

VM Ch'iao: Why not?

Dr. Kissinger : Absolutely. It's an improvement. And then we should begin the next sentence, 'They reviewed …” We don't have to repeat “the leaders.” I just told Mr. Lord that your staff gives you as much trouble as mine does. (laughter) Is it all right?

VM Ch'iao: Only question of custom and habit too. For our side “position” and “views” are …

Dr. Kissinger : All right. Let's leave it. It's just stylistic.

VM Ch'iao: Because if we delete it there appears a question of stylistic matter … question for us Chinese. That is, “position” is a question of matters of principle; “views” are specific things.

Dr. Kissinger : All right. I don't want to be petty. I have one other stylistic question. If in the first sentence we can take out the word “respective.” Keep it in the second sentence, but take it out of the first. Just say, “They presented their views . . “ Purely stylistic. In English it isn't good if exactly the same words are at the end of two successive sentences.

VM Ch'iao: We agree. There is no substantive matter involved here at all. It is a matter of style. We suggest that for us in Chinese we keep respective, but if you delete it …

Dr. Kissinger : Pure question of style. No one will notice it. It would be helpful… what we would like to say when this is finished is that this is an unusual communique. We talked frankly and stated our differences frankly, and therefore a little eloquence at the beginning is helpful. So this is fine.

VM Ch'iao: Go on to another paragraph. That is on the second sentence of the second paragraph, 'The Chinese said that where there is oppression there is resistance.” Then the second sentence to that paragraph, we have another suggestion, and think you will realize why. That is to say, we would like to restore the original wording. Why do I say this? Because you know in my speech in the UN General Assembly that's what I said, and that's why I said you would anticipate that I would make this suggestion. I would like to make here a brief explanation of why we are making this suggestion again.

Dr. Kissinger : I have noticed that the Vice Foreign Minister didn't waste any of the language from my previous visit. Whatever was eliminated here he put in his speech. (Laughter)

Please, go ahead.

VM Ch'iao: As you say, first of all, that is, of course, that our positions and philosophies are different on many questions. As for this specific wording, “revolution”, you on your side use it on many occasions too.

Dr. Kissinger : We don't have your reputation.

VM Ch'iao: And President Nixon in one of his well-known articles mentioned this question. You are more familiar with these words than I. President Nixon once said these changes in India are a “revolution.” That was in 1967, and then in the intervening period there were many such examples when President Nixon mentioned “revolution.” And then one of the latest references of President Nixon to the word “revolution” was in an interview granted to TIME Magazine in January, 1972. The gist of this was President Nixon replied to a question that there is a new American Revolution.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, but we apply it to ourselves, not to other countries. We don't object to your saying, “the Chinese revolution.”

VM Ch'iao: But in President Nixon's article of 1967, he mentioned the revolution in Asia. Our socialist revolution has a history of only 20 years and more, whereas your country has 200 years. Both our nations are the sons of revolution, so why can't we mention it? Dr. Kissinger: We have two problems. One, as the Foreign Minister remembers, we did not unqualifiedly approve his speech at the United Nations.

VM Ch'iao: 'Empty cannons.”

Dr. Kissinger : Second, which is more important, as I explained to the Prime Minister last time, when you make this statement as your own it is very logical. When you make it in a document that includes the President of the United States, we have to think how it will be greeted at home. Did he come this far only for the Chinese to use him as the instrument of their propaganda? I am being very frank with you, but I understand your use of a different word.

VM Ch'iao: The fact that there does exist differences between our two countries is known through the whole world, and we have no intention of covering these differences up. But if there does arise some criticism of the nature you mentioned a moment ago—making use of this visit to make propaganda for ourselves—on the Chinese side we are faced with the same question. Just before you state your views and people can also criticize us that you are using this occasion only to state your views. And I am being very frank here and particularly think our American friends understand our practice. That is, it is our view to put forward our views as they really are, as an expression of honesty, whether it be to our friends or to the people.

Dr. Kissinger : Let us do this, because we have more or less agreed on this. Let us put the word in tentatively. I will have to speak to the President—and see how the rest of it looks. If the rest of the document is agreeable, when I think we can probably live with this word. I will submit it to the President.

VM Ch'iao: I agree. And then about the Chinese statement on Indochina, there is a phrase which we would like to add, merely a question of a factual matter. That is to add this phrase: “The Chinese side expressed its firm support to the peoples of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia in their efforts” through “of the Republic of South Vietnam.” Then add “its elaboration of February of the two key problems in the seven-point proposal.”

Dr. Kissinger : Of February?

VM Ch'iao: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : You might as well put in February. Otherwise, no one in America will know what you are talking about. That's fair enough; all right, that's proper.

Mr. Chang: Of February this year?

Dr. Kissinger : Of February this year if you want it.

How many pages is the transcript of our discussions in Chinese?

VM Ch'iao: Our efficiency is not as high as yours. By 48 hours after we can answer that.

Dr. Kissinger : It's not important.

This change is fine, but for my own edification, why do you support seven points when the North Vietnamese told us they wanted to negotiate nine points? I don't understand the North Vietnamese and I don't understand you. I was prepared to negotiate… but I don't understand why we are being pressed to accept points which Hanoi itself didn't want to discuss with us.

VM Ch'iao: I am not familiar with the specific proceedings of these negotiations, so I am not in a position to answer. And then I would like to ask you a question, very honest.

Dr. Kissinger : No, this is not negotiating, just to try to understand each other.

VM Ch'iao: We are only exchanging views and the question of Vietnam can only be solved by you. On the visit of Mr. President, the whole spirit of his visit is to relax tension.

Dr. Kissinger : That's right.

VM Ch'iao: So we would like to ask what really are your intentions about this Vietnam question? The President exchanged views with the Prime Minister on this matter, but as we see it your way is not a way out of this question. Because in the Far East the really acute question is the Indochina question.

As for the Taiwan question, we have very big differences, but there is no particular tension involved because there is no fighting there now. And as you want to relax the tension in the Far East the principal question is that of Vietnam. I am, of course, quite aware of all the points made by Mr. President in his exchange of views with our Prime Minister, as well as your statements on this matter.

Dr. Kissinger : I would like to do this privately because it is a crucial issue, and we are attempting to approach it on a basis that is just to both sides. But I think to do it thoughtfully would take us an hour, and I would like to propose to the Vice Foreign Minister, if he agreed, that we schedule a separate meeting for it after we have worked on the communique on a very private basis which would remain totally secret. I don't want to repeat just our formal position now—if you want to do it, we will. But I think it is better to get your views on the communique first, and then schedule a meeting tomorrow or tonight for the question of Vietnam.

VM Ch'iao: I agree. Either tonight or some time tomorrow. We will find time for that. Or any other time. We will find the time for it. Completely informal basis.

Dr. Kissinger : Completely informal, and we will never mention it.

VM Ch'iao: So, let's go on to our communique.

That is concerning Chinese statement on the India-Pakistan question, we plan to have this wording revised.

Dr. Kissinger : No other changes in that paragraph?

VM Ch'iao: No. The Prime Minister had already expressed some ideas along this line to the President yesterday.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

VM Ch'iao: That is to say, to put it this way, “it firmly maintains that India and Pakistan should, in accordance with the UN resolutions on the India-Pakistan question, immediately withdraw all their troops to their own side of the borders and of the ceasefire line in Kashmir and firmly supports the Pakistani government and people in their struggle to preserve their independence and sovereignty, and the people of Jammu and Kashmir in their struggle for the right of self-determination.

Dr. Kissinger : I don't think Mrs. Gandhi will be happy with you. (laughter)

I give you this confidential information. We have no objection to whatever you wish to say on this.

VM Ch'iao: As for your working of this, you told us last time about the general thinking you have on this matter, but not specific wording.

Dr. Kissinger : I have some vague wording which we have not yet discussed with the President in detail, and therefore we can modify it, but I will informally give it to you. I think for example we can also support the withdrawal of both sides to the ceasefire line. It isn't in here.

VM Ch'iao: We have no specific objections at this moment to this wording. It depends on you, really.

Dr. Kissinger : We'll keep it tentatively, and will you give us an English translation of yours? We have no objection to your wording. It may strengthen it to say “it favors …”

VM Ch'iao: We would like to repeat our suggestion about this withdrawal because it involves two aspects: one is withdrawal to their own side of the borders. The other is to withdraw to the ceasefire line.

Dr. Kissinger : I hadn't heard that. Let me study your text, but otherwise we have no objection to your text.

Mr. Chang: We will give Mr. Holdridge the Chinese version.

Dr. Kissinger : He is so sympathetic with the Chinese I thought he might be in collusion with Mr. Chang.

VM Ch'iao: From the third page to the fourth page, that is your statement.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

VM Ch'iao: We have no objections to your suggested changes in the tenses.

Dr. Kissinger : Thank you. I have a suggestion. We would like … when I was here in October we didn't have a formal proposal that would be made public and therefore, since you have referred to the seven-point proposal, I would like to refer to our eight-point proposal.

VM Ch'iao: That's the right of having differences.

Dr. Kissinger : That's right. I will give you the exact phrase when we meet again. ”… and stated that its eight-point proposal of January 25 represents a just basis for the attainment of that objective.” Something like this.

VM Ch'iao: There is no need to repeat our views on your eight-point proposal.

Dr. Kissinger : Oh, no, we know it. You are supporting seven points. We are not commenting on each other's positions. It's simply an objective statement of our views.

VM Ch'iao: So then we go on to page 4.

Dr. Kissinger : We may not settle the war in Vietnam, but we will confuse everyone so completely … . There are seven points, eight points, secret nine points, two explanations of the seven points. You have to be a Talmudic scholar to understand it.

VM Ch'iao: Our communique will not increase the knowledge of the peoples. As you said, if the word “revolution” was put in to make propaganda, saying support the seven-point proposal is also making propaganda. These are our differences.

Dr. Kissinger : Once Governor Harriman said our point six is why they can't accept our proposal. But our point six is almost word-for-word their point seven. We thought we were making a big concession with it.

VM Ch'iao: What did Governor Harriman think after they were published? I am well acquainted with him.

Dr. Kissinger : He is now …

VM Ch'iao: Still very active?

Dr. Kissinger : Oh, yes. He is still the unofficial ambassador of the Soviet Union. He thinks we are very wrong to antagonize the Soviet Union so much.

VM Ch'iao: I would like to remind you of the fact that the secret clauses of the World War II agreements on China were drafted by Averell Harriman as the People's Republic's representative. I am unclear as to what it has to do with history.

Dr. Kissinger : On Vietnam he is closer to your position than to ours, but in his general philosophy he feels we are going too far in the direction of the People's Republic.

VM Ch'iao: Let's continue. So on these paragraphs we have no differences.

Dr. Kissinger : We agree on our differences.

VM Ch'iao: We agree to disagree. Now we are on page 5.

Dr. Kissinger : The rest of 4 is all right.

VM Ch'iao: Except for the change of tenses.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, but with the second paragraph on page 4 you have no problem.

VM Ch'iao: No.

Dr. Kissinger : All right, page 5.

VM Ch'iao: On the second paragraph of page 5. Originally, it was written “it would be against the interests of the people of the world for any major country to collude with another … or to behave in such a way as to suggest it had an exclusive sphere of interest.” In our suggestion, the first phrase remains unchanged. Then, ”… or to divide up spheres of interest.”

Dr. Kissinger : One country can't divide up spheres of interest. I'm just putting it in English. ”… or to claim exclusive spheres of interest.”

VM Ch'iao: I would like to quite frankly say why we make this suggestion. We find there are shortcomings in the version you just suggested though in substance there may be no difference. We know that whether it be exclusive domination by one country or condominium, we are opposed to that.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand.

VM Ch'iao: But frankly speaking, to us your present wording connotes the question of enjoying equal rights, which has some implications of what happened before in China's history.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand your problem. What you want to say, I am thinking out loud, is something like, ”… or for the major countries to divide up the world into exclusive spheres of influence.” What you want to say is it is wrong for countries to divide up the world. Isn't that right?

VM Ch'iao: What I mean is we are opposed to both tendencies. One is for a country to exercise exclusive domination over an exclusive sphere of interest. Another is for a number of countries to collude with each other.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand. Give me your text again. I am not quarrelling with what you are trying to do. I understand it and agree with it. It's only a question now of finding the word. Then that phrase would be “or to divide up spheres of interest.” It doesn't sound right in English. How about, “or for the major countries to divide up the world into exclusive spheres of interest.” It sounds wrong in English. The way it reads now is “it is against the interests …” through “against other countries.” One country can't divide up the world, you see what I mean?

VM Ch'iao: Would you kindly give us a written version of that? Just hearing it we find nothing to object to.

Dr. Kissinger : At any rate we agree on what we are trying to say, so it is purely a stylistic problem. I will give you a text this afternoon. This is easy, because we agree with what you want to say.

VM Ch'iao: So that will be that. And then we come to the common ground of the two sides. On page 5, “with these principles of international relations in mind …” That is all right. Then “progress toward the normalization of relations” through “is in the interest of all countries.” That is all right. And then the second point, we agreed to the original wording and not to your addition. It had already been mentioned above, and it is rather unclear here and redundant.

Dr. Kissinger : It's not unclear, but it is redundant.

VM Ch'iao: It is not that. It is the question of whether there are disputes between China and the United States but the two types of disputes, within the country itself and international, and as to how international disputes should be solved we already mentioned that in the ppreceding paragraph. So if you are to add this phrase it is not only redundancy but ambiguity.

Dr. Kissinger : This was not the intention.

VM Ch'iao: We understand that was not your intention, but it is also a question of redundancy.

Dr. Kissinger : We are glad to add the phrase “international” here—it has a way of highlighting it.

VM Ch'iao: Read the ppreceding paragraph again.

Dr. Kissinger : Let me ask you this: We will be able, on the basis of the preceding paragraph to say to the press that on international disputes we have renounced the use of force. Then on Taiwan I would say China does not consider Taiwan an international dispute.

VM Ch'iao: So there is no need to add this phrase here.

Dr. Kissinger : But is it all right if we explain the meaning of the communique in this sense afterward—can we say after we get back that one of the results of our trip was that we have renounced the use of force in our disputes with one another? Then we will say—we will not embarrass you—that you do not consider Taiwan an international dispute. We will not be tricky on this.

VM Ch'iao: Our position on the Taiwan question we have stated on many occasions.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand. We will not apply it to the Taiwan question. We know your position—you have stated it since 1955, and we will not use this communique as a way of making you change your position on this.

VM Ch'iao: We have always considered that the Taiwan question had two aspects. One is your military presence, which we should try to solve through negotiations, whereas the question with Chiang Kai-shek is a domestic matter.

Dr. Kissinger : Let us drop this then. The President may want to raise it again. One suggestion—at the top of the page, why don't we say, “will apply these principles …” and we will drop this other sentence the way we proposed it.

On the top of page 5 should we substitute “will” for “are prepared toy?

VM Ch'iao: We would prefer to leave it “are prepared”—if it is changed to “will” it will involve the Taiwan question. It might imply that you should immediately withdraw from Taiwan. This is from our point of view. So when we say “are prepared” we take into consideration the state of affairs in which we find ourselves at present. What do you think?

Dr. Kissinger : May I consider this?

VM Ch'iao: And then that means that you previously agreed to delete . .

Dr. Kissinger : Yes. I would like to discuss it with the President.

VM Ch'iao: Surely, we understand that; “neither will seek”. Dr. Kissinger: That's fine.

VM Ch'iao: And now we come to the crucial question.

Dr. Kissinger : May I make a suggestion? Since I think that will take the longest time, shall we do all the rest first and then come back to the crucial question?

VM Ch'iao: The following is a rather important question, that is the sentence on trade and also on other bilateral relations. But that is all connected with this crucial question.

Dr. Kissinger : All right. We will have to do it one way or the other. No problem. Go ahead. We will follow your suggestion.

VM Ch'iao: On this crucial question we should at any rate advance a step forward to make a new beginning. We were joking yesterday when you said you expected I would agree very rapidly to your suggestion—but I have rapidly disagreed.

Dr. Kissinger : It shows what a bad judge I am.

VM Chi iao: Now I would like to comment on your suggestion. And I hope you will not interpret my frank exposition as anything else. According to our discussions last time I do understand your wishes and on our side, too, we hope we can approach each other closely. But frankly speaking, from this formulation you put forward yesterday there has been not only no advance, but in a certain aspect a step backward.

Dr. Kissinger : Which aspect?

VM Ch'iao: For instance, in October our two sides had already agreed to the first portion of this statement. It was agreed at that time to these two sentences: “The U.S. side declared that the U.S. acknowledges” through “the United States does not challenge that position.” But here you put in a different formulation. Originally you agreed to say Taiwan is a province of China, whereas in yesterday's formulation you said “Taiwan historically has been Chinese territory.” And we don't approve of that formulation because the fact is really that all Chinese on either side of the Straits maintain that there is but one China.

Dr. Kissinger : Let me hear the rest of your comments. I will reply to them all together.

VM Ch'iao: As the Premier told the President yesterday, if there is still any common point of view between those of us on the two sides of the Taiwan Straits, it is that Taiwan is a province of China. And so as that is something maintained by all Chinese and something which you put forward yourself last time …

Dr. Kissinger : You put it forward.

VM Ch'iao: … which you agreed to last time, but now for you to say Taiwan has historically been Chinese territory, that is a step backward.

Dr. Kissinger : Let's hear the rest of your comments. I understand your point.

VM Ch'iao: On that portion which, we have not agreed to we cannot accept that version put forward by you. That is, the last time you said you agreed to say that “it hopes.”

Dr. Kissinger : “Abiding concern.”

VM Ch'iao: “Abiding interest.”

Dr. Kissinger : We took that out.

VM Ch'iao: But now you use the words “reaffirms its position.” We think that is too strong. And I would like to say also that this is different from what you had publicly stated. For instance, in the World Message put forward by your President he said these words, “The ultimate relationship between Taiwan and the Mainland is not a matter for the United States to decide. A peaceful resolution of this problem by the two parties would do much to reduce tension in the Far East… We are not, however, urging either party to follow any particular course.” But when you use the word “position” it means you have in mind that we Chinese should follow a particular course. So we said that even proceeding from your openly published stand, we cannot agree with it because it is not consistent.

Dr. Kissinger : You are not asked to agree to this. This is our position. We are pursuing an unusual course here anyway. We have no comment on what you are saying about Taiwan, but here, in effect, you are commenting on what we are saying. We are not saying that you have to agree to this. VM Ch'iao: No, this is a matter between us because Taiwan is our territory.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand.

VM Ch'iao: If there was no difference between us on this matter we would not be sitting here discussing it. So I think it would be better to change the word “position” to the word “hope.” Dr. Kissinger: Let me find another solution.

VM Ch'iao: That is my second objection. And then the third point. ”… should be achieved …” This is something like a command. “Should” do this, “should” do that. You put us in an awkward position—embarrassing us. So these are the points of objection, and we have frankly told you.

Dr. Kissinger : I appreciate this.

VM Ch'iao: But, as I said at the beginning, I do understand that your subjective wish is by your formulation to bring the two sides closer.

Dr. Kissinger : It is. We know you are intelligent enough that we can't do anything tricky, and even if we could we would have to live with it for a long time. So the spirit is to bring us closer together.

VM Ch'iao: I have no intention of thinking that either of our sides want to play any tricks.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

VM Ch'iao: The question is that there are differences of view between our two sides. Dr. Kissinger: Actually there are fewer differences in practice than there are in expression.

VM Ch'iao: Even if it's only a question of expression, you have your difficulties and we have our difficulties, and the Chinese people feel very strongly on this matter.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand.

VM Ch'iao: So after considering various aspects, we have suggested a formulation. Now this will be our suggested formulation. The first two sentences remain as in October: “The U.S. side … and that Taiwan is a province of China. The U.S. Government does not challenge that position. It hopes that the Taiwan question will be settled by the Chinese themselves through peaceful negotiations.”

Dr. Kissinger : You will hand me that?

VM Ch'iao: And then the final sentence. It states that “it will progressively reduce and finally withdraw all the U.S. troops and military installations from Taiwan.”

Dr. Kissinger : Our difficulty, Mr. Vice Minister, is that it is our belief for us to return to be attacked that we sold out a friend in the capital of another country with which we have had long difficulties will unleash a storm, and will undo much of the good that has been accomplished and will reduce our ability to do what we have said we will do. This is complicated by the fact that this is an election year, and therefore it makes the problem especially complex for us as to what we can say. I speak to the Vice Foreign Minister very frankly.

To give you an example, Mr. Vice Minister, and to explain to you why we changed that first sentence, I took the formulation brought by General Haig before I came here to Secretary Connally. I did this because he is the strong man in our cabinet, and we need him if we want to get public support for something; or, it is helpful—we don't need him absolutely, but it is helpful. He doesn't know anything about China, Taiwan—he's just an American who has instinctive reactions.

Mr. Holdridge: Strong reactions.

Dr. Kissinger : He said to me, “You've sold out.” This is the Haig formulation. Because he thought that the phrase “a province of China” has a peculiar connotation in America. He said he thought this meant we were turning over Taiwan to China right then and there. I am not arguing the merit of the position; I am trying to tell you what we are up against and I know how painful this is for you.

VM Ch'iao: But why didn't you tell him Chiang Kai-shek too says Taiwan is a province of China?

Dr. Kissinger : Mr. Vice Minister, I have explained this to him. His argument is you never have a chance to explain these things after all hell has broken loose. This is almost a direct quotation. I just want to explain to you there is no complicated rationale. We want to avoid the word “province”—and we are trying to gain his support which could be useful.

On the middle part, I thought I was meeting you some part of the way by taking out the words “abiding interest.” But I have an idea of how to fix this and will skip it for the moment.

Now we come to the last part. The dilemma we face is this. You do not wish us to state it conditionally, because you took the position this is your territory and we have no right to set conditions, and I understand this. We would like to find a formulation which is at least vaguer, not because it affects what we will do, which you know, but because it enables us to return without looking as if we had surrendered on this point. And this is our dilemma with your last sentence.

We have told you exactly what we will do and we have kept all our promises. I have repeated it on each of my visits. The President has repeated it. So I have an idea of what to do with the central part; I have no precise idea yet on what to do with the last sentence. What I would like to do if this meets the approval of the Minister is that after we finish here, I would like to spend an hour with my assistants and talk to the President and give you another draft early this afternoon, which you can study, which takes into account your points and, of course, I will show the President your version also. But I simply wanted to give you my reaction.

VM Ch'iao: I am very grateful for your comments. But you know that in the Chinese declaration on this matter there are many points which we could have, but did not put forward. For instance, in your propaganda you have repeatedly stated you abide by your treaty commitments with Chiang Kai-shek. But we took into account your situation. We did not fire some empty cannons, for instance, that you must immediately totally and unconditionally withdraw from Taiwan.

Dr. Kissinger : Like your allies.

VM Ch'iao: You have heard that. We say direction, but the direction must be mentioned. You mentioned in one of your past declarations the ultimate objective of the withdrawal. But if such formulations are to be put forward, it would be impossible.

Dr. Kissinger : “Ultimate objective” you would not agree to.

VM Ch'iao: I just say that in your last suggestion in October you still mentioned “ultimate objective” but in this draft which you put forward you don't even mention that—you just talk about progressive removal. So when your people see it they will say, “Isn't that the same as in Vietnam?”, and you will leave a tail behind. Reduction, but not withdrawal.

Dr. Kissinger : “Removal” in English means “withdrawal.” “Progressive” means it will be done in stages.

VM Ch'iao: Well, we have already stated our views and in a frank and serious way, and have repeatedly studied formulations we put forward, and in our formulation we put full stops at ends of sentences. They are independent sentences. You have semicolons; we have full stops. Dr. Kissinger: The difficulty is that you are so much subtler than most Americans that that fine point will be totally lost on most Americans. But I appreciate it.

VM Ch'iao: Taiwan is our territory. That's our problem, not your problem.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand your problem, and I am not saying you are being unreasonable. We have an objective difficulty here because it does you no good if, as the result of the communique, a tremendous debate starts in the U.S. about whether we were completely taken in by you and casts into doubt everything else that we have discussed. That is the problem we face.

And, for example, there is the other problem. I recognize you are not mentioning the defense treaty on your side, but I do not think it will help you when we are asked by Congress what this means that we point out that you have not mentioned the defense treaty, because that would be embarrassing to you.

VM Ch'iao: It won't be embarrassing because we would immediately put it off, the differences.

Dr. Kissinger : That's what I mean, exactly.

VM Ch'iao: I just say that in these private conversations to take into consideration your problems.

Dr. Kissinger : We will not mention it to the Congress, I promise you.

VM Ch'iao: Because the fact that we are not mentioning this treaty is to take into consideration your difficulties. Our American friends should understand.

Dr. Kissinger : 'We here understand it. Our problem is we cannot explain this to our people that the Chinese side has taken our problems into account by not mentioning the defense treaty because that would make it worse. And therefore, we will be judged only by these words, and we cannot explain your moderation, because that would not help matters.

Mr. Chang: Well, you need not say that in your explanations to your contacts. Just ask them to make a comparison between this statement and the Vice Minister's statement in the UN, and they will see what moderation we have exercised.

VM Ch'iao: If this wording you put forward is to be published, then to put it in customary Chinese wording our people would explode. They will say what have you been doing in these talks? I agree to this suggestion—this is a crucial matter and suppose we continue with your suggestion.

Dr. Kissinger : We will give you another draft this afternoon.

VM Ch'iao: And so to put it very frankly, if we cannot find the wording acceptable to both sides, and reasonable on this crucial matter, then on the other matter of trade or exchanges we cannot find it possible to go on to discuss these things.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand.

VM Ch'iao: If you find any of my comments not clear we can have more exchanges now because we do have differences. Or shall we recess now? Our differences are to be discussed.

Dr. Kissinger : I think I understand your point of view and don't think much is solved by continuing this discussion until we have considered it and then we can do. Because we don't want to draft something here of this importance. But can we consider for a moment what will happen if we cannot find a mutually agreeable formulation? How shall we then proceed?

VM Ch'iao: It will be hard for us to reply to that. Maybe just no communique?

Dr. Kissinger : That's a possibility.

Well, the next step has to be that we consider. We shouldn't plan for something that we are here to avoid.

VM Ch'iao: That is right. We are very serious about this communique.

Dr. Kissinger : I know you are.

VM Ch'iao: Because we Chinese don't take things very lightly.

Dr. Kissinger : This has been our experience, and we will consider what you have said and make an effort to meet your concerns. And you please keep in mind our difficulties and that we are approaching it in a very serious manner also and with the intention of having a positive outcome.

I want to make one point about exchanges and trade. Precisely because we are serious people we both know that basically they don't mean anything. The maximum amount of bilateral trade possible between us, even if we make great efforts, is infinitesimal in terms of our total economy. And the exchanges, while they are important, will not change objective realities. We both know this. Nevertheless, we believe that we should have some significant paragraphs in the communique on this because what we are doing is to make a revolution in American foreign policy, and we need to symbolize it in some concrete way that the American people can understand. When I say “revolution” there is a great deal of sentimental interest in China. But in terms of the hard decisions that we have to take, such as we did take in the crisis with the Subcontinent, such as we did take in relations with the Soviet Union and Japan, where a concrete price has to be paid, we wouldn't have nearly the support that you would think we have watching television people. In other words, you no doubt distinguish between the sentimentality and reality of Americans in their attitudes toward China, especially those with a missionary background. Many of those, a majority of those who are genuinely in favor of better relations with China, would be absolutely horrified if they knew about the discussion we had yesterday morning.

So I want to tell you the attitude of the President and myself on exchanges and trade. We believe that a people who has suffered and fought what you have in the last 50 years, who have been on the Long March are not going to be charmed by a group of pedants from universities or bought by a businessman from Hong Kong. But the American public is more sentimental and also there will be inevitable comparisons between what will happen when we go to Moscow, and I have explained what the Soviet strategy is —to get a maximum number of agreements, no matter how irrelevant they are. I say this only so there is no misunderstanding about exchanges and trade, and why we want it.

Can I raise a few minor technical points, or should we wait? They are not connected with the communique.

VM Ch'iao: Yes, you may.

Mr. Chang: I would like to say one more word on the Taiwan clause. That is on the first part, these first two sentences were already agreed upon, and what is more, the State Department in Secretary Rogers' memo to the President, it too agrees that Taiwan is a province of China. Does Dr. Kissinger still think it is necessary to change the wording?

Dr. Kissinger : Let me talk to the President about it. We will try to deal with it in a positive spirit.

We are going to replace General Walters in Paris. He is going to be made Deputy Director of the CIA. That is always a job that goes to a military man, and we are giving it to him because we trust him. He will leave Paris. We are thinking of asking our Ambassador in Paris to carry these messages. This is not a career ambassador. He is a personal friend of the President's and we have complete confidence in him. And he would do it privately. He would not do it on an official basis and the secrecy would be maintained. Is that agreeable to you? You don't have to answer now.

VM Ch'iao: Thank you for your notification.

Dr. Kissinger : Is it agreeable or you will let me know?

VM Ch'iao: We will tell you later.

Dr. Kissinger : If not, we will find somebody else. We are being pressed very much by our press to tell them something. So far we have said nothing and will say nothing of substance, but is it possible to say, for example, when the President and the Prime Minister meet they speak without notes, just to give them atmosphere? It's stupid. (Laughter)

VM Ch'iao: You are expert on this matter; I am not.

Dr. Kissinger : I am an expert on stupidity?

VM Ch'iao: On making these people stupid.

Dr. Kissinger : On making the press stupid?

VM Ch'iao: You must not make that public to them.

Dr. Kissinger : I thought I would quote you.

VM Ch'iao: There is nothing substantial about that.

Dr. Kissinger : Can we say that the atmosphere is frank, friendly, or whatever, about the mood?

Let's wait till we have the Taiwan thing settled. I think it's better.

VM Ch'iao: Use “frank” and “serious.”

Dr. Kissinger : Let's not use adjectives. We once drafted an all-purpose communique: “The fact that voices were raised does not prove that physical violence was used.” (Laughter)

Can we say something like that?

VM Ch'iao: I don't know how you'll put it.

Dr. Kissinger : We could say the table between them prevented physical violence.

VM Ch'iao: Of course, you say that.

Dr. Kissinger : It would be helpful if either the Prime Minister to the President, or you to me would say … the President suggested to the Prime Minister for me to visit after the Moscow summit. It has to be before July 7 because that is the Democratic Convention. It would help if some comment could be made because it would help in our bureaucracy to know these arrangements were made as a result of this visit.

VM Ch'iao: Certainly, we will give you a clear reply to that before you leave.

Dr. Kissinger : No hurry. One other point. The Director of the New York Museum of Art was under the impression that Ambassador Huang Hua said to him you might consider sending some of the works of art going to the Paris museum to the United States if our government welcomed this. I don't know whether he misunderstood Chinese politeness. I give you this letter from him. You should reply to him, not to us. If you are considering it, and if our interest is of importance, we would welcome it, but we are not requesting it.

VM Ch'iao: It's very clear. We will study this.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, and the answer should go to him, not to us. You can tell us if you want to, but I want to make clear it is a non-governmental proposal.

VM Ch'iao: Yes, you made that very clear. But on the question of informing of these things, we can tell you when we make our decision.

Dr. Kissinger : We would be very pleased.

VM Ch'iao: But it is not a governmental action.

Dr. Kissinger : When shall we meet again, this afternoon?

VM Ch'iao: The President and Prime Minister are going to meet again this afternoon.

Dr. Kissinger : At 5:00.

VM Ch'iao: So long as it does not affect discussions between the President and the Premier we can meet again. You can inform us of the time. So long as it does not affect the meeting between Prime Minister and President, any other time is all right for us.

Dr. Kissinger : After a dinner of Peking duck I will agree to anything.

VM Ch'iao: I hope so. Would you kindly tell us the name of your ambassador in Paris?

Dr. Kissinger : Watson. He is not as intelligent as Walters.

Let us aim for 3:00 this afternoon, or 3:30. Let's say 3:30. It won't take us long because if we have a new text we will give it to you and explain it.

VM Ch'iao: Decide on 3:30.

Dr. Kissinger : And I would be prepared to meet after the Peking duck, either to get your reaction to what we discussed at 3:30 or to discuss Vietnam. Or tomorrow—it's up to you.

VM Ch'iao: Let us put the communique in first priority. We'll be flexible. Mr. HAN Hsu's principle is flexibility.

Dr. Kissinger : I have noticed that.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

94. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 24, 1972, 3 p.m. 94. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 24, 1972, 3 p.m.1

Beijing, February 24, 1972, 3 p.m.

Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: February 24, 1972, 3:00 p.m.

SUBJECT:

Counterpart Meeting III

PARTICIPANTS:

Chinese

Foreign Minister Chi P'eng-fei

Hsiung Hsiang-hui, Secretary to the Premier, Foreign Affairs

Wang Chen, Deputy Director, Information Department

Ch'ien Ta-yung, Deputy Director, West European, American and Australasian Affairs

Li Tsung-ying, Leading Member, Research Group

Ting Yuan-hung, Member, Delegation to the UNGA

SHEN JO-YUN, Interpreter

Hu Fang Hsien, Stenographer

US

Secretary of State William P. Rogers

Assistant Secretary of State Marshall Green

Ron Ziegler, Press Secretary to the President

John Scali, Speciail Consultant to the President

Alfred le S. Jenkins, Director for Asian Communist Affairs

Nicholas Platt, Assistant to the Secretary

Commander John Howe, National Security Council Staff

Charles W. Freeman, Jr., Interpreter

Calvin Mehlert, Interpreter

PLACE: Sinkiang Room, Great Hall of the People, Peking

COPIES TO: S S/S U EA J

White House - Dr. Kissinger

At our suggestion, the Foreign minister opened with a review of the international situation from the PRC point of view, which, he observed, can be learned from PRC newspapers.

Foreign Minister Chi noted first that great changes had occurred in the international situation in the over 20 years since the end of World War II, changes to which President Nixon had referred in his Foreign Policy Report of July 6, 1971. The most dominant characteristic of the world in this period is its untranquil nature. Although there has been no new world war, local wars have never ceased. The civil conflict in China, the Korean War and the Viet-Nam war are examples. Now the India-Pakistan war has added a third war in this area, sharpening contradictions and making the situation in South Asia more unstable and uncertain. The Middle East is in the midst of recurrent war crises, with the ever-present possibility of war on a larger scale.

Causes of Turmoil

What are the causes of this lack of tranquility? Frankly speaking, they cannot be separated from the post World War II policies of Presidents Truman, Kennedy and Johnson. Thus, in the 1950's the economic and military strengths of the US expanded enormously. In the words of the 1971 Foreign Policy Report, the US had “indisputable superiority in strategic strength.” As a result the US stretched out its hands too far and attempted to gain too much control. Tension grew in many areas as a result. Witness the civil war in China, the Korean War and Viet-Nam.

The Soviet Union and the US

In the 1960's, another big power has attempted to slip into your shoes and to control the affairs of other countries. It wants to intervene in Europe, the Middle East, the Mediterranean and also in South Asia. Its purpose is to establish hegemony in the Indian Ocean and to dominate everyone else, as the US Foreign Policy Report noted. President Nixon has noted also that US-USSR relations are “dominated by incessant and dangerous conflict.” Thus, how can the international situation be other than dangerous? Furthermore, the situation will become increasingly hostile.

Reaction to US Policy of Domination China and Viet-Nam

What was the result of the US policy to dominate all, the Foreign Minister asked. President Nixon himself noted in the July 1971 Foreign Policy Report that the US was no longer in a position of “complete predominance” and “has a challenge such as we did not even dream of.” Mr. Secretary is no doubt familiar with our views that where there is oppression there will be resistance. President Truman spent billions to engage in the Chinese civil war, but what was the result? We are all clear about that and no details are needed. Then you began throwing more billions as well as your own troops into the Indochinese War, bringing disaster to the people of Indochina. Now it is certain that the US will not be able to win this war.

The Crux of the World Situation

The crux of the situation in the world is that aggression and oppression are unpopular and can only arouse the resistance of the people. (The Foreign Minister then drew a parallel with the US war of independence.)

In the view of the PRC, despite upheavals, the trend is progressive, and is reflected in the post-war antiimperialist and anti-colonialist struggles in Asia which have brought independence to many countries. In Africa and Latin America the struggle against colonialism and imperialism has spread and countries are becoming independent one after another. President Nixon also has noted the strong desire for change in Latin America.

The Competition of the “Super Powers”

In the world today, the Foreign Minister continued, there are one or two super-powers who, no matter how wild their ambitions, cannot monopolize world affairs. The middle and smaller powers demand a voice. This trend is being expressed in international bodies like the U.N. Our outlook is optimistic: countries want independence; nations want liberation; and people want revolution. This is an irresistible trend.

President Nixon has said that he wants a relaxation of international tension. But the people of the world see that the US and the USSR are rivals for world hegemony; anxious to divide between themselves spheres of influence; and deeply involved in a nuclear arms race, in what you call “global strategic competition.” You emphasize the need to enhance your position of strength, to create an “adequate nuclear deterrent” and to spend billions for this. How can this be conducive to peace and to relaxation of tensions? It is already many years since the end of World War II, but the US still maintains many troops and bass overseas.

The US and its “Old Friends,” or a New Policy

The US says that it will not abandon its old friends and will faithfully observe its treaty commitments. What does this mean in fact? In fact, you have no intention of withdrawing troops from overseas, or of giving up control over and interference in other countries.

How then can the US contribute to a relaxation of tensions? Premier Chou En-lai told Dr. Kissinger last October that “if we are to enter a new era, it will be necessary to change some relations, If there is no change, then life can only go on as before.”

If you maintain all old relations, you won't “abandon old friends;” how can you adapt to a new era? I discussed this problem with the Secretary on our trip to the Great Wall. What about Ngo Ding Diem and Syngman Rhee? Were they not “old friends” in their time? It is clear to everyone what end they met. Why are you so reluctant to part with unpopular “old friends.” In our view we must march forward to adapt to a new era. We cannot stand still.

PRO Solution for Peace and Its Own Role in International Relations

If we are to ease international tension and attain peace then all must respect the five principles of peaceful coexistence. Every country must be free to choose its own social system without outside interference. Otherwise the world will only see even greater upheavals.

For over a century the Foreign Minister continued, the Chinese people have suffered from foreign aggression and oppression. Therefore, the Chinese people of course sympathize with and firmly support the just struggle of all oppressed peoples. I think you know that our support is primarily political and moral although we give some material support to friendly countries.

On the basis of the five principles, we have established and developed relations of friendship and cooperation with many countries. Even with these countries with whom we have differences of principle, we have established normal relations on the basis of the five principles. The old China once bullied neighbor countries, and then itself was subjected to bullying. This kind of injustice still exists today with the large bullying the small and the strong bullying the weak. Our experience has shown that big power chauvinism is undesirable. All countries, large and small, should be equal. International matters should be settled by consultation of all countries and not by the super-powers. We believe that peaceful consultation should be used to settle problems and not force or the threat of force. Troops should be withdrawn from foreign territory.

Prospects for Peace in Asia

While we favor a reduction of tension in the Far East, we take a realistic view of the complicated situation in that area. We hope for peace but we have no illusions about the ease with which peace may be attained. We hope for a reduction of tensions, but we are not afraid of tension. We are accustomed to tension on our borders. In fact, tensions are not harmful to us, but rather have the effect of educating and mobilizing our people.

I must tell you frankly that we have made preparation against all kinds of eventualities. I believe that you must be clear about all these.

Foreign Minister Chi concluded this presentation by suggesting that certain questions touched on only briefly, such as those concerning Indochina, Japan and Korea, could be dealt with separately later on.

The Secretary opened by commenting that the Foreign minister's presentation showed so many obvious misconceptions of US policy and world affairs that he had difficulty knowing where to begin.

”Oppression?”

It is difficult, he continued, for the American people to accept the PRO's simplistic division of the world into oppressors and oppressed, into aggressors and those aggressed against. It is also impossible, based on observable fact, to imply that the US is an oppressor and thus unpopular in the world. That is a total fallacy. If one travels extensively, as I have, one can see clearly that what you say is entirely wrong, although isolation from the real world may cause some people to think this way. I remarked to you on our way to the Great Wall that I personally, as Secretary of State, have been well received in almost every country I have visited, about 45 in all.

Our people are free to leave the US to go anywhere they want. We have no problem of citizens who want to escape. Rather, our problem is that we have so many people who want to come to the US that we must have restrictions on immigration. Many Chinese live in the US, and more want to come. If the US was, as you seem to imply, an “aggressor and oppressor,” then there would not be this considerable desire to come to the US.

The US has treaties with 45 nations. These treaties, and the mutual commitments therein, were not forced on either party. They were made with nations chosen by the people.

US Support to Independence Movements

You are aware of our strong support for the independence of African nations. I have been warmly received, in many of these countries. African nations do not want revolution, but peaceful development and peaceful change are needed. I was continually asked to provide more Americans and more US help to these countries.

The situation is much the same in Latin America where, as I learned at the recent meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the Americas, more US participation in development is desired. One basic reason is that those countries know that we have no territorial ambitions nor any wish to control them.

US-PRC Agreement in Principle

We agree with you that the large and strong should not bully the small and weak. The nations with whom we have relations do not fear us on this score. There are some nations with whom we are having difficulties at the present, difficulties which are described fully in our free press.

We agree with you also that affairs should be settled by the people of the countries themselves. We agree on the principle of self-determination. In our view, this means by voting; we know of no other way.

US Armed Strength

I mentioned once in our meeting yesterday that the US had been forced into world wars two times against our will. We have since decided that we will never again be second best. And we do not intend to apologize to anyone for that. We maintain our military strength as a means to prevent another world war.

You imply that US troops are in other countries against the wishes of the people. This is not true. We maintain troops in Europe in reaction to the threat to stability posed by the Warsaw Pact and in response to the requests of the nations concerned. In fact, I don't believe that your own government would want us to withdraw these troops. Certainly the countries concerned do not want us to do so. The world knows that US power brought victory in World War II; and that instead of dominating the vanquished we helped to rebuild them to the point where Japan is now the third most economically powerful nation, Germany the fourth and Italy prospering.

In summation, I find that the facts simply do not support your implication that the US is an oppressor nation out to dominate the world.

”Old Friends” and Troop Withdrawals

You criticize us for being unwilling to abandon old friends. We say that we want to make new friends and that is why we are in the PRC today. Also, we are reducing our troop presence in this part of the world as a result of lowering tensions. We have given up Okinawa. Although I understand that there are many things you feel compelled to state publicly concerning my country and the world, I hope that you do not believe all of what you say.

Co-existence, Our Pride in Our System and Revolution

We naturally prefer our system and we are proud of the achievements which have been made, in freedom, under that system. Our achievements are based on our system but we do not insist that others accept it. We agree with you that regardless of system, all nations and peoples should get along. Perhaps in your situation, your system suits you.

Revolution, in our view, is not the wave of the future but rather peace, order, and prosperity. Where change is needed, we believe the world has reached the stage in which change can be orderly and in which force is not needed. We know your ideas differ, but, at the least, we feel if you come to the US you will understand that we are not oppressors.

Foreign Minister Chi responded that of course, differences in principle exist and we have our own views based on our own philosophy, just as you have yours.

War Preparation and Peace

We desire peace. But if one side makes preparations for war and the other also (Chi was referring to the US and the USSR) then there is danger of an arms race. The PRC will not join in an arms race, but because of world tensions it will look to its own strength. We build upon military strength for self-defense purposes; moreover, we have no soldiers stationed abroad.

The Secretary replied that all nations maintain their forces are for self-defense. Again we agree on principle: we build up our strength in order to avoid trouble. Furthermore, we want to reduce the level of arms by mutual agreement with the Soviet Union reached through the SALT talks. Would you want us to disarm unilaterally in the kind of world we live in today?

Foreign Minister Chi expressed the hope that both the US and the USSR will reduce arms levels. But the “self-defense” to which you refer is different from our concept. Our self-defense is on our own soil. But for you, self-defense includes the arms race between your two countries. Suppose the Soviets refuse to reduce their armed strength, what then?

Then we will maintain our strength, the Secretary replied. If we lived in an idyllic world, then we would not need arms. Would you reduce your troops as long as the Soviets are on your border?

If they don't attack us, we won't attack them, Foreign Minister Chi replied.

Turmoil and Revolution in the World

Foreign Minister Chi stated that in spite of differences in social system, philosophy, principles and outlook, it is still possible to reach agreement on state relations. He commented that although the Secretary said the people of the world do not want revolution, in the Chinese view the world is in turmoil and that turmoil is good because then everyone can have their say, and everyone can go forward.

The Secretary noted that two years ago there was much turmoil in the Middle East. Nigeria, once plagued by a most costly war, is now peaceful. Kenya is vastly more stable than some ten to fifteen years ago.

The Foreign Minister replied that although in some areas war has ceased, in others disruption and war is bound to break out. Portugal, the UK and France are all supporting disruption and subversion in Africa.

The Secretary commented that France and England had been successful not only in granting independence to their former colonies in Africa but in retaining their friendship. The South African problem is another difficult problem and we all understand that. With the exclusion of the Portuguese colonies, the other nations of Africa have made significant progress. The last thing they want now is revolution. They need more education, economic development and technical assistance.

Viet-Nam and Asia

Foreign Minister Chi commented that he had spoken generally about “aggression and oppression” and that these words appeared to have made the Secretary unhappy.

The Secretary said that he was used to such words, and that if saying them made the Foreign Minister feel better, he should go right ahead.

Where there is aggression, the Foreign Minister continued, there is resistance to aggression and where there is oppression there is resistance to oppression. After President Nixon came into office, he began to withdraw troops from Asia, but we must trace out the roots of the problem. You inherited the problem and you are doing your best to extricate yourself, but you must admit there was aggression and oppression on your part. We know you are trying to settle the question of Indochina.

The Secretary responded that he did not feel it useful to get into an exchange of recriminations at this point, expressed appreciation for Chi's comments on President Nixon and said that he thought it useful to remind ourselves that there have been recent changes.

Cambodia

The Secretary then raised the matter of North Vietnamese invasion of Cambodian territory. At one time Prince Sihanouk had complained publicly over the presence of NVN troops on Cambodian soil, and had made trips to Peking and Moscow in an attempt to get the NVN to leave. To the American people this seemed like a clear case of foreign troops in a country against the will of the people of that country. The new government of Cambodia maintains exactly this same position as Sihanouk once did. The US would like to have Cambodia free and neutral and to have f_oreign troops leave. We know your ideas are different, although both Sihanouk and now the new government agree that the North Vietnamese are invaders. It is difficult for us to understand why you feel differently. If the North Vietnamese went back to North Viet-Nam, then there would be no trouble in Cambodia. But it looks different from your point of view so these talks are useful.

Prime Minister Chi replied that the Indochinese question should be settled by the Indochinese peoples themselves.

The Secretary said that the US agreed and had advocated an Indochinese conference. Foreign Minister Chi refused to be drawn into a discussion of this, stating only that “this is not our affair. We will not intervene.”

Foreign Minister Chi said that as mutual understanding increases, reinforced by the “testimony of fact,” the views of both sides will come together. It is important, the Foreign Minister said, if we cannot find common views right away because we don't have to be in a hurry.

The Secretary commented that there had been more agreement in principle than he had anticipated and that the main differences lay in how to implement principles and took the five principles of peaceful coexistence as an example.

The Foreign Minister concluded that relations between the two countries should be concluded on the basis of these principles, in particular those relating to non-interference in internal affairs and mutual respect for territorial sovereignty.

Just before the meeting adjourned, a discussion arose over the meanings of the words “dominance” and “predominance.” The Secretary pointed out that the Foreign Minister had mistaken the term “predominance,” as used by President Nixon, for “dominance.” The statement that the US was predominant after World War II simply meant that it was the strongest power in the world, not that the US was trying to control the world. Now, the President had pointed out, the US was no longer predominant, and that in our view, this was a natural and healthy development.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 7 US/NIXON. Secret;Nodis; Homer. Drafted by Calvin Mehlert and approved in S on March 3. Copies were sent to S, U, J, EA, S/S, and Kissinger. The meeting was held in the Sinkiang Room, Great Hall of the People. Eliot sent the memorandum to Rogers under a March 3 covering note. Rogers subsequently approved the memorandum.

95. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 24, 1972, 3:30-3:45 p.m. 95. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 24, 1972, 3:30-3:45 p.m.1

Beijing, February 24, 1972, 3:30-3:45 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John H. Hoidridge, NSC Staff

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Jonathan T. Howe, NSC Staff

Ch'iao Kuan-hua, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Chang Wen-chin, Director of Western Europe, North American, and Australasian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chao Chi-hua, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chi Chao-chu, Interpreter

Two Notetakers

DATE & TIME: Thursday, February 24, 1972 - 3:30-3:45 p.m.

PLACE: Guest House, Villa 2, Peking

Dr. Kissinger : I am sorry I am late. I was on the phone with Washington and I had to talk to the President. That is why I am late.

VM Chiao: Then the President's trip to the Great Wall was fine.

Dr. Kissinger : He was delighted.

VM Chiao: Such fine weather.

Dr. Kissinger : No one of our associates knows about our discussions, and I will not show them to anybody until we have agreed. I think you were right on your suggestion. What do you think about letting me show the Secretary of State tonight after the dinner the part up to the Taiwan section? That is the part we have agreed on. Tell me candidly.

VM Chiao: You want that we do our work the best way possible. Maybe we will meet each other even before the dinner.

Dr. Kissinger : We won't do anything until—discuss it with me first. We have redrafted the statement, and we tried to take your views into account. We have gone back practically to the old terminology. The only thing we would like to say, which I think makes no difference in Chinese, is there is but one China and Taiwan is a part of China. It is just to avoid this criticism that I mentioned to you. I am just explaining what we tried to do.

Then we have changed the word “position” to “view,” We have taken two sentences from the World Report which you said you liked or at least maybe I misunderstood—from which you thought we had regressed. And we have put in the phrase “progressively reduce and finally withdraw” in a slightly different context than you. So let me read it to you. “The U.S. acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Strait maintain there is but one China and that Taiwan is a part of China. The U.S. does not challenge that position. It reaffirms its view that the ultimate relationship between Taiwan and the Mainland is not a matter for the U.S. to decide. It believes that a peaceful resolution of the Taiwan question by the parties concerned would do much to reduce tensions in the Far East. This would enable the U.S. to progressively reduce and finally withdraw all the U.S. troops and military installations from Taiwan.”

VM Chiao: We will study, and then we will give you the reply. As Dr. Kissinger knows, that has been our practice on previous occasions. We will make a serious study of it first and then we will continue. From our side I have nothing more to say now. We need some time to study it, and I will have to report to Premier Chou En-lai.

Dr. Kissinger : Of course. We have made a serious effort to take your views into account, and we will continue to do so as these discussions proceed. But I understand you have to study it.

VM Chiao: I do not want immediately to comment on your draft now. I believe that Dr. Kissinger would understand how I feel about certain of the wording here, but I will not go into it now.

Dr. Kissinger : The two sentences in the middle were from the World Report and were an attempt to take sentences that you have indicated you approve.

VM Chiao: I would clarify what I said this morning about the World Report. I just want to point out in making the report you indicated you do not want to affect any particular course any side might take. In doing that I did not express that I approve.

Dr. Kissinger : No, no. You thought what we had was a step backward from the World Report, so I wanted to go back to the World Report.

VM Chiao: After we make the study we will continue.

Dr. Kissinger : You will notify us when you are ready.

VM Chiao: The President and Premier are going to meet at 5:00. If possible, the earliest time would be after the duck dinner, and after we had the duck dinner we would have new energy to have to deal with work.

Dr. Kissinger : And I will be much easier to deal with.

VM Chiao: You may want to ask to discuss this matter after you have passed that state in which you are easy to deal with.

Dr. Kissinger : So, make sure you pick the right moment.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

96. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 12:50-1:15 a.m. 96. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 12:50-1:15 a.m.1

Beijing, February 25, 1972, 12:50-1:15 a.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John H. Holdridge, NSC Staff

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Johnathan T. Howe, NSC Staff

Ch'iao Kuan-hua, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Chang Wen-chin, Director of Western Europe, North American, and Australasian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chao Chi-hua, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chi Chao-chu, Interpreter

Three Notetakers

DATE & TIME: Friday, February 25, 1972 - 12:50-1:15 a.m.

PLACE: Guest House, Villa 2, Peking

Dr. Kissinger : The thing that, as I said, holds my staff together is the hope that they will be there when I collapse.

VM Chiao: Let's begin our work. We studied the formulation which you put forward, and I reported it to Premier Chou En-lai. I would like to proceed in accordance with the spirit of the discussion held today with the President and Chou En-lai on Taiwan. And I don't believe it is necessary for me to say much more on this. I would first like to say something concerning your formulation—places we find difficult for us.

Dr. Kissinger; We thought the Prime Ministers presentation showed a great understanding of the problem.

VM Chiao: Thank you. In the draft which you handed over this afternoon there is a possible misunderstanding of what we meant when we mentioned what was in the World Report. President Nixon said the ultimate relationship between Taiwan and the Mainland is not for the U.S. to decide. In the context of the World Report of the President it implied that you considered it to be an internal affair of China, but in the context of the Communique we don't think this appropriate.

Now, why is that? Because it had already been made quite clear in the first part of this paragraph that there is only one China. You have already made clear that this is a matter between the two opposing sides in China. But to say it here about the ultimate relationship between Taiwan and the Mainland, this would imply two possibilities. One eventuality is that Taiwan would separate itself from China and the other possibility would be to return to the embrace of the motherland. Of course, I don't imply by that that that is your implication when you say that. I am just saying that placed in this context it will give my people this impression.

Dr. Kissinger : We took it out of context—a slight misunderstanding of what the Vice Foreign Minister said. We don't insist on this.

VM Chiao: We suggest that this sentence be deleted.

Dr. Kissinger : Alright.

VM Chiao: Your following sentence “[the U.S.] believes that a peaceful solution of the Taiwan question by the parties concerned would do much to reduce tension in the Far East.” We think the general meaning is alright but I would like to make some changes.

Dr. Kissinger : But I am afraid you will take out the whole sentence.

VM Chiao: Because you have repeated the sentence …

Dr. Kissinger : No, no. Please give us your ideas.

VM Chiao: And then in your final sentence you want to link the question of the final withdrawal with certain conditions, and we should put it in such a way so that it would be passable for you and for us.

Dr. Kissinger : I think the Prime Minister expressed it very well this afternoon.

VM Chiao: As for the first sentence, there is the question that Taiwan is a province of China. That was originally agreed upon but this morning you told us in a frank way why you find it difficult to keep that wording, although, in our view the reasons you advanced were insufficient. I asked you why don't you ask Connally and why don't you ask Chiang Kai-shek? But nevertheless, we are willing to consider your difficulty in this matter. So we would like to make a concession to you on this point and put this idea into our statement. In our statement we would say Taiwan is a province of China.

Dr. Kissinger: And us?

VM Chiao: And for you Taiwan is a part of China. That is to say we have made efforts in the general spirit of the Prime Minister and the President to see to it that both your side and our side will [be satisfied].

Dr. Kissinger : Of course, I am in the same position as you were this afternoon. That is to say, I do not want to reply to this hastily and I would like to discuss it with the President. Just a preliminary comment. First, I recognize you have made an effort to move to take into account our difficulties and in a preliminary way I think that the first three sentences have moved us very far towards a solution. It is the relationship between those and the last sentence that is frankly the difficulty for both of us. And we will have to consider how … we realize that you do not want to make it conditional, and we would like to imply to some extent that it is. I am being very honest. But we will consider it. This is just a preliminary reaction, and I would like to discuss it with the President, and it is really this sentence at this moment that stands between us. Let us consider it overnight with the President and get together tomorrow morning again. Would that be a good way to proceed?

VM Chiao: Alright.

Dr. Kissinger : Now I have only the concern how we will bring this to a conclusion, much as I enjoy the company of the Vice Foreign Minister, and because I suppose you will have to consider any counter proposal we make.

VM Chiao: That is correct. This is a crucial question.

Dr. Kissinger : The other issues we will settle relatively easy.

VM Chiao: I believe there won't need to be too much time spent on this, once this question is solved. As for the others, even if there is some differences of views they can be overcome.

Dr. Kissinger : I have a few suggestions on the part we discussed this morning. Should I give them to you now or should we wait until morning?

VM Chiao: You may as well tell us now. I enjoy your company.

Dr. Kissinger : In the first paragraph of page 2 you are saying they reviewed the international situation in which important changes are taking place and great upheavals exist. Upheavals do not exist. So, I would like to take out the word “exist” and have “important changes and great upheavals are taking place.” Consider it is purely a stylistic point.

VM Chiao: I don't believe there would be any difficulty there.

Dr. Kissinger : Where you say “expressed their position and views”—purely stylistic—I am trying to refrain from using “views” in both sentences. How about “attitudes"? Does it present any problems?

VM Chiao: “Positions and attitudes"?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

VM Chiao: As a matter of style.

Dr. Kissinger : In the last paragraph 11 ”… people want revolution”—“revolutionary changes” is better for us.

VM Chiao: We will consider the matter.

Dr. Kissinger : In our section where we say the U.S. side stated that in Asia—that paragraph in the middle where it says ”… improving communication with countries that have different world outlooks.” I think “ideology” is better in English than “world outlook.”

VM Chiao: We will consider it.

Dr. Kissinger It will not fail for that reason. I think if we settle everything except that one I will yield. And one: other stylistic change which is not worth it now. We will do it tomorrow. In that paragraph prior to the principles, where you say “it would be against the interests of the peoples of the world for any major country to collude against another country.” We are going to suggest “to divide up into spheres of interest.”

VM Chiao: You mean for major countries of the world to divide up into spheres of interest. We will review that. I believe that on this matter there is no difference on our basic thinking,

Dr. Kissinger : Alright, Those are the only changes I have now. Shall we meet tomorrow morning?

VM Chiao: As to when we will meet, that is up to you.

Dr. Kissinger : I have to talk with the President. He is going to the Forbidden City and so the press will think I am very blase—seen it once, why see it again.

VM Chiao: Maybe they will think that you are up to some collusion somewhere,

Dr. Kissinger : They do. Mr. Cronkite of CBS called today and insisted on talking to me to make sure I was still in Peking. But, of course, I am up to some collusion.

Alright, let's say 10:00, because the President will be leaving by then, and we will have discussed it by then.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2, Beijing.

97. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 9:34-10:58 a.m. 97. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 9:34-10:58 a.m.1

Beijing, February 25, 1972, 9:34-10:58 a.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John H. Holdridge, NSC Staff

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Jonathan T. Howe, NSC Staff

Ch'iao Kuan-hua, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Chang Wen-chin, Director of Western Europe, North American and Australasian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chao Chi-hua, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chi Chao-chu, Interpreter

Three Notetakers

DATE & TIME: Friday, February 25, 1972 - 9:34 a.m. - 10:58 a.m.

PLACE: Guest House, Villa 2, Peking

Dr. Kissinger : I have just been given an AP story—you can read it yourself. It is not true. As I told the Prime Minister yesterday, most of our bureaucracy is in favor of this course, and they have the tendency to leak to the press what they would like to have happen. President Bhutto has talked to us about recognition after March 17. That was his proposal to us. We have made no decision and we will relate it to the withdrawal of Indian troops at the end of March. And, as the President told the Prime Minister, we will inform you all before official action is taken, and until then, none of this is to be taken as authoritative.

VM Chiao: I am grateful to you and there will be no misunderstanding on our part.

Dr. Kissinger : Secondly, and this is simply for your information, you should know, as we said in our World Report, that we are resuming humanitarian relief to East Bengal. We have adopted the policy that we will do so only through the United Nations and that we will contribute our normal contribution to UN agencies which is to say around 33 percent. This is about half of what we contributed before. This is simply for your information. We will not make a big announcement about it.

VM Chiao: Thank you. We are clear about the purpose of your humanitarian relief which we had already read about.

Dr. Kissinger : Now, to get back to our communique. I have discussed your proposal of yesterday with the President and he realizes that you have made a significant effort to take his problems into account. We are therefore accepting the first three sentences as you drafted them. So the only issue is the last sentence. And the President himself, as you see here, drafted the version. I will give you a typed copy. I just think the Vice Minister feels that I am cheating him if I don't show him an internal document once a day. My assistants tell me the diplomatic methods I pursue are highly unorthodox.

VM Chiao: Revolutionary.

Dr. Kissinger : That's right.

VM Chiao: I am on your side.

Dr. Kissinger : We have rephrased the end somewhat, quite frankly to make it a little vaguer, not because our intentions are different, but because of the reasons the President and Prime Minister discussed yesterday. There is a typographical error; we mean “on” Taiwan not “in” Taiwan.

VM Chiao: This is a very serious question.

Dr. Kissinger : Of course, of course.

VM Chiao: And I will adopt no hasty attitude.

Dr. Kissinger : Of course.

VM Chiao: And I only express our preliminary impressions. I realize indeed you have worked hard to try to find a formulation. My preliminary impression is that the world “premise” is very strong and somewhat difficult for us. But we will take a serious attitude.

Dr. Kissinger : I know you will.

VM Chiao: And I will report to Premier Chou En-lai and after a careful study then we will see whether we can find some way out. And with possible alternatives just for reference sake, not as a formal suggestion, for use for an alternative.

Dr. Kissinger : Do I understand it is the word “premise” that is the principal concern to you?

VM Chiao: And then “looks to”—it is too loose. It may even imply no action at all. I am not talking about what actually will happen, but the way of expressing it, the impact on the outside world. I recall that in one of your former suggestions you had a formulation that “The U.S. accepts the ultimate objective of the withdrawal of its forces from Taiwan.”

Dr. Kissinger : I am looking for the language on … yes, we could conceivably do this “based on this premise.” Of course you understand I am somewhat limited by this, so we have to say this is just thinking out loud.

VM Chiao: No commitment for either of us on these comments.

Dr. Kissinger : The Vice Minister has correctly pointed out we have put this in the direction of vagueness for the reason that the President gave to the Prime Minister yesterday. It would serve nobody's purpose if we had to spend the next month after we return explaining what we did not agree to. So we could conceivably say, “based on this premise …”

VM Chiao: I am not quite familiar with this … “on Taiwan” or “from Taiwan?”

Dr. Kissinger : We would be glad to say … “from” is fine.

VM Chiao: Immediately before?

Dr Kissinger: That's fine; that's no problem.

VM Chiao: . . I just remind you to refresh your memory, “U.S. accepts the ultimate objective …” Originally your suggestion then was “The U.S. accepts the ultimate objective … and pending that …” Changed to ”… as tensions in Asia diminish …”

Dr. Kissinger : Is that easier for you?

VM Chiao: I am just trying to refresh your memory.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes I have it and it was a proposal by me of course. You understood then that everything we were discussing had to be discussed with the President, but I think we could work with that sentence, if you would rather have that sentence.

VM Chiao: That's not what I mean. What I mean on that, the words “ultlimate objective” are words which can be used as a reference.

Dr. Kissinger : Oh, instead of “looks to.”

VM Chiao: I am also thinking out loud; that is my personal, preliminary, and unofficial thinking. First, the word “premise” is too strong, and second, the words “looking toward” are too loose. I understand why you use the word “looks toward” because following that you mention final withdrawal, so I believe that you used that for the purpose of discussing your difficulties. On final withdrawal you want to be loose?

Dr. Kissinger : Absolutely. Our problem is—and you have stated your problem very fairly and clearly—our problem is the word “hope” is too loose, and the word “intends” is too strong.

VM Chiao: Both of use are just thinking out loud. No commitment on either side.

Dr. Kissinger : Absolutely, I understand.

VM Chiao: And I proceed entirely on that constructive spirit.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand.

VM Chiao: All just thinking out loud. As I said, for our side the difficulty with the word “premise” is that it is too strong, and “looking to” is too loose. But we understand your difficulty too—if you are to mention “final withdrawal” you want to put it too loose. But for our side as far as public impact is concerned, it could appear you are taking no action. So it is now a question of expression.

Dr. Kissinger : Exactly.

VM Chiao: So both sides, particularly for our side, will have to make a very careful study of this, and after that I will have to report to Premier Chou. And then we can meet again.

Dr. Kissinger : This is fine. I am getting somewhat concerned for bureaucratic reasons about how we will bring this process to a conclusion.

VM Chiao: What is your idea on this?

Dr. Kissinger : And incidentally, we will study this also, keeping in mind what you have said, and see what can be done. Its … it will, based on past experience, take you several hours to study this, will it not?

VM Chiao: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : Then we have a session this afternoon and a banquet this evening, and will be in Hangchou tomorrow. And so I don't know how this will work out in terms of time.

VM Chiao: I am just expressing my thinking. The ideal thing is for both sides to use the greatest effort to see to it the substantive parts are agreed upon in Peking.

Dr. Kissinger : That is exactly our view.

VM Chiao: If we are able to succeed in that, then you can tell your press we will have a communique. Yesterday afternoon the Premier instructed us to complete it last night. But neither of our sides were able to complete that task.

You blame me and I blame you.

Dr. Kissinger : But you are wrong.

VM Chiao: What do you think of this?

Dr. Kissinger : I think we should finish it today. It would help us with our own bureaucracy. Incidentally, in the spirit of frankness with which we have dealt with each other, I want you to know what we have done in our government. We have given the Secretary of State the draft you handed us yesterday morning—the old draft, which is almost the same as your first draft, not the one of last night—simply so that he knows from what base we were operating when we came up with something better, and so that we can show him that you have made significant concessions yourself. So if he mentions anything to your Foreign Minister, it is the old version that he has seen. But only on Taiwan—nothing else has been shown to him because we have a serious internal problem on it, as you know. To help your thinking, you consider “premise” too strong and “looks to” too vague. As we try to work on this we cannot both weaken “premise” and strengthen “looks to” so maybe a compromise can be found by finding a formulation where one or the other gets improved or both get improved a little bit. But if one becomes more specific, the other has to get a little stronger. I am just telling you the philosophy with which we approach it. For example—and now I am thinking out loud completely and it may not be approved by the President—I could imagine that it could drop the word “premise” and “hope” and simply say “with this in mind, the United States looks to …”

VM Chiao: That's one way of thinking. I also think out loud.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

VM Chiao: That is to say, as I said to you many times, if there is no mention of a final withdrawal, it will be impossible for us to … But then on your side, if there were “final withdrawal” to be mentioned, then as to how you should look on this final withdrawal is your difficulty. From your point of view that must be put in a loose way. So I am just thinking whether it is possible to put words “ultimate objective” before, in front. Just thinking out loud.

Dr. Kissinger : Absolutely, but the reason why this is so helpful is if we go off and write something and you go off and write something without knowing our thinking, we may be exchanging papers . .

VM Chiao: I have no complete formulation in mind. Just thinking if we consider putting words “ultimate objective” in front and then as to the verb which will characterize the progressive reduction, your verb is “look to”—our verb is “will, ”

Dr. Kissinger : Well, “progressive reduction” we don't mind being more specific about. It's the “final withdrawal” that we want to be vague about,

VM Chiao: So in that case, if “ultimate objective” is placed in front then the verb which would describe how you take the action of progressive reduction would be stronger,

Dr. Kissinger : That's right.

VM Chiao: We know that your difficulty lies in this “final withdrawal.” Because otherwise you will find it difficult to account to your opponents. But if it. were not for the word “final withdrawal” for us we could not make an accounting to our people. That is where the difficulty lies.

Director Chang: (whispers to Chiao, unintelligible)

Dr. Kissinger : Does he want to accept it?

VM Chiao: Collude with you against me.

Dr. Kissiger: That's my dream. Mr. Lord says he is already on your side anyway. Judging by the quality of his work I have already suspected that.

VM Chiao: … … in your own collapse.

BREAK—10:15 - 10:37 a.m.

Dr. Kissinger : We think we could, for example, change the word “premise” to “prospect, “ “with this prospect in mind …” It's a little stronger than “hope” and a little weaker than “premise.” And just again thinking out loud, to indicate a direction and since this is of such great domestic importance to the President—you understand that I will have to discuss this with him when he returns—we could, for example…”with this prospect in mind, the U.S. anticipates …” Anticipates means it will happen; we look forward to its happening.

VM Chiao: With this prospect in mind … but so far as progressive reductions is concerned, you just say “anticipate”—that is too light. “With this prospect in mind …” that's too light. I will study that again. I would now like to have some comments on …

Dr. Kissinger : Let me tell the Vice Minister this, the following. We can reduce forces on Taiwan and we intend to during the next year, for example, or certainly as Vietnam diminishes. To the extent that the President can say it is not based on an agreement and that it is a unilateral decision based on our judgment of the situation. This is why we want to say something other than “will.” Could I have your other comments?

VM Chiao: Let us think about various possibilities. First of all, our comment on your formulation. The word “premise” is indeed a very strong word, and speaking from the point of view of logic, “premise” is inseparable from consequence.

Dr. Kissinger : A Hegelian student.

(Laughter)

VM Chiao: The point is that if that is the premise, then that means that a peaceful settlement had already been brought about between us and the Chiang Kai-shek regime. If that is the case, how is there a question of progressive reduction—it will not be a question of withdrawing. If we are to consider accepting the word “premise” then it should be like this: “Based on this premise, the United States will withdraw all its forces and military installations from Taiwan.” That is one possible formulation.

Dr. Kissinger : Good, “based on the premise …” Just so we understand each other, because we will have to explain it to the press. If this were one proposal and we accept it, then we say to the press in case of a peaceful solution, we will withdraw all of our troops. Is that correct?

VM Chiao: Withdrawal of all your forces.

Dr. Kissinger : So you say it's possible, thinking out loud, that if you were to accept the word “premise” we should then just say “will finally withdraw all our forces.” In other words, “based on this premise, the U.S. will withdraw all its forces.”

VM Chiao: That's one possibility. And then another possibility is to delete the word “premise.” Something like this: “With this prospect in mind, the U.S. will progressively reduce its military … something like that … with the ultimate objective … . Just some thinking on this matter.

Another possibility is to delete “premise” and say: “With this prospect in mind, the U.S. will progressively reduce its forces on Taiwan with the ultimate objective of total withdrawal,” something like that.

And then a third possibility, “It reaffirms its interest in a peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question, by the Chinese themselves, and accepts the ultimate objective of the withdrawal of all U.S. forces from Taiwan. With this in mind it will progressively reduce its forces as the tension in the area diminishes.

Dr. Kissinger : Give me the other possibilities so I can take them up with the President.

VM Chiao: “Based on this premise, the U.S. will withdraw all its troops and military installations from Taiwan.” And, “With this prospect in mind”—weakened “this premise”—the United States will progressively reduce its troops and military installations on Taiwan with a complete withdrawal as its ultimate objective.

Neither of us are commited. I aim to find something mutually acceptable.

Dr. Kissinger : I think we are heading in the right direction.

VM Chiao: What other business?

Dr. Kissinger : I suggest that you might wish to consult with the Prime Minister. When shall we meet again?

VM Chiao: We will tell you about the time.

Dr. Kissinger : It would be good if we could perhaps … I have one other idea … there would be a certain advantage—thinking out loud about time—if we could get the Formosa part settled before the session this afternoon—we could move the session to 4:00 this afternoon.

VM Chiao: We can suggest that to the President and Prime Minister.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, and finish the rest of it after dinner tonight.

VM Chiao: We hope. But both you and he have to.

Dr Kissinger: But if you should be instructed before the President returns from the Forbidden City, let us meet anyway. Because I will have your suggestions and I can take them up with him immediately. I am just thinking how to save time.

VM Chiao: Yes, we will consider that and we can do that.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, so as soon as you are ready, please notify us and we will handle our internal things.

VM Chiao: Just one more thing on which I would like to speak to you alone.

(Chao takes Dr. Kissinger to other side of room and they confer alone with only the interpreter present about a second meeting between the President and Chairman Mao.)

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. Brackets and ellipses in the source text. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

98. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 2:35-2:45 p.m. 98. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 2:35-2:45 p.m.1

Beijing, February 25, 1972, 2:35-2:45 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John H. Holdridge, NSC Staff

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Jonathan T. Howe, NSC Staff

Ch'iao Kuan-hua, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Chang Wen-chin, Director of Western Europe, North American, and Australasian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chao Chi-hua, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chi Chao-chu, Interpreter

Three Notetakers

DATE & TIME: Friday, February 25, 1972 - 2:35-2:45 p.m.

PLACE: Guest House, Villa 2, Peking

VM Chiao: In this counter-proposal we had absorbed some of the things which you put forward in your last suggestion and we will suggest as follows, on the last sentence: “With this prospect in mind, the United States anticipates the progressive reduction and final withdrawal of all U.S. forces and military installations from Taiwan.”

Now I will read the whole thing: “The U.S. side declared: The U.S. acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Strait maintain there is but one China and that Taiwan is a part of China. The United States Government does not challenge that position. It reaffirms its interest in a peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question by the Chinese themselves. With this prospect in mind, the United States anticipates the progressive reduction and final withdrawal of all U.S. forces and military installations from Taiwan.”

That is according to instructions given to me by Premier Chou En-lai.

Dr. Kissinger : May I see the text?

As you said, this is a very serious matter for both of us because it is a matter of great political consequence for the President, of how it will be represented when he returns. Well, I think we are very close to we are moving closer together. Will you be in this villa for awhile?

VM Chiao: Yes, surely.

Dr. Kissinger : Why don't I talk to the President and get his reaction because I think it isn't sensible to give a quick reaction. We can meet again in a little while, about half an hour, 3:00. So we will tell our colleagues we had a terrible row.

VM Chiao: Should we issue a communique to that effect?

Dr. Kissinger : Of course.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

99. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 3:35-4 p.m. 99. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 3:35-4 p.m.1

Beijing, February 25, 1972, 3:35-4 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John H. Holdridge, NSC Staff

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Jonathan T. Howe, NSC Staff

Ch'iao Kuan-hua, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Chang Wen-chin, Director of Western Europe, North American, and Australasian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chao Chi-hua, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chi Chao-chu, Interpreter

Three Notetakers

DATE & TIME: Friday, February 25, 1972, - 3:35-4:00 p.m.

PLACE: Guest House, Villa 2, Peking

Dr. Kissinger : I want to be frank with you what our problem is—the President is taking a nap, and I didn't want to wake him up. So in order not to waste the time I wanted to give you some of our considerations. We have not yet had time to discuss it with the President. And I understand what you have attempted to do. You have tried to weaken premise” and strengthen “look to” and come up with a balance that way. Let me tell you something that we had done in the break, in the interval between the two meetings. This the President has approved; he approved it before I came here at 2:30. But I didn't table it because I wanted to discuss your draft with the President, and I was waiting for him. Now it doesn't look as if he will get up until just before the meeting. But of course we will discuss your draft with him.

Our problem is that the way your last sentence is formulated will raise this question. The first question I will be asked at the press conference is “What exactly does this mean?” They will say “are you going to withdraw your forces because you hope that there will be a peaceful settlement, or are you going to withdraw your forces only if there is a peaceful settlement?” Then if I say we will withdraw them only if there is a peaceful settlement, I think the Vice Minister will not be fully happy with me.

So what we had done in the interval before the 2:30 meeting was to take some of the third formulation of the Vice Minister before lunch, which we recognize was in no way official, and you are in no way bound by it, or committed to it. We used it just for our thinking—and phrased it in a way which has the great advantage that we can do everything it says without having to give a tricky explanation. This is what the President worked on before. Let me just show it to you. If by chance you were able to accept this, it would solve all our problems.

I will submit your version to the President, and this is not to be taken as a rejection completely of all the elements, but this one I know we can accept; the other we have to wait. It has the advantage that it affirms the ultimate objective which the Prime Minister when he called on me briefly on some other matters said was the one with which he was concerned, and states the reduction which we can defend as an American initiative and not as a negotiation with you.

VM Chiao: I understand what you mean.

Dr. Kissinger : On one interpretation yours is easier for us.

VM Chiao: I think that there is some formulation which will be easy for you: for instance, “With this prospect in mind …” That is not right away but … then follows the word “anticipate.” There is very little restraining effect. For instance, speaking purely from your angle, you could well say that as you consider progress is being made in a peaceful solution of this problem so you will be able to anticipate a progressive reduction.

Dr. Kissinger : “Progressive reduction” is not the problem. It's the final withdrawal that …

VM Chiao: You can link that up with the peaceful settlement. As I said this morning, once a peaceful settlement, there will be no reason for you to stay.

Dr. Kissinger : No, there is no problem, and in fact, we can have a substantial withdrawal without a peaceful settlement as long as we don't do it as part of an agreement with you.

VM Chiao: You can say that entirely as your own initiative, not as an agreement between you and us. That is, you consider there is such a prospect. And you consider that that prospect is coming closer. And so you are able to make the progressive reduction. As for what happens finally, you can entirely link that up with the peaceful settlement.

Dr. Kissinger : But if we can do that in language then we have no problem.

VM Chiao: As the President said, the important thing is for both sides to leave some running room.

Dr. Kissinger : You see in this draft which we worked on over the luncheon break we linked up the final withdrawal with the prospect of a final settlement. Thus, we are then of course in the position if we are asked to interpret it the way the Minister suggested and we will say we will withdraw our forces anyway.

VM Chiao: I am … concerning your formulation on the reduction of tensions, speaking frankly, it is quite difficult for us to have this linked up with the question of the relaxation of tension in this area and if that is to be said it will be difficult for you to explain in the future as well. Because in that wording “The United States anticipates …” has no binding effect. We made great efforts in accepting this word “anticipate.”

Dr. Kissinger : Even if we can't come to an agreement, I understand you have made a major effort and have come a long way toward us, and it is the objective difficulty of the subject which is between us. We can say “in Asia” rather than “in the area,” but that makes it worse.

VM Chiao: Of course, as I said last time, people will say they are making use of Taiwan as a trick. Of course, in actuality, that is not so, but they can say that. The actual fact would not be that case, but to be open, for us to say that would be difficult. That is our consideration.

Dr. Kissinger : No, I understand.

VM Chiao: So it is our contention that we should leave it only linked with the question of Taiwan itself. And we accepted both words “prospect” and “anticipate.”

Dr. Kissinger : I understand. You haven't been unfair. Usually people can't agree on what to do. Here we have agreed on what to do and we can't agree on what to say.

VM Chiao: And it is indeed true that as to what is to be said you have your difficulties and we have ours.

Dr. Kissinger : I know it. I am fully aware of it. So our problem is, as the President explained, if we go home and people say we sold out in Peking and we use the vagueness of this formulation to prove we didn't and we have no obligation at all, and foreign radios start beaming it to your country that we tricked you, then you aren't going to gain a great deal either. If the President and I are going to spend the next two weeks explaining that this doesn't mean anything, then we are in trouble. If I say this means something only if Taiwan agrees to a negotiation, but Taiwan isn't going to agree to a negotiation—this is the line of argumentation that we would use. Then we haven't anything; what have we achieved?

VM Chiao: How do you consider this suggestion …

Dr. Kissinger : Thinking out loud again.

VM Chiao: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand.

VM Chiao: “With this in mind … . withdrawal of U.S. forces from Taiwan. In the meantime it anticipates the progressive withdrawal of …”

Interpreter (Chi): Do you want me to repeat that?

Dr. Kissinger : I know what he did.

VM Chiao: It's just my personal thinking. You can explain it only from the prospects.

Dr. Kissinger : I think it moves us closer to the … it moves us closer.

VM Chiao: Also it only anticipates.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand.

VM Chiao: Nothing else.

Dr. Kissinger : “In the meantime, it anticipates the progressive reduction of those forces …”

VM Chiao: And military installations.

Dr. Kissinger : That's your problem. That is not the hang-up to us. The hang-up is …

VM Chiao: That is to say, this is the long-range objective.

Dr. Kissinger : Can we say “consistent with the Nixon Doctrine?”

VM Chiao: You can say it somewhere, but not in this communique.

Dr. Kissinger : You know you got me into bad trouble with the President. I told the President if he mentioned the Nixon Doctrine to the Prime Minister he would undoubtedly get a short response. He mentioned it and he did not get a short response, so now the President thinks I don't know anything about the Chinese any more.

VM Chiao: We have to ask for instructions from the Prime Minister.

Dr. Kissinger : Certainly, and I haven't seen the President. Could you hold up the Prime Minister for five minutes?

VM Chiao: Oh surely.

Mr. Kissinger: Hold him up for ten minutes because I don't want the President to meet without even knowing about your draft.

VM Chiao: Remind you this is only my preliminary.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand and we will not ever hold you to anything you say in this manner. If you get different instructions we will not hold you to them.

VM Chiao: I think five minutes is too short. We should delay until 4:30 p.m.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

100. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 4:50-5:25 p.m. 100. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 4:50-5:25 p.m.1

Beijing, February 25, 1972, 4:50-5:25 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John H. Holdridge, NSC StaffM

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Prime Minister Chou En-lai

Ch'iao Kuan-hua, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Chang Wen-chin, Director of Western Europe, North Ameican, and Australasian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chao Chi-hua, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chi Chao-chu, Interpreter

T'ang Wen-Sheng, Interpreter

One Notetaker

DATE & TIME: Friday, February 25, 1972 - 4:50-5:25 p.m.

PLACE: Guest House, Villa 2, Peking

Kissinger: The President thought he would not do the actual drafting in a meeting and that he would convey his thoughts so that when you meet each would know exactly what the differences are.

I also want to tell you on behalf of the President that we recognize that you have dealt with this in a farsighted spirit. The difficulties have to do with how we present this at home and not your attitude. Nothing we say implies any criticism of what your side has done.

Our difficulty with the formulation the Vice Minister brought us this afternoon is really somewhat embarrassing because I recognize what you did was to meet 90 percent of our proposal. The problem is when we come home we have to meet the press and the Congress. Now then, we can explain that this doesn't mean anything and therefore anticipations will not arise. After all we have discussed, this is an unworthy manner of dealing with you. So we don't want to have to be tricky in our explanation.

On the one hand, we have a problem that if we state a reduction of forces without reciprocity we will be accused of having come to Peking and being taken in. On the other hand, we recognize—the President recognizes—your issue of principle on reciprocity with respect to an island you consider your own. As the President explained to you, we can reduce our forces as long as we can present it to our people as our unilateral decision.

For example, we had not intended to mention it here because we didn't think it was proper to discuss it here … we have the intention of reducing our forces on Taiwan during the next year by 3,000, which is about 40 percent. But we would like to present this to our Congress as a unilateral American decision. So this is our dilemma.

Now on the text we have no problem about affirming the ultimate objective of withdrawal of American forces and military installations from Taiwan. We can say that with this prospect in mind, “it affirms the ultimate objective,” etc. The difficulty arises with stating the progressive reduction unconditionally, and I know your difficulty arises from stating it conditionally. I repeat that this does not affect what the President has told you he will do.

Chou: Didn't you tell the Vice Minister that deleting the phrase “as tensions in the area are reduced” makes the position closer because it is linked to a peaceful settlement?

Kissinger That's what the Vice Minister told me. We could put it “as progress is made toward a peaceful settlement” or, linking it to tension in the Taiwan Straits, “as tensions in the Taiwan Straits are reduced.” We don't want to embarrass you.

Ch'iao: Please repeat the second formulation.

Kissinger: “As tensions in the Taiwan Straits diminish.” I am thinking out loud, really, or secondly, “as progress is made toward a peaceful solution,” or something like that.

Chou: If you say, “tensions in the area” they will say, “what area?”.

Kissinger: I understand. That's why we could say “in the Taiwan Straits.”

Chou: But there are no longer tensions in the Taiwan Straits now.

Kissinger: It's not … or “as progress is made toward a peaceful settlement.”

Chou: Your problem is that you need some kind of condition for reductions.

Kissinger: We are not setting conditions. We will do it, as you know, in any event. You could draw up a sentence about progressive reductions and just end with the ultimate objective if you like.

Chou: The President's idea is that we should not mention this in our talks, since we discussed it yesterday?

Kissinger: We would just as soon not. If you want us now to explain our position to you, we can do it.

Chou: You said earlier that the Secretary of State would join the talks this afternoon on the Communique.

Kissinger: Not on the Communique. It was just for the press. If it were to be a long session then the ministers could come in for an hour for picturetaking purposes. The Communique we could do without unless you want. We will complete it by the process that was agreed to.

Chou: Mr. President said that the plenary meeting may be held in Hangchow.

Kissinger: Or Shanghai.

Chou: And therefore in the latter part of this afternoon's session, as he suggested, only the Secretary of State and the Foreign Minister take part and not the others.

Kissinger: Perhaps Mr. Green. But that was when we thought that we would meet at 3:00 and have a long time. It is not necessary. I think it is better that you and the President talk personally. But we leave this to you.

Chou: In the Communique there are two other points that are not completed yet. Those are not difficult.

Kissinger: No. We can do it. The rest of the Communique may take maybe two hours.

Chou: You could do it after dinner.

Kissinger: There is no problem with that.

Chou: But I will have a meeting with the President to discuss some other matters. I will hold further consultations on this clause on Taiwan and the Vice Minister will reply to you after dinner. We want to see if we can approximate positions.

Kissinger: I have to say—this is very unorthodox—that you have made the bigger moves in recent days. We cannot complain about anything you have done. You have been very generous. We recognize you consider this your own country. You might take the position that you should not talk to us about this at all. I am sorry we have so many domestic difficulties, but our actions will be more impressive than our words.

Chou: As your President said, you can do more than you can say.

Kissinger: That will be the case.

Chou: I will go over at 5:30 and we can talk until 6:30 and have the banquet at 7:30. There is no need for the Secretary of State and Foreign Minister to take part altogether?

Kissinger: What do you think?

Chou: There is the question that if there's a meeting, everyone should participate for us, the Vice Chairman, Marshal Yeh, Li Hsien-nien and everyone involved, because they are not going to Hangchow. The plane tomorrow is at 9:00 o'clock. If we are able to agree on the whole Communique tonight, should we let the party see it only when it is published or beforehand?

Kissinger: After an agreement is worked out, we must show it to the Secretary of State. He will not leak it. This he does not do. We will show it to nobody else, and we would agree on when to release it. Maybe in Shanghai Sunday night—what do you think?

Chou: The time for release may be decided by you. We will leave the decision up to you.

Kissinger: Perhaps it should be done from Shanghai on Sunday in the late afternoon. And I would agree with the Prime Minister and the Vice Minister on exactly what I would say when I talk to the press. I would tell you ahead of time. Until then only the Secretary of State will see it, if that is agreeable to you.

Chou: Yes.

One possibility is, as Vice Chairman Yeh and the Vice Premier Li Hsien-nien and others will be sending the President and his party off at the airport, maybe we could have a very quick session at the airport at which all could talk in the sitting room at the airport.

Kissinger: So they can also participate.

Chou: For us, all our people would take part who were at the plenary, and for you, your people could take part who were at the plenary. At this meeting we could say that certain agreements have been reached by the two sides and after making necessary preparations they could be turned into a Communique.

Kissinger: At Shanghai there would be the final Communique.

Chou: Yes.

Kissinger: All right.

Chou: There is no need for us to show the document at the plenary.

Kissinger: It should be done in a very general way. I cannot guarantee the security of everybody.

Chou: It might be better not to do it.

Kissinger: We could have a plenary session where the Foreign Ministers report about their work in the other meetings.

Chou: That would be too long then.

Well, maybe we could finish the Communique tonight. As for the question of people-to-people trade and exchanges, it could be said at the plenary that this was a possibility. Maybe that's not appropriate?

Kissinger: I must be honest. Mr. Rogers will not leak, but some of the junior men that are in the group, I have an uneasy feeling, do leak. I don't think we should let anything out before the Communique unless you want to.

Chou: It will just be a simple plenary meeting tomorrow morning at the airport. Because Vice Chairman Yeh and Vice Premier Li Hsien-nien must have an opportunity to take part in one more meeting. We can say that the five days of talks have been fruitful and say nothing about the contents.

Kissinger: Or say that we hope to have a Communique without saying what it is, and that we will finalize it in Hangchow, or something.

Chou: We will just tell them that we hope it will be completed but we haven't worked it out yet. We hope there will be a Communique but we haven't worked it out yet. We can talk in general terms in the plenary session.

So we will make a final session in Peking. When we go to Hangchow we will not bother with plenary meetings, just private talks.

Kissinger: At some point it would be helpful for the morale of the group if something could be done for those who feel neglected.

Chou: We can do that by some other means. But the meeting at the airport will still be a form of a plenary session. There will be fifteen on your side.

Kissinger: I guess the whole official party?

Chou: Everyone will be happier. A formal plenary session? And I will think of other things to improve morale.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

101. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 5:45 p.m. 101. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25, 1972, 5:45 p.m.1

Beijing, February 25, 1972, 5:45 p.m.

Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: February 25, 1972

TIME: 5:45 p.m.

SUBJECT: Counterpart Meeting IV

PARTICIPANTS:

Chinese

Foreign Minister Chi P'eng-fei

Hsiung Hsiang-hui, Secretary to the Premier, Foreign Affairs

Wang Chen, Deputy Director, Information Department

Ch'ien Ta-yung, Deputy Director, West European, American and Australasian Affairs

Li Tsung-ying, Leading Member, Research Group

Ting Yuan-hung, Member, Delegation to the UNGA

SHEN JO-YUN, Interpreter

Hu Fang Hsien, Stenographer

US

Secretary of State William P. Rogers

Assistant Secretary of State Marshall Green

Ron Ziegler, Press Secretary to the President

John Scali, Special Consultant to the President

Alfred le S. Jenkins, Director for Asian Communist Affairs

Nicholas Platt, Assistant to the Secretary Commander

John Howe, National Security Council Staff

Charles W. Freeman, Jr., Interpreter

Calvin Mehlert, Interpreter

PLACE: Guest House, Peking, PRC

COPIES TO:

S S/S

U EA

J

White House - Dr. Kissinger

Contacts and Communication

The Foreign Minister opened by apologizing for being so late and said that since there was only a half hour left until the reciprocal banquet, he would be pleased to hear the Secretary's views.

The Secretary said that he wanted to talk about contacts and communications, items discussed during the first day of our talks.

The Foreign Minister responded if the Secretary had any specifics to add he would be delighted to hear about them.

The Secretary said he wanted to learn what facilities for improved contacts in communications were acceptable to the PRC. Both sides had agreed that better communications and contacts were in mutual interest. However, we could discuss it at a later time if the Foreign Minister preferred.

The Foreign Minister said that he preferred to discuss this topic at the end of the talks.

Southeast Asia

In the past two days, the Secretary said, the PRC had criticized US policy and charged the United States with a number of alleged wrongs against the people of China. The United States side had answered these criticisms, but has not recorded our own criticisms or those of our allies against the PRO. Although we think there is a better way to spend our time, we should record our criticisms briefly. The United States opposes the propaganda, material aid and subversive activities which the PRO is applying against the countries of Southeast Asia, particularly Thailand. The US is aware that the PRO is supporting with arms and equipment North Vietnamese troops who are threatening Thailand's northern borders. The United States Government has consulted with the Thai Government and they have stopped their broadcasts against the PRO. Why has the PRO continued its hostile activities against Thailand, the Secretary concluded?

Common Support for the Public Welfare

The Secretary continued his statement saying that the talks had shown that both sides operate from different premises but our goals and principles and interests are similar in many respects. We share, for instance, an interest in the welfare of our peoples and in a peaceful world. It is apparent to the United States that the PRC Government has worked diligently and successfully for the improvement and the welfare of its people. Compared to past periods of history the Government has made progress in feeding and clothing the Chinese people. The Prime Minister had said yesterday that constituted governments should be dealt with on the basis of the five principles regardless of the form the government takes. The United States agrees with this and feels that proceeding from this common ground, we can move gradually to improve our relations.

PRC-Thai Relations

The Foreign Minister said he would first like to speak to the question of PRC-Thai relations. Historically, China had maintained good relations with the people of Thailand. However, after the civil war, Chiang Kai-shek troops withdrew to Thailand and the Thai Government made use of these troops. The Thai Government has pursued anti-China policies since the founding of the PRO. That is why we have had no contacts and still have none. Despite the fact that the cabinet has been reshuffled, the Thai Government continues to pursue its old policies.

The PRO is not interfering in the internal affairs of Thailand. If the Thai people want revolution, that is their affair. We are willing to have normal relations on the basis of the five principles. However, as long as they pursue a policy which is against China and which supports the Viet-Nam War, we will not be able to establish relations. Thailand is a good friend of the United States which is used as a base to unleash war in Indochina. The United States and the PRO have very different views on this question and I hope that you will convey them to your old friends. The PRO makes no secret of the fact, the Foreign Minister continued, that Thai leaders of guerrilla forces waging revolution in Thailand live in Peking. This is because we share their ideological beliefs in Communism, Marxism and Leninism. But ideology and State relations are different and the fact that we share different ideological views does not mean we cannot improve the ties between governments. When the Thai guerrilla leaders return to their country, and whether they support the government there or not, is their affair. We will not interfere.

The Foreign Minister said that he wanted the Secretary to be clear on the PRC position.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 7 US/NIXON. Secret; Nodis; Homer. Drafted by Platt and approved in S on March 8. Copies were sent to S, S/S, U, J, EA, and Kissinger at the White House. The meeting was held in the Guest House.

102. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25-26 1972, 10:30 p.m.-1:40 a.m. 102. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 25-26 1972, 10:30 p.m.-1:40 a.m.1

Beijing, February 25-26 1972, 10:30 p.m.-1:40 a.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John H. Holdridge, NSC Staff

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Jonathan T. Howe, NSC Staff

Ch'iao Kuan-hua, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Chang Wen-chin, Director of Western Europe, North American, and Australasian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chao Chi-hua, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chi Chao-chu, Interpreter

Two Notetakers

DATE & TIME: Friday, February 25-Saturday, February 26, 1972; 10:30 p.m. - 1:40 a.m.

PLACE: Guest House, Villa 2, Peking

VM Ch'iao: First with the Taiwan question and on that last sentence.

Dr. Kissinger : I have reached the point where I am rejecting my own drafts.

VM Ch'iao: You want to start all over again? I have one vice. When I start speaking, I must smoke.

Dr. Kissinger : I don't want to tell you to stop speaking.

VM Ch'iao: Let us go straight to the point. Following the discussion between the Premier and Dr. Kissinger, and in the spirit of that discussion, and after making a study after that discussion, and before the Premier met with the President, we have decided to accept your proposal.

Dr. Kissinger : Which is what?

VM Ch'iao: In the meantime—with respect to withdrawal of all forces—“it will progressively reduce its forces and military installations on Taiwan …” With the exception of adding the words “military installations.”

Dr. Kissinger : No problem. It is awfully hard to argue when you accept my proposal [laughter]. What I would really like to do is interrupt for ten minutes and go over to see the President. I can't argue with you about your accepting my proposal.

VM Ch'iao: Mr. Lord will argue for you.

Dr. Kissinger : Let me just read to you what I understand it is. “The U.S. side declared: the U.S. acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Strait maintain there is but one China and that Taiwan is a part of China. The United States Government does not challenge that position. It reaffirms its interest in the peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question by the Chinese themselves.” And then “in the meantime, it will progressively reduce its forces and military installations on Taiwan as the tension in the area diminishes.”

When you hear a loud voice you will find you have a new applicant in your foreign office.

(The meeting adjourned for a few minutes at 10:40 p.m. while Dr. Kissinger checked the draft with the President. The meeting then resumed at 11:00 p.m.)

Dr. Kissinger : Much as I enjoy arguing with you, the President accepts this, with one suggestion which is not essential. Where it says “it reaffirms its interest in the peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question by the Chinese themselves”—he wonders if you could say “the Chinese on both sides of the Strait” to make it consistent with the second line.

VM Ch'iao: That is what is to be meant anyway.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, it is really more for clarity.

VM Ch'iao: Our putting this is not—the actual purpose is for simplicity. It was quite alright to add it. Taiwan Strait. We don't have to repeat it. Add Taiwan Strait—originally it was our intention to make it simpler but since we want to make it more clear, we might as well make it more clear. “It reaffirms its interest in the peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question by the Chinese on both sides of the Taiwan Strait.” It is also in the first sentence.

Dr. Kissinger : My colleagues wonder whether we include the off-shore islands in these. If you do anything militarily, we will not be able to wave a piece of paper at you.

VM Ch'iao: As far as this paragraph is concerned, that's the only change.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes. Then we consider it agreed.

VM Ch'iao: Basically—essentially. If there are any other changes it would be changes like that. We will start from the beginning.

Dr. Kissinger : Go on from here, and then we go back to the beginning.

VM Ch'iao: The next is concerning the question of people-to-people contacts. Basically speaking, we agree with your draft, but we made some slight changes. That's the latter part. The last sentence of the first paragraph we suggest: “Each side undertook to facilitate the further development of such contacts and exchanges.” Just to make it more concise. The meaning is the same.

Dr. Kissinger : Mr. Minister, just one point which we don't have to waste time on now. But there seems to be a change in tenses. Some things are in the present and some are in the past. We are doing this to clean up the style.

VM Ch'iao: No question about that.

Dr. Kissinger : “Each side undertakes to facilitate the further development of such contacts and exchanges.”

VM Ch'iao: Tonight, we will just basically agree on the paper and make some stylistic changes.

Dr. Kissinger : I accept this, subject to any advice I will get from my right.

VM Ch'iao: We would like to make it read, “both sides view bilateral trade as another area from which mutual benefit could be derived and agreed that economic relations based on equality and mutual benefit are in the interest of the peoples of the two countries. They agreed to facilitate the gradual development of trade,” I don't find it necessary to explain this.

Dr. Kissinger : The question of normalization we raised the last time.

VM Ch'iao: And because our relations are only in the process of being normalized.

Dr. Kissinger : My one concern is the word “gradual”—“Progressive?”

VM Ch'iao: Quite all right. But in Chinese it is the same—“progressive development”—“facilitate the progressive development of trade.” Dr. Kissinger, would you read this?

Dr. Kissinger : Development of trade between their two countries, or between the U.S. and the PRC.

VM Ch'iao: “Between the two countries.” The implication is not quite clear.

Now let's go back to the beginning. “The two sides agreed that they would stay in contact through various channels. In addition, the U.S. Government will send a senior representative to Peking from time to time for concrete consultations to further the normalization of relations between the two governments and continue to exchange views on issues of common interest.”

Dr. Kissinger : This may not be the time, but what if we are asked about channels? How do you plan to answer? I understand from the Prime Minister what you wish—as I understand it, it is to do it through New York primarily now. But I understand also you don't want to have that publicly known. That's the channel we use secretly.

Now, we can say one of two things. We can say it is still under discussion, what forms of channels will be established. And what we ought to consider—you might discuss this with the Prime Minister—to have someone different from New York where the State Department can pass whatever technical messages it might have on trade, and we can say that is the channel. We said we used Warsaw once so that then technically is one place, which we do not mind.

So when I am asked—so my answer will be this is still in the process of discussion, and we have not yet got it formally settled. And some time later your leaders may know where you want it to take place and we will use that for the passing of technical documents.

VM Ch'iao: Okay.

Dr. Kissinger : We are assuming that you have no interest at this time, such an interest say with another embassy. In Canada, for example.

VM Ch'iao: You mean through a third country?

Dr. Kissinger : I think your suggestion for an open reply to those who ask us is correct—that is, this matter is still under discussion.

VM Ch'iao: And we will consider some place where we can have communications and take technical matters.

Dr. Kissinger : And then just so I am clear, we will use Ambassador Huang Hua for secret communications; what we used to pass through Paris. Now no one knows.

VM Ch'iao: I will give a reply to you on that after asking for my instructions from my Prime Minister. I want to confirm that because as time passes New York may not be a very safe place.

Dr. Kissinger : We know how to do it. If we can't arrange for a secret meeting in New York then we can't do anything.

VM Ch'iao: We will not discuss it now.

Dr. Kissinger : Okay.

VM Ch'iao: And then the following paragraph, the first sentence is moved to the front. And then no more following that up to the very end. But there is a suggested change in this sentence.

Dr. Kissinger : The one which we are considering?

VM Ch'iao: Yes, yes. The two leaders “were gratified to have this opportunity” and we suggest to say the two leaders “considered it beneficial to have …”

Dr. Kissinger : Mr. Minister, “the leaders of China and the United States considered it beneficial” is fine, “to have this opportunity, after so many years”. I think to say “The leaders of China and the United States considered,— found it beneficial to have this opportunity, after so many years without contact and express their views”—it is just English.

VM Ch'iao: Yes. “Found it beneficial.”

Dr. Kissinger : It is stronger—to have this opportunity after so many years without contact, to have the opportunity to frankly present—present frankly to one another their views. It is not very strong in English—I don't object to it. It is just not very strong.

VM Ch'iao: I agree it is better than “gratified.”

Dr. Kissinger : I am just trying to find a stronger adjective. Found “invaluable”—although beneficial is a little reserved, it is substantive.

VM Ch'iao: Then back to the Taiwan question. The President made his suggestion. I reported this to the Premier, and he said there was no need for this addition. He does object because it was already said all Chinese on both sides—it does not have to be repeated. And then secondly, you wish to see a peaceful settlement by the Chinese on both sides. And thirdly, we have already accepted in its entirety the principles put forward by Dr. Kissinger on this. And we have made so many efforts. Why should there be any changes on it? But we will not object when you explain the Communique. You can say that when it says “by the Chinese themselves,” it means Chinese on both sides of the Straits.

Dr. Kissinger : I will have to accept it ad referendum. I will check it with the President who is probably retired. I think he will accept it. I am practically certain.

VM Ch'iao: We can settle it if the President wants to have a word with the Prime Minister on the airplane. I do not believe the Communique will fail on those three words. I think it can be settled. And then subject to any changes by our two leaders it will be as we handed it to you.

Dr. Kissinger : I just made a slight reservation that the President may wish to raise it on the plane.

VM Ch'iao: Actually the interpretation will be just the same.

Dr. Kissinger : You have made a considerable move. When I pass it to the press and when we inform other governments, then …

VM Ch'iao: No question about that.

Dr. Kissinger : We will say with the approval of the Government of the People's Republic of China this is our mutual understanding. May I take these quotes off?

VM Ch'iao: Oh, yes. Oh, yes.

Interpreter: The Vice Minister said it is self-evident because anyone can see from the preceding sentence it is Chinese on both sides of the Straits.

VM Ch'iao: Now, shall we start from the beginning and go up to the end? There may still be some points which have not been finalized.

Dr. Kissinger : Right. We will have to check with the President if he wants to use his middle initial. We will speak about the most important problems first. If he does not use his middle initial, none of us will.

VM Ch'iao: We will respect the decision of your President on that. If one has it, then everybody has it. We don't have this problem of middle initials. That is your decision.

Dr. Kissinger : We will drop the “En” out of Chou En-lai.

VM Ch'iao: After we have read the Communique, it still will be subject to final approval.

Dr. Kissinger : Where are we starting? First, “The two leaders held”—Why don't we—shouldn't we say, “the two leaders had a serious and frank discussion on Sino-US relations and world affairs”—which is what the Communique says. Is that agreeable?

VM Ch'iao: “The two leaders had a serious and frank discussion on Sino-U.S. relations and world affairs.” It is alright. There will be no “exchange of views.” And then the dates February 21, and on the first paragraph from February 21 to February 28, 1972. But it will be published on the 27th.

Dr. Kissinger : That doesn't affect it.

VM Ch'iao: “Earnest and frank?” I would say the two leaders had a serious and frank discussion—exchange of views on Sino-US relations.

Dr. Kissinger : I don't think it adds anything in English.

VM Ch'iao: If they exchanged views on Sino-US relations, what did they discuss? You want to say “had a serious and frank exchange of views on Sino-US relations and,” etc. But then immediately following that the last paragraph—“the two sides had discussions.”

Dr. Kissinger : That's airight. “Serious and frank conversation—serious and frank exchange of views on Sino-US relations.”

VM Ch'iao: “The two leaders had a serious and frank exchange of views on Sino-US relations and world affairs.”

Dr. Kissinger : May I make a suggestion on the next one? During the visit rather than say “further”, I would say “extensive” discussions.

VM Ch'iao: “There were extensive …

Dr. Kissinger : Why don't we say: “During the visit, extensive and earnest and frank discussions were held between President Nixon and Premier Chou En-lai on the normalization of relations.” Is that agreeable?

VM Ch'iao: We have here another suggestion. “During the visit, extensive, earnest and frank discussions were held between President Nixon and Premier Chou En-lai on the normalization of relations between the United States and the People's Republic of China as well as on other matters of interest on both sides.”

Dr. Kissinger : Do we need the list of everybody else who participated in these discussions? I don't care—is it your custom?

VM Ch'iao: We will consider that. What is your preference?

Dr. Kissinger : Let me check with the President.

VM Ch'iao: Only a technical matter. Just a formality. Leave it for the time being.

Dr. Kissinger : “And they toured Hangchow and Shanghai.” We are making a slight change in the English: “where, continuing discussions with Chinese leaders, they viewed similar places of interest.”

VM Ch'iao: They also toured Hangchow and Shanghai, where, continuing discussions with Chinese leaders, they viewed …”

Dr. Kissinger : It is better English. It is purely stylistic.

VM Ch'iao: The next page—will you read it out?

Dr. Kissinger : Shall I read—“The leaders of the People's Republic of China and the United States found it beneficial to have this opportunity, after so many years without contact, to present frankly to one another their views on a variety of issues. They reviewed the international situation in which important changes and great upheavals are taking place and expounded their respective positions and attitudes.” How about “candidly"?

VM Ch'iao: “The leaders of China and the United States found it beneficial to have this opportunity, after so many years without contact, to present candidly their views.”

Dr. Kissinger : “And expounded their respective positions and attitudes.”

VM Ch'iao: Go on.

Dr. Kissinger : Please.

VM Ch'iao: Then the next paragraph—“the people want revolution” -

Dr. Kissinger : I had not been sure we had agreed on that. In other words you prefer to keep it.

VM Ch'iao: “The people want revolution.”

Dr. Kissinger : It is going to make some people extremely unhappy, but I won't call attention to the fact.

VM Ch'iao: Your assistants will agree to this.

Dr. Kissinger : That's why I am keeping them in a state of panic.

VM Ch'iao: Then it is on the question of the elaboration of the two key principles—on Vietnam.

Dr. Kissinger : Okay.

VM Ch'iao: “The Chinese side expressed its firm support to the peoples of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia in their efforts for the attainment of their goal and its firm support to the sevenpoint proposal of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam and the elaboration of February this year on the two key problems in the proposal.”

Dr. Kissinger : That time the sentence was so long.

VM Ch'iao: We admit grammatically it is rather poor. Then the rest is about our position on India/Pakistan. It comes after Japan.

Dr. Kissinger : Do you mind if we break this into sentences? Your whole section. This will help you. It won't help us.

VM Ch'iao: That will be alright. In the English we can change—keep the semicolon. We will make another compromise. We will accept the semicolon to four stops. But in Chinese we will stick to the four.

Dr. Kissinger : And we will put a period whenever there is a new subject. When you go from Vietnam to Korea, we will make it a period and vice versa. It is really better reading, and then when you go from Japan to India we will make a period. Let me go through our section. We have substituted “ideologies” for “world outlook”. We said ”… be willing to compete peacefully …” “Countries should treat each other with mutual respect and be willing to compete peacefully … .”

VM Ch'iao: There is no need for us to change the Chinese there.

Dr. Kissinger : Let me read you what I have on Vietnam. “The United States stated that the peoples of Indochina should be allowed to determine their destiny without outside intervention; its constant primary objective has been a negotiated solution; its eight-point proposal of January 25, 1972, represents a just basis for the attainment of that objective; in the absence of a negotiated settlement the United States envisages the ultimate withdrawal of all U.S. forces from the region consistent with the aim of self-determination for each country of Indochina.” Alright.

VM Ch'iao: That, of course, was put in because much of …

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, but for two reasons. Because, one, when we were here in October we did not have public proposal and therefore we could not reply and, in addition, now you have mentioned both the seven-point proposal and the two problems, so we put it in to balance.

VM Ch'iao: I understand. Tentatively, let us put it in that fashion, but we still have to consider it further because in ours we made no comment on that proposal.

Dr. Kissinger : We can support our own proposal. This is what makes it different. I understand you accept it tentatively, subject to a possible discussion.

VM Ch'iao: And now let me read this American statement in total.

Dr. Kissinger : I reserve some discussion.

VM Ch'iao: Let's go on.

Dr. Kissinger : We are willing to say “it has put forward its eight-point proposal of January 25 for the attainment of that objective”—something like that.

VM Ch'iao: That would be better.

Dr. Kissinger : If we say its “constant primary objective has been a negotiated solution on a just basis - it has put forward its proposal in order to attain its objectives”—and then we don't characterize those objectives.

VM Ch'iao: You have too many adjectives—true self-determination.

Dr. Kissinger : I don't mind taking out “true.”

VM Ch'iao: Never put both “just basis” and “true.”

Dr. Kissinger : I don't mind eliminating “true”, but I do feel we have to characterize what we are trying to do. “Its constant primary objective has been a negotiated settlement.”

VM Ch'iao: And there should be no difficulty there.

Dr. Kissinger : You have a slightly subjective view.

VM Ch'iao :Then I am willing for you to point out that subjectivity.

Dr. Kissinger : We have to explain to our people. You are supporting a seven-point proposal which is extremely critical of us. It uses many unflattering adjectives. Therefore we have to assume you support these unflattering adjectives also. This is a statement of our position.

VM Ch'iao: We could have said a “fair and reasonable” seven-point proposal.

Dr. Kissinger : If we said “reasonable” rather than “just”, could that help you? I don't mind taking out “true.” Let me make this suggestion. We could say “its objective has been a just negotiated solution” and then we would say “represents a basis”—we drop the word “just”—we don't characterize our eight-point, proposal as such.

VM Ch'iao: We are being restrained. 'Express firm support of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia in their efforts”—no adjective and no adjective to characterize the seven-point proposal. And if adjectives are to be added to the statement of both sides it will become quite cumbersome. We will consider it.

Dr. Kissinger : Let's both consider it. We will put a bracket around it. “The U.S. side stated that peace in Asia and peace in the world required efforts both to reduce immediate tensions and to eliminate the basic causes of conflict. The United States will work for a just and secure peace: just because it fulfills the aspirations of peoples and nations for freedom and progress, secure because it removes the danger of foreign aggression. The United States supports individual freedom and social progress for all the peoples of the world, free of outside pressure or intervention. The United States believes that the effort to reduce tension is served by improving communication between countries that have different ideologies so as to lessen the risks of confrontation through accident, miscalculation or misunderstanding. Countries should treat each other with mutual respect and be willing to compete peacefully, letting performance be the ultimate judge. No country should claim infallibility and each country should be prepared to reexamine its own attitudes for the common good. The United States stated that the peoples of Indochina should be allowed to determine their destiny without outside intervention; its constant primary objective has been a negotiated solution; its eight-point proposal of January 25, 1972, represents a [just] basis…

VM Ch'iao: Our idea is adjectives should all be deleted.

Dr. Kissinger : “and was put forward for the attainment of that objective.” Has been put forward—just—negotiated solution. “The eight-point proposal has been put forward for the attainment of that objective.”

VM Ch'iao: “It has put forward its eight-point proposal for the attainment of that objective.”

Dr. Kissinger : If we can say “just negotiated solution” then I will be glad to say “has been put forward for the attainment of that objective.” It doesn't characterize what we have done. We leave the word 'Just” with “negotiated.” Instead of saying—we will say “has been put forward for the attainment of that objective.” Two versions. “Its constant primary objective has been a negotiated solution; its eight-point proposal of January 25, 1972 represents a basis for the attainment of that objective.”

Then as an alternative: “Its constant primary objective has been a just negotiated solution; its eight point proposal of January 25, 1972 has been put forward for the attainment of that objective.”

Your point is we should drop the word altogether or put it just before negotiated. That's what I prefer.

VM Ch'iao: First point is not to have the word “just.” There will be a lot of work in Hangchow, and on the plane, or you, too, will be unemployed. I have additional information for you. We'll talk on Vietnam …

Dr. Kissinger : Don't prolong the discussion just for the pleasure of talking to me.

VM Ch'iao: … First, “its constant primary objective has been a negotiated solution; its 8-point proposal of January 25, 1972 represents a basis for the attainment of that objective.”

Second, “its constant primary objective has been a just negotiated solution; its 8-point proposal of January 25, 1972, has been put forward for the attainment of that objective.

The question here is simple. I would suggest we put brackets around it and have both versions—only a question of maintaining the word “just.”

Dr. Kissinger : As I understand it, there are two versions. One is to have a just negotiated solution in which Mr. Chang suggests that we say “the eight-point proposal has been put forward for the purpose of achieving that objective”—“represents a basis for the attainment of that objective.” If we retain the word “just,” it determines the second sentence.

VM Ch'iao: We will have two versions typed out.

Dr. Kissinger : “In the absence of a negotiated settlement, the United States envisages the ultimate withdrawal of all U.S. forces from the region consistent with the aim of self-determination for each country of Indochina. The existing commitments between the United States and the Republic of Korea will be honored; the United States will support efforts of the Republic of Korea to seek a relaxation of the tension and increased communication in the Korean peninsula. The United States places the highest value on its friendly relations with Japan, and it will continue to honor its mutual defense treaty obligations. The United States supports the right of the peoples of South Asia to shape their own future in peace and free of military threat; it supports progress to fulfill the aspirations of all the nations of the subcontinent without having the area become the subject of great power rivalry.”

VM Ch'iao: You don't plan to add any more to that?

Dr. Kissinger : We can probably say “it supports adherence to the UN resolution calling for the withdrawal of troops to …”

VM Ch'iao: It is up to you.

Dr. Kissinger Can we keep it open tomorrow?

VM Ch'iao: It is up to you. We will just type this part. On the following paragraph there seems to be nothing.

Dr. Kissinger : We may add a sentence to India/Pakistan, and we will discuss that tomorrow.

VM Ch'iao: That will be for you to decide. We have nothing on the following paragraph. Do you have any suggestions?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes. I would like to raise again the issue that I raised with you before, whether we should not say “our people are prepared” or whether we say “will prepare.”

VM Ch'iao: In that way of putting it the difficulty will not lie on our side but with your side, because just before that there is the question that involves Taiwan.

Dr. Kissinger : But we have a separate section on Taiwan which explains our position.

VM Ch'iao: But in your explanation on Taiwan you only put forward an ultimate objective and that ultimate objective has not been realized.

Dr. Kissinger : “Prepare” means we want to create a condition to realize it. Can we say “the United States and China have renounced the use or threat of force in their international disputes?”

VM Ch'iao: We discussed it before. I don't think we need to go into this matter.

Dr. Kissinger : But I don't know what we are saying.

VM Ch'iao: We had already said we wish to reduce the danger of international military conflicts.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand that. But what are we saying? Are we going to apply these principles or are we not?

VM Ch'iao: We are laying the ground for implementation of these principles. For instance, we now still have no state relations.

Dr. Kissinger : There is nothing in the five principles of coexistence that says we must have state relations.

VM Ch'iao: Five principles—your maintaining your treaty with Chiang Kai-shek cannot be said to be consistent. So I think that this wording which has been discussed so many times should be maintained. We do very much like to use that wording, and we are making an effort so in the future we will be able to use it. The difficulty is not on our side. It is you who have sent the force of arms to Taiwan. For instance, your people—you cannot answer to that because you have not removed the use of force. So it is only a question of solving it progressively. It is clear, so I don't think there need be any more discussion on this.

Dr. Kissinger : But I am not.

VM Ch'iao: For instance, if this Taiwan question had been settled by now, to withdraw all your armed forces, there would be no question but to have you withdraw them. This matter we have been discussing for more than a decade and the fact is you are there and the fact is you do have your armed forces on our territory and that military presence on our territory is a violation of …

Dr. Kissinger : Two questions. How will this be interpreted? In 1955 the People's Republic was prepared to sign a treaty for the renunciation of force. The only reason it failed was because we insisted this apply to Taiwan.

VM Ch'iao: It was not so simple as you described it. We will discuss this in more detail on the plane tomorrow.

Dr. Kissinger : On December 1, 1955 you made the proposal that the PRC and the US should settle disputes between our two countries through peaceful solution without the use of force. And we said does this apply to Taiwan? You said Taiwan is an internal matter which China is willing to settle by peaceful means. We raised the issue that this is without prejudice to the collective right of self-defense. This you did not accept.

VM Ch'iao: But here you only touch the surface of the problem. You did not touch the roots of the problem, that is, the premise of your putting forward your suggested joint declaration and an inevitability of putting forward that joint declaration is that you would agree to withdraw from Taiwan.

Dr. Kissinger : That was never put forward.

VM Ch'iao: There is not much time tonight, but I can tell you the whole story tomorrow.

Dr. Kissinger : I am less interested in that story than I am in what exactly we are saying here.

VM Ch'iao: I am trying to say we are working towards that goal.

Dr. Kissinger : We are not clear that this applies to Taiwan. We recognize you do not consider Taiwan an international dispute.

VM Ch'iao: The trouble is there are American troops stationed in Taiwan. We had always maintained that there are two aspects to the Taiwan question. One is that it is an internal matter between the Chinese. The other aspect of the Taiwan question is you have your armed forces there and that constitutes an international dispute between the U.S. and China. We are willing to bring an end to the international dispute between the U.S. and China. We are willing to bring an end to the international dispute between our two countries—you withdraw your forces. You cannot say you are not using your armed forces when you have them stationed there. You said, if they would ask you has there been an agreement between China and the U.S., you cannot say that.

Dr. Kissinger : If one said, yes, one would have to add the People's Republic does not consider Taiwan an international dispute and therefore this restriction does not apply to Taiwan.

VM Ch'iao: That is not correct. Taiwan is a part of China. We should not reach agreement on this. What both of our sides have been saying—with relations suspended for more than 20 years—let us admit errors and move in that direction. The direction is to merely put into implementation those principles mentioned above.

Dr. Kissinger : The President may want to discuss this.

VM Ch'iao: “There are essential differences between China and the United States in their social systems and foreign policies. However, the two sides agreed that countries, regardless of their social systems, should conduct their relations on the principles of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all states, non-aggression against other states, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. International disputes should be settled on this basis, without resorting to the use or threat of force. The United States and the People's Republic of China are prepared to apply these principles to their mutual relations.”

Dr. Kissinger : Alright.

VM Ch'iao: And then the following paragraph. “It would be against the interests of the peoples of the world for any major country to collude with another against other countries, or for major countries to divide up the world into spheres of interest.”

Dr. Kissinger : May I suggest we take out the word “major”; then it will apply to minor countries. (Laughter)

VM Ch'iao: It is not realistic to think that a small country can divide the world into spheres of interest.

Dr. Kissinger : Are you not in fear of Arab countries making a sphere of interest against Israel?

VM Ch'iao: Let's not go into any discussion on that.

Dr. Kissinger : Okay.

VM Ch'iao: “With these principles of international relations in mind the two sides stated—no change.”—Progress toward the normalization of relations between China and the United States is in the interests of all countries;—both wish to reduce the danger of international military conflict.”

Dr. Kissinger : I was going to make a suggestion here. I think “wish” is a very weak word. “Make efforts to reduce the danger of international military conflict.” “Wish” is a weak word.

Mr. Chang: Because that is not conforming to reality.

Dr. Kissinger : It will not happen unless we make an effort.

VM Ch'iao: With the word “wish” that does not hinder you from making your efforts.

Dr. Kissinger : But it is not a word that does justice to two great peoples.

VM Ch'iao: We made so many concessions to you. As the Premier said, if we don't show clear restraint.

Dr. Kissinger : But this is no concession to the U.S.—what do we get out of it?

VM Ch'iao: We wish to maintain the word “wish.”

Dr. Kissinger : You don't even wish to discuss it?

VM Ch'iao: We have such big differences. Of course, we may have further discussion of this wording. We suggest, however, to keep it as it is. I am quite capable of talking at great length.

Dr. Kissinger : But we are not trying to wear each other out. We are trying to get a good document.

VM Ch'iao: That is right. As you joked the other day, you hoped I would not deal with you as I dealt with Malik. We are striving to approach each other.

Dr. Kissinger : Will you discuss this point with the Prime Minister?

VM Ch'iao: If you express that wish, we can do it. The next is—the whole document will have to be referred to your President and our Prime Minister subject to their approval. Third, “neither will seek hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region and each is opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony; and—neither is prepared to negotiate on behalf of any third party or to enter into agreements or understandings directed at other states.” There is lack of clarity. We can say “neither is prepared to negotiate on behalf of any third party or to enter into”—what is the agreement between the US and Japan and your treaty with Chiang Kai-shek?

Dr. Kissinger : That is why I think we should say “to enter into agreements or understandings with the other directed at other states.” “Neither is prepared to negotiate on behalf of any third party or to enter into agreements or understandings with the other directed at other states.”

VM Ch'iao: Okay, it is more clear.

“The two sides reviewed the long-standing serious disputes between China and the United States. The Chinese side reaffirmed its position: The Taiwan question is the crucial question obstructing the normalization of relations between China and the United States; the Government of the People's Republic of China is the sole legal Government of China; Taiwan is a province of China which has long been returned to the motherland; the liberation of Taiwan is China's internal affair in which no other country has the right to interfere; and all U.S. forces and military installations must be withdrawn from Taiwan. The Chinese Government firmly opposes any activities which aim at the creation of 'one China, one Taiwan,' 'one China, two governments,' 'two Chinas,' and “independent Taiwan' or advocate that 'the status of Taiwan remains to be determined.”

Then the U.S. side. “The U.S. side declared: The United States acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Strait maintain there is but one China and that Taiwan is a part of China. The United States Government does not challenge that position. It reaffirms its interest in the peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question by the Chinese themselves. With this prospect in mind, it affirms the ultimate objective of the withdrawal of all U.S. forces and military installations from Taiwan. In the meantime, it will progressively reduce its forces and military installations on Taiwan as the tension in the area diminishes.”

Dr. Kissinger : It makes no sense in English.

VM Ch'iao: You have trapped me.

Dr. Kissinger : No, not yet.

VM Ch'iao: Shall I continue? “The two sides agreed that, it is desirable to broaden the understanding between the two peoples. To this end, they discussed specific areas in the fields of science, technology, culture, sports and journalism, in which people-to-people contacts and exchanges would be mutually beneficial.”

Dr. Kissinger : If you people lose one game in the U.S., I will know you have instructed them.

VM Ch'iao: “Each side undertakes to facilitate the further development of such contacts and exchanges.”

“Both sides view bilateral trade as another area from which mutual benefit could be derived, and agreed that economic relations based on equality and mutual benefit are in the interests of the peoples of the two countries. They agreed to facilitate the progressive development of trade between their two countries.”

“The two sides agreed that they will stay in contact through various channels. In addition, the U.S. Government will send a senior representative to Peking from time to time for concrete consultations to further the normalization of relations between the two countries and continue to exchange views on issues of common interest.

“The two sides expressed the hope that the gains achieved during this visit would open up new prospects for the relations between the two countries.”

Dr. Kissinger : May I make a suggestion—that repeats—may I say progress of the … “open up new prospects.”

VM Ch'iao: “They believe that the normalization of relations of the two countries is not only in the interest of the two peoples but …

Dr. Kissinger : The first of the two.

VM Ch'iao: Progress towards the relations of China and the U.S. is in the interest of all countries. A little bit of difference. In the principles, it is progress towards normalization—here it is the normalization. If you put various channels before a stop, that is something not agreed to by both sides.

Dr. Kissinger : Now we have a practical problem. We will get this typed up tonight, and we will have a copy on the plane. Now the question is we would like to tell Secretary Rogers and him alone. What do you think? It is almost essential.

VM Ch'iao: I know this is your problem and one we respect. But as you know, Premier Chou En-lai shows great concern on matters of that, and we have to report to him on that first. Your wish is to show it to Mr. Rogers now?

Dr. Kissinger : No, not now. Tomorrow. He will have to defend it before Congress. But we will not show it to anyone else.

VM Ch'iao: As the Premier said to you this afternoon—we would say we reached some agreements, and we might work out a Communique.

Dr. Kissinger : We can say we might work out a Communique, but then we have to be prepared to tell the press there will be a Communique.

VM Ch'iao: The fact is that the President and the Prime Minister may still want to have some changes here and there.

Dr. Kissinger : How is the seating arrangement on the plane? Will we sit together?

VM Ch'iao: We will be together. We can discuss this. No matter how we arranged it, we can sit together.

Dr. Kissinger : Then I suggest I will give Secretary Rogers a copy after we reach Hangchow and that we not discuss it on the plane.

VM Ch'iao: I approve.

Dr. Kissinger : And then we will give it to him as soon as we arrive in Hangchow, and you and I can have private discussions anyway. You will find out from the Prime Minister with respect to the various points we raise, and I will find out various points you raised with the President, and then we will put it in final shape.

VM Ch'iao: I approve. The scheduling for Shanghai is very tight.

Dr. Kissinger : We will get it finished tomorrow afternoon.

VM Ch'iao: Or in the evening. We must finish in Hangchow. Then the procedure will be as follows. Tomorrow, we will read it through in Hangchow and check it, and after that we still will have to send it for approval by the Prime Minister and the President.

Dr. Kissinger : I will submit to the President what we have, just to make some progress.

VM Ch'iao Certainly. Even after we do it once, we still have to submit it. We have just obtained instructions that if you want to show it to Secretary Rogers that can be decided by your President himself. We have no objections.

Dr. Kissinger : We will show it to him in Hangchow.

VM Ch'iao: Another thing—“also taking part in the discussions were so and so"— whether you have it or not have it is really up to you and we will list or not list accordingly.

Dr. Kissinger : I will dispense with it.

Mr. Lord: I think we ought to take Kissinger out of it.

Dr. Kissinger : This is his last trip (laughter).

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. Brackets in the source text. The meeting was held at the Guest House, Villa 2.

103. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 26, 1972 103. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, February 26, 19721

Beijing, February 26, 1972

Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: February 26, 1972

SUBJECT: Plenary Session

PARTICIPANTS:

PRC

Prime Minister Chou En-lai

Foreign Minister Chi Peng-fei

Vice Foreign Minister Ch'iao Kuan-hua

Hsiung Hsiang-hui, Secretary to the Prime Minister, Foreign Affairs

Chang Wen-chin, Director European, American and Australasian Affairs

Ch'ien Ta-yung, Deputy Director European, American and Australasian Affairs

Interpreters: Chi Ch'ao Chu, T'ang Wen Sheng, SHEN JO-YUN

HAN Hsu, Director, Protocol

Wang Hai-jung, Deputy Director, Protocol

US

President Richard Nixon

Secretary of State William P. Rogers

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant for National Security Affairs

Mr. Robert Haldeman, Assistant to the President

Mr. Dwight Chapin, Special Assistant to the President

Mr. Ronald Ziegler, Press Secretary

Mr. John Scali, Special Consultant to the President

Mr. Alfred Jenkins, Director for Asian Communist Affairs

Mr. John H. Holdridge, National Security Council Staff

Mr. Winston Lord, Office of the Assistant for National Security Affairs

Mr. Charles Freeman, Interpreter

PLACE: Peking Airport, VIP Lounge, Prior to take-off

COPIES TO:

S

J

EA

U

S/S

WH - Dr. Kissinger

After brief amenities Prime Minister thou asked whether the President had anything he wished to say at this point.

The President observed that long talks have been held bilaterally both at the summit and between the Secretary of State and the Foreign Minister concerning problems of interest to the whole world. This has been necessary in order for us to find common ground. The important thing is that we reflect honestly the substance of these talks, and that we avoid diplomatic doubletalk. We have been honest and candid. If we can continue on that basis we have a solid foundation on which to build for the future. The President asked whether the Prime Minister had anything further to add.

The Prime Minister said that the discussions at both levels had indeed been proceeding as the President indicated. Both sides have set forth differences in principles, but we have also been able to find common ground. We have also agreed that we will declare to the peoples of both our sides, and to the world, both our differences and our common round. In this way we will break through some of the usual diplomatic conventions. President Nixon and Chairman Mao have a characteristic in common: they do away with the superfluous.

The President said that in the discussions we had come to the point very quickly.

The Prime Minister agreed, saying, why should we cover up our differences? If we show to the peoples of our two countries the truth, and show it to the world, we shall have a new style of work. At first, people may not be able to accept this, but it will come to be viewed as a good way of dealing. It would not be good to feed illusions to the world or to our two peoples.

The President said that we do have differences, and we cannot build a bridge spanning l6,000 miles and 23 years in one week. Nevertheless, we have found more common ground than we anticipated. The world wants to find that these two great nations do have common ground.

The Prime Minister said that the President's statement, “We cannot build a bridge spanning 16,000 miles and 23 years in one week” would make a good poem. He added that we have at least taken the first step in a long march of 10,000 miles.

The President observed, however, that we must not take 10,000 years for that march. The Prime Minister agreed that would be too long.

The President then asked whether the Secretary wished to make any observations. The Secretary said he was sure the Foreign Minister would agree that their talks had been conducted in the same spirit as those at the summit: they were frank, but never unfriendly. In these talks it was agreed that in order to build a bridge or take a long march together we must have contact. He had indicated that we were prepared to carry on contacts in a manner which the Chinese found most suitable under existing circumstances.

The Prime Minister interjected, “Suitable to both sides.”

The Secretary said that the talks had also helped clear up a number of misunderstandings, for instance concerning the matter of a requirement for fingerprinting of some visitors to the United States. The Chinese had indicated that this was an unacceptable procedure, for historical reasons. (Feudal landlords had required fingerprinting of tenants.) In less than ten minutes a phone call to Washington had confirmed our understanding that fingerprinting was no longer required. The President said he believed that this practice had been stopped during the time when Secretary Rogers was serving as Attorney General. The Prime Minister said that was to his credit. The Secretary said that the phone call had demonstrated how quickly misunderstandings could be cleared up when there was a means of fast and frequent communication. The Secretary concluded with an expression of appreciation to our Chinese hosts, saying that in every possible way this had been a most pleasant and unforgettable visit.

The Prime Minister said that in some ways they had not done enough. There were shortcomings. During the visit to the Great Wall, and the Ming Tombs, for instance, there was a serious problem. It was quite unnecessary to put on a false show of children dancing along the route of the President at the Ming Tombs. The American press had pointed this out. We have admonished our people who did this. We had not known previously of this. In the spirit of Chairman Mao, we are determined not to cover up our errors. This was a simple thing, but it was bad. It is right to admit our wrongs; but we will not, of course, admit to having done wrong when we have done no wrong. Only in this way is it possible for us to control bur bureaucracy; but this is not easy. The Prime Minister then laughed and said, “But I have been talking too much.” He wondered whether Foreign Minister Chi Peng-fei had anything to say.

The Foreign Minister said that he was in full agreement with the opinions expressed by the Secretary. The general atmosphere had been characterized by friendliness. Both sides adopted an attitude of looking forward in a positive spirit in order to improve our relations. In the attempt to find common ground we had reviewed history and touched on the differences of opinions and of principles which we have had in the past. In order to make a good start in the normalization of our relations both sides discussed some concrete issues as well as general principles. We discussed how to move forward in people-to-people exchanges in the fields of sports, science, medicine, culture and education. We also considered trade relations, which we believed would be helpful in promoting the normalization of relations. We reached a meeting of minds concerning the initial, beginning steps in trade. We also reached the common view that before relations are normalized it would be better for the above matters to be conducted on a people-to-people basis, with governmental facilitation. It was also the common view that these matters should be developed gradually and progressively. Ten thousand years are too long, but to take this long march in one year is too short. Still, we must “seize the day, seize the hour.” The Secretary and the Foreign Minister would be primarily responsible to see that these programs were carried out.

The President said that he wanted to make a point which was very important for our future relationship. The Prime Minister had been very forthright concerning the press story about the little girls dancing. The President only wanted to say that he hoped no one would be reprimanded for the incident, because he liked it. The incident nevertheless does illustrate how misunderstandings could poison our relations. We must make every effort to prevent this.

The President said that all agree that this is the story of the century. There will be much comment. Newsmen consider that they are experts and have the right to express their opinions. Members of Congress, too, have the right to make statements freely, without consulting with us. For instance, there was a story yesterday that the President had made the decision to recognize Bangladesh at a certain time. We are considering this step, but I have not made a decision. There will be stories by columnists and statements by politicians. Many people abroad will consider these to be authoritative.

From the beginning we have developed between ourselves at the highest levels a spirit of mutual trust. Ayub Khan once said to me, “Trust is like a thin thread: once it breaks, it is hard to put it together again.” It is important that all of us recognize that when statements are made in the future, the Prime Minister and the Chinese Government should realize that until the President or the Secretary, or some authorized person speaks, it is not the position of our government. We cannot control what others will say, but we will be honest in our statements, as we have been in our discussions here.

The Secretary emphasized that what the President had just said was most important. He would appreciate it if, when there is any misunderstanding, the Foreign Minister would get in touch with him. He said he had many foreign ministers who simply picked up the phone and called him. If we could have a way to communicate quickly, we could straighten things out by keeping in touch.

The President said he would like to state that never in his term of office had we talked with a government which had been more meticulous and trustworthy in our communications. There had been absolutely no leaks. This is very important to our relations, which must progress on this basis. We have been criticized because we on our side have not kept the press informed. We have so acted because this was the understanding which we had with the Prime Minister. The rule which we want our people to understand is that this great step we have made will never be served by the headline we make today, but by the history we make tomorrow.

The Prime Minister said that was quite right. For communication be more accurate, it must be accomplished directly with the President, the Secretary, or with anyone whom they authorize to communicate. This is necessary in order for the general public opinion to accept what is correct but not pay attention to that which is wrong. We should also like everyone to know that socialist China can stand-up to criticism. If we are wrong, we can correct it.

The Prime Minister observed that there were still two days in which to finalize the communique. He hoped that the remaining talks would continue to be productive.

The President said that soon we would have to answer press questions. He said that up to now he had only “not talked about the weather.”

The Secretary said that he thought all had been impressed with the progress made so far. He hoped that progress which had been so successfully started would continue.

Both the President and the Secretary expressed their sincere appreciation for the hospitality which the Chinese had shown them and their party in Peking. The Prime Minister thanked them, but said that the Chinese had not done enough. They should have made more effort.

The Prime Minister suggested that the President allow Mr. Ziegler to tell the press that this final plenary meeting of the Peking phase of the President's visit had been held.

The Chinese and American parties then proceeded to their planes for the flight to Hangchow.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 91, Country Files, Far East, China, Memoranda of Conversation Between Secretary Rogers and PRC Officials, February 1972. Secret; Nodis; Homer. Drafted by Alfred Jenkins and approved in S on March 10. Copies were sent to S, S/S, U, J, E, and to Kissinger at the White House. The meeting was held in the VIP Lounge of the Beijing Airport prior to the parties' departure to Hangchow. The precise time of the meeting is not indicated on the memorandum.

104. Memorandum of Conversation, Hangchow, February 26-27, 1972, 10:20 p.m.-1:40 a.m. 104. Memorandum of Conversation, Hangchow, February 26-27, 1972, 10:20 p.m.-1:40 a.m.1

Hangchow, February 26-27, 1972, 10:20 p.m.-1:40 a.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John H. Holdridge, NSC Staff

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Jonathan T. Howe, NSC Staff

Ch'iao Kuan-hua, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Chang Wen-chin, Director of Western Europe, North American, and Australasian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chao Chi-hua, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chi Chao-chu, Interpreter

Three Notetakers

DATE & TIME: Saturday, February 26 - Sunday, February 27, 1972

10:20 p.m. - 1:40 a.m.

PLACE: Hangchow Hotel, Hangchow

Dr. Kissinger : Mr. Vice Minister, should I start?

VM Chiao: Please.

Mr. Kissinger: As you know, as I told you yesterday, we were going to give this draft today to the Secretary of State and I want to talk to you frankly. We do not need his approval to execute a communique and in normal circumstances we make these decisions regardless of the views of individual Cabinet members. In this particular case, we have not achieved our full objective if we do not succeed in mobilizing public opinion behind the policy we are trying to pursue. So, while normally we can easily survive comments from officials which are critical, in this particular case we can survive them but it will get us into side issues and the Minister must have seen when he was in the United States during the India-Pakistan crisis how a mutinous bureaucracy can get its views to the public. So we would like to gain not his acquiescence but his strong support by letting him get a sense of having done something to the communique. Now he has three suggestions on the crucial paragraph on Taiwan and I will just put them and then let us see how much we can do.

In the first sentence where it says “The United States acknowledges … “ The argument is that all sounds a little ridiculous in English. So we would suggest not saying “all Chinese” but “the Chinese.” It's in English makes almost no difference, and in Chinese it may even translate the same way. I don't know.

VM Chiao: Mr. Holdridge, “all” means “so yu” (Chinese word).

Mr. Holdridge: It is stronger, but the difference is not all that great.

Dr. Kissinger : His argument is that it sounds silly for us to say “all” and that it sounds excessive for us to say that. We say “all” Chinese but we can say “the Chinese” which in English means almost the same thing.

VM Chiao: That's one point. Now you will please continue.

Dr. Kissinger : I don't want to give you the impression that there is wild enthusiasm on his part for the whole paragraph. He wants to say instead of “does not challenge that position,” “does not challenge this.” And the third point—the last point in this paragraph—is he does not like “by the Chinese themselves” in the next sentence and he makes the same point as the President made: “on both sides of the Straits” or something like that. That's all in this paragraph.

Then there's an issue at the beginning that is raised. We would like to propose at the beginning—as it is now, after the introduction, you state, your position and we state ours. We propose that you state your position in the Chinese text first and we state our position in the English text first.

VM Chiao: Anything more?

Dr. Kissinger : One other point. All I am now mentioning are minor things. We have a sentence for the ceasefire line in India, for example, which I don't think is a problem.

VM Chiao: Would you kindly give it to us?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, We would say the following: “Consistent with the United Nations Security Council resolution of December 21, 1972, the United States favors the continuation of the ceasefire of the south Asian sub-continent and the withdrawal of all military forces to within their own territory and to the pre-war line in Jainmu and Kashmir.”

VM Chiao: Pre-war line. That's rather vague.

Dr. Kissinger : Let's say ceasefire line. The trouble with that is which ceasefire line?

VM Chiao: When it says ceasefire line in Jammu and Kashmir then the connotation is clear.

Dr. Kissinger : All right, Let's say that.

VM Chiao: That is immediately following what you presented yesterday?

Dr. Kissinger : We had had it at the beginning of that sentence. We would shift the sentence around. And then it would be a semicolon after this and it would be followed by what we had, which we have shortened a little bit.

VM Chiao: Anything more?

Dr. Kissinger : Well, this last point is our . . no, we have one other problem and that's really the last one except for word suggestions here and there. Not to waste time, the argument was made that by listing commitments to two countries and not saying anything about a general attitude toward commitment we are acting ambiguously toward countries like the Philippines, and Thailand, and therefore should have a sentence in there which says that the United States will maintain its commitments … . If we can say the United States will maintain its existing commitments, then we would take it out with regard to Japan and Korea and put in some other words. What we would then do … You see, it's also a problem for you because supposing we say these two, then every other ally in the whole Pacific will say “what about us?” and we will have to be issuing statements every day.

VM Chiao: I cannot make any immediate reaction to that suggestion.

Dr. Kissinger : But we would then take out “the existing commitments between Korea and the United States will be honored.” We would not use the word “commitment” twice and we would also take it out of Japan.

VM Chiao: I can't immediately give an answer to that. If you were to say that it will be very obvious that first of all you will include your commitment to Chiang Kai-shek.

Dr. Kissinger : I don't want to bargain about this because I understand your problem.

VM Chiao: We pointed out our position and you yours.

Dr. Kissinger : You don't have to argue it because I understand.

VM Chiao: The interests of our two sides, the positions of the two sides, are quite clear to each other.

Dr. Kissinger : I will make the following suggestion. We will rewrite the section on Korea and Japan so the commitment is not mentioned, so there won't be questions why you make commitments to them and not to others. That you can't object to.

VM Chiao: Well indeed there are so many countries in the world with whom you have treaty commitments.

Dr. Kissinger : We would say, for example, not the final language but just to give you a sense of what we would say, instead of “existing commitments between the U.S. and the Republic of Korea” we would say “the U.S. will maintain its close ties and support for the Republic of Korea.”

VM Chiao: “And support?”

Interpreter (Chi): “Will maintain its close ties and support?

VM Chiao: Please repeat.

Dr. Kissinger : “Will maintain its close ties and support for the Republic of Korea.”

VM Chiao: Anything more?

Dr. Kissinger : And then in this sentence … “the U.S. places the highest value on its …” we would take out “honor its mutual defense treaty obligations” and put in something else, “continue to place the highest value on its friendship with Japan and continue to strengthen the existing close relationship.” So no defense treaty; we haven't mentioned the defense treaty.

VM Chiao: Any more?

Mr. Kissinger: Well, many of these we will get when we go through the text. I have one

VM Chiao: Question whether the Vietnam part, what is a just basis …

Dr. Kissinger : Have you a suggestion?

VM Chiao: So we maintain our original position that neither side use any adjective.

Dr. Kissinger : You are going to drop “firm support” then?

VM Chiao: It's not an adjective, “firm support.” What I mean is we shouldn't spend too much energy on.

Dr. Kissinger : “Its constant primary objective has been the peaceful solution …” What we want to say there to be precise, the eight-point proposal put forward by the Republic of Vietnam and the United States on January 25.

VM Chiao: That's fact.

Dr. Kissinger : Factual. As long as we are giving you changes like this, I have one which is at the very end.

VM Chiao: Repeat this sentence.

Dr. Kissinger : “It's constant primary objective has been a negotiated solution; the eight-point proposal put forward by … represents a basis for the attainment of that objective.”

VM Chiao: It's clear. Anything more?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes. “The two sides agreed”—at the end—“that they will stay in contact through various channels.” Instead of saying the United States Government will send a senior representative, this sounds like we have made an obligation to you, so what we want to say is “through various channels, including the sending of a senior U.S. representative to Peking.” Other things we will get as we go through. When it is a word, do you want every last suggestion now?

VM Chiao: When it is a purely technical, stylistic matter, it doesn't matter.

Dr. Kissinger : From the point of view of vanity, we favor taking out “also taking part in the discussion” and “also taking part in the talks.” In the part where it says this, could we also mention that the Secretary of State, William P. Rogers, and Foreign Minister Chi Peng-fei also had a useful talk? It's a minor point. If it gives you any trouble forget it, It's not worth a lot of effort.

I have one point which is a point of logic. On our page … on page 5 of this document, … he just explains to me that what I had in mind isn't going to be possible. That sentence, “it is against the interest …” We agree with it. Just logically it isn't listed among the general principles, and isn't listed among agreements. It's just put there between the principles and agreements and my suggestion is that it should be moved into one or the other. I think it's not substantive; it's a drafting suggestion.

Another possibility is … which requires less worry—it's less elegant, is that we begin the sentence by saying “The two sides also agreed that it is against the best interest…” That may be the easiest and really all.

VM Chiao: The questions which you raised are things which we will have to study.

Dr. Kissinger : I recognize it.

VM Chiao: A 15-minute recess?

Dr. Kissinger : Certainly. I want to repeat to the Vice Foreign Minister, this is not a clever negotiating trick on our part.

VM Chiao: No.

Dr. Kissinger : We really think if some of these points could be made, it would help us achieve the objective.

BREAK—11:00 -11:28 p.m.

VM Chiao: Before expressing our views on the suggestions you made, I would like first of all to say that considering the present stage already reached in discussing the communique there are a few minor points which we feel our part would like to put forward.

Dr. Kissinger : All right.

VM Chiao: That is, on the four points of common positions of the two sides. That is on these four points, the first point concerns the question of normalization of relations; the second is on the reduction of danger of international military conflict, and the third is on the question of opposition to hegemony. On this third point, we did not quite make our position quite clear yesterday. We wanted to change the words “will seek” to “neither side should seek hegemony.” But in interpreting, my interpretation was not accurate.

Dr. Kissinger : But what is the difference in meaning that you are trying to convey?

VM Chiao: Of course there is a difference between “will” and “should” because Dr. Kissinger's English is better than ours.

Dr. Kissinger : But your subtlety exceeds mine.

VM Chiao: No, your subtlety exceeds mine. Quite to the contrary, it is not to be subtle that we want this word. It is to make it perfectly clear that whether you do want or do not want it that you should not.

Dr. Kissinger : In principle I am disposed to go along with you, but the question in my mind is that if you say neither will, then you are committed. If you say neither should then you are expressing a general moral proposition which may or may not be carried out.

VM Chiao: Well, then we said “with this principle of international relations in mind” we used the word “should,” for instance “disputes should be settled on this basis” and “the two sides agreed that … . should … .”

Dr. Kissinger : But the previous one expresses general principles, but this one expresses definite action.

VM Chiao: No, that's not the case. For instance, when we talk about progress toward normalization of relations, what action has been taken? It's only a direction.

Director Chang: Apart from that, the first sentence of the statement is merely a statement: “Both sides are of the view that it is in the interest …” This is merely a judgment.

Dr. Kissinger : “Neither will seek”—is that too weak or too strong for you?

Director Chang: According to the exact implication of our Chinese version, the word ying kai should be interpreted as “should” and not “will.” Of course we understand somewhat about a legalistic language, but don't want to debate much of that now. So if you feel that as the Vice Minister was saying, we were very frank with you and it was a mistaken interpretation on my part. . if you don't agree then we can debate on it.

Dr. Kissinger : Supposing we put in “should” and then someone asks me why this curious word is here. As I understand it, you are trying to express a moral commitment that this should not be done. In other words, you want to say more than “will.”

VM Chiao: It includes that interpretation and accurately reflects the Chinese word “should.”

Dr. Kissinger : Let's put it aside. We'll solve this; it can be solved. We can perhaps say it—it is awkward in English.

VM Chiao: It's a very minor matter. Then we go on to another, also a very small question. We don't have any major points. That is our declaration on the Taiwan question. We have a technical change and think you will understand when you hear it. It is a matter of language because when we first put forward this draft our statement on Taiwan, it was said … “and the U.S. troops must withdraw from Taiwan.” We put it in Chinese, but it meant the U.S. must withdraw all its forces and military installations from Taiwan.

Dr. Kissinger : Of course, of course. Will you just give us your language? It's more poetic this way, but more accurate the other.

VM Chiao “All U.S. forces and military installations must be withdrawn from Taiwan.”

Dr. Kissinger : All right. That's fine. In fact, that's much more correct. You are absolutely right; no problem.

VM Chiao: So that was what I was originally intending to do tonight. To discuss technical and stylistic matters.

Dr. Kissinger : So was I, and we are embarrassed.

VM Chiao: It is late evening on the 26th and this is to be published tomorrow. And this document was already agreed upon by your highest leadership and our highest leadership. And if a major change is to be suggested now, I think the consequences would be we cannot publish it tomorrow. Because some of the questions raised are quite serious. I want to discuss this matter with you and also want to reach agreement with you, and after our discussion last night at the small hours I believed then this question was already solved, and when I sent you off early this morning I was relaxed thinking we had solved this. But I cannot in a most frank way tell my colleagues; the questions you raised today indeed put us in a very difficult position. And for some of the questions, I don't think it is possible for them to be solved tomorrow. If you persist—of course, you do have the right to persist—there is no question but you do have the right to persist on an equal basis. So now, what after all, are your intentions now?

For instance, your argument on the Taiwan wording, how long we have discussed it. We have spent so much energy from your first visit in July; we spent so much time on this matter.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand.

VM Chiao: And in our five days of discussions in Peking our energies were primarily devoted to the Taiwan question—and we didn't spend much time on any other question—because the Taiwan question is indeed the crucial question between us.

I would like again to tell my colleague Dr. Kissinger that what has characterized our relations has been sincerity and frankness. And it is in this spirit that I want to say that we cannot consider the suggested changes in the wording of this Taiwan case. That originally is where we were. So you say you have difficulties. So we went back then you advanced forward, and then you said an agreement is reached and both of us were happy and then in the last five minutes you raised it again and we cannot do it now.

Dr. Kissinger : Mr. Vice Foreign Minister, I understand what you are saying. These difficulties rise from the fact that I did not persist in my proposal to have Marshall Green present because my colleagues do not know with what sincerity and anguish you have worked, and the problems you have had. When I discuss your problems, they ascribe it to my inadequacy rather than to anything else. I am speaking with the frankness with which we speak to each other. And the reason I raise it at all is to get their willing cooperation in defending it before the Congress and our public.

VM Chiao: Precisely. It is because we want to take into account these reasons you advanced that we made concession after concession on this.

Dr. Kissinger : You did, I agree.

VM Chiao: Your President personally put forward a proposal yesterday and we asked for instructions from our Prime Minister. Our Prime Minister accepted it. Now you want to change it; that I cannot do. As you often said, and as the President often says, we must establish mutual trust. If there is no such mutual trust what is the sense of having this piece of paper? So Dr, Kissinger, I think the matter now is very serious. You have pressed me to a corner. And now we attach great importance to this work and have adopted a very positive and cooperative attitude in hoping to succeed in this communique. Why is it that we do this? Because to do this conforms to the needs of both sides, not just to the needs of one. Isn't that so?

Dr. Kissinger Yes.

VM Chiao: So I will reply to you very clearly. If you persist in your position there will be no need for further discussions tonight. And we will discuss it again tomorrow and the result will be no communique. That is so because Chairman Mao had made it very clear to Mr. Edgar Snow that it is our policy that it is all right whether the meeting with President Nixon is successful or not. We will still consider this visit to be fruitful. But please don't misunderstand. We still hope to have a communique. But I must sincerely hope you will not persist in your suggestions. You know, Dr. Kissinger, the sentiments of all Chinese are very strong on the Taiwan question. I am restraining myself to the utmost. We have to do much work with our people to enable our people to accept even this. So I am being most frank. If you feel you have to persist in this, let us not continue tonight.

Why is it I agreed yesterday that you may tell the press there is a communique? I thought we had solved our main problems. If I had not believed this I could not have let you tell the press there would be a communique. You really put me in a dilemma. I cannot agree. So I must sincerely hope you will reconsider.

If you feel that you need not persist in these suggestions then we may continue our discussions tonight, Otherwise I suggest we recess. Of course, whether it be a person, a nation or a state, if it is forced to a corner it will resist. So what do you think? Everyone is very tired: We are very tired; you are very tired. As I said, your suggestions on the Taiwan question are unacceptable. All three are. Cannot be. Not a matter of words. I can well make a long statement and I am able to make speeches.

Then, as for the suggestion about the order of the statements of the two sides, we could consider, when you publish it whether it be English, Chinese, or any other translation, you can put your statement first, and when we publish it, whether in English, Chinese or any other translation, our statement can come first.

Dr. Kissinger : That's acceptable.

VM Chiao: That we can consider. But I still have to say with regard to this point too, I still have to report to the Prime Minister and you have to report to the President. So the first point, on the Taiwan case, we cannot agree to any of the three. The second point, about order of statements, we may consider. The third point we find we can agree, that is on having a clause on talks between the Secretary of State and the Foreign Minister in accordance with the concerns you advanced, and it also reflects a fact. Of course, on the one hand you do have your difficulties here and also it's a fact.

And then the fourth is the question of the commitments. I am inclined to not have any change. Because time is too late. And for any changes to be made even in such cases, its rather difficult. Because I am being most frank with you, that is for such a big change by you to be made in the communique, then our Prime Minister will still have to consult leading personages of the Central Committee and how can there be time for that? When you mentioned the time for publishing of the communique, although at that time I hadn't reported to the Prime Minister, but it was my feeling the Prime Minister's spirit would be he is willing to consider what is most effective.

Dr. Kissinger : It makes no difference. We can do it late tomorrow.

VM Chiao: But if you are to make such a major change, even though we are all still in China, it would be very difficult. I can tell you that after our meeting at the small hours this morning our government engaged in a very serious and earnest discussion on this draft.

Director Chang: This is the first communique ever published between China and the United States. It is of great importance.

VM Chiao: I am saying all this without any reservations. So if you want to insist on such changes,then there is that danger that there will be no guarantee as to whether there will be time for itor not.

Dr. Kissinger : Mr. Minister, I want to speak to you with the same frankness with which you have spoken to me.

VM Chiao: Let me finish.

Dr. Kissinger : Oh, I thought you had.

VM Chiao: Then, as far as your suggestion about “including the sending of a senior U.S. representative,” we could agree to that. And then we can also agree to deleting that “taking part in Chinese …” And then on your suggestion about the question of any major country colluding with another I believe your suggestion is merely from the point of view of structure. Isn't that so?

Dr. Kissinger : That is right.

VM Chiao: This is a point which we could of course consider. If it's only that question, I don't think the problem is very big. So the question again is the crucial question, Taiwan. Another major question is that of the commitments regarding Korea and Japan. Now I would like to hear your views. I made my position clear and we do not like to engage in senseless debates. We must be practical.

Dr. Kissinger : Mr. Minister, first of all, I understand your position and I think it is reasonable on the issue of Taiwan. I believe you have made major steps and as I pointed out, the difficulty arises from the fact that unless people have been physically present at the talks, a paragraph when it is read cannot possibly reflect the anguish that went into it, And I also recognize that Taiwan has special sensitivity to you and therefore I can understand the intensity of your feelings. My motive in raising these issues is to prevent what can become a very bitter debate in America and to keep from happening what happened at the time of the India-Pakistan crisis. A major department pursued a deliberate policy of undermining our credibility. However, considering the fact that you did give me the opportunity to take this document to the President myself, I believe perhaps I should not persist in the proposal on Taiwan. I must tell you frankly, the advantage to us of substituting the word “the” for “all” is so out of proportion to the meaning that I simply want to mention it, but I can see that I should not persist in it.

Director Chang: I don't agree to that, but don't want to debate with you at this moment. I don't want to waste time now.

Dr. Kissinger : Now, on the other point, there I feel frankly your position is not so reasonable. Because we have not in effect made a serious effort to correct your statements on your version. We are not changing the sense of what we are saying.

VM Chiao: Let me interrupt a moment. The reason for the interruption is to make clear my position. That is to say most frankly, unless on this point you are able to give us right away an explicit wording, otherwise I fear very much.

Dr. Kissinger : No, we will give you an explicit wording now.

VM Chiao: Then let us put this question aside.

Dr. Kissinger : We will give you an explicit wording this minute. On Korea we will say: “The United States will maintain its close ties with and support for the Republic of Korea.” That is all we will say here and then semicolon, “The United States will support efforts …” This is negotiated. Next when we talk about Japan, “The U.S. places the highest value on its friendly relations with Japan; it will continue to strengthen the existing close bonds.”

Interpreter (Chi): And then South Asia?

VM Chiao: And then the South Asia clause?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, let me read you. “Consistent with the United Nations Security Council resolution of December 21, 1971, the United States favors the continuation of the ceasefire in the South Asian subcontinent and the withdrawal of all military forces to within their own territories, and to the ceasefire line in Jammu and Kashmire; the United States supports the right of the peoples of South Asia to shape their own future in peace, free of military threat and without having the area become the subject of great power rivalry,” Just stylistic, no substantive change.

VM Chiao: You wish to put it this way in your statement?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

VM Chiao: There is nothing very strong here, any strong views here. That is, with the exception of mentioning the December 21 resolution of the Security Council and thereby indirectly mentioning India and Pakistan, you didn't mention India and Pakistan at all. But there is no pressures about that. If you want to say that, we have no strong views. You mentioned Korea, Japan and Vietnam, but what about South Asia? You didn't mention the name of a country in South Asia. This makes it seem that you have no interest in their status. But please don't attach too much importance to our words; we never want to play any trick.

Dr. Kissinger : No, no, no, no. You didn't make the point yesterday unfortunately.

VM Chiao: But you had no formulation yesterday.

Dr. Kissinger : I know, it's our formulation, but we are asking for your view. Do you think it would straighten it if we said “withdrawal of all Indian and Pakistani military forces"?

VM Chiao: That is your decision. But if you ask my views, I think it is better to mention them. Or you can mention it this way, or that way, or not mention them at all.

BREAK—12:25 - 12:30 a.m.

VM Chiao: On India and Pakistan you preliminarily said that would be the wording.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, you know our policy anyway.

VM Chiao: “The South Asian subcontinent…” Maybe we should say “of a ceasefire between India and Pakistan.”

Dr. Kissinger : Once we have said “between India and Pakistan” we can leave out “of all military forces,” Don't you think?

VM Chiao: Whatever you think. In Chinese we favor more redundancy. If you decide it in this way it will facilitate our work.

Dr. Kissinger : It's decided.

VM Chiao: No reporting to our superiors?

Dr Kissinger: It's decided.

VM Chiao: And then, what about our points that neither will seek hegemony or neither should seek hegemony—there is a question of mistaking interpretation ?

Dr Kissinger: Yes, my only problem is it just doesn't make any sense in English. It makes no difference because if you are going to seek hegemony or we are going to seek hegemony, you won't be able to wave a piece of paper and say we are doing something illegal.

VM Chiao: But here, frankly speaking on this point, the policies of the two countries are different. Your view toward your policy and our view toward your policy is different and contrary-wise it might be said the same of our policy. Speaking most frankly, certain policies which you had adopted in the past, you may not have considered seeking hegemony, but we cannot guarantee it was not an attempt to seek hegemony. Nor can we guarantee it in the future. But on the other hand, that principle the United States could also apply to us. So what is the impression we do not want to create. We do not want any person to think we can guarantee on your behalf, or you can on ours in some sense, that we did not exercise hegemony in the past and will not in the future.

Dr. Kissinger : In English, let me just say it means statement of intention by each side for itself that it will not exercise hegemony.

Director Chang: But as this is something in common we think that whether it be in Chinese or in English, the words “should” should be used.

Dr. Kissinger How about “intends.” “Should” just doesn't make any sense in English. That's my problem with it. It's almost meaningless that way.

VM Chiao: But of course this was started out as a mistake in translation and if we had raised this point early it might have been solved and you also expressed that you wouldn't consider it a matter of great importance. So can we not compromise and use the word “neither should?”

Dr. Kissinger : But I am assuming in the previous sentence my suggestion of yesterday has not been accepted to strengthen the wording.

VM Chiao: Yes, we made it very plain we could not accept it. But even as it is in these sentences we did take in some of your views. Now for instance in the fourth sentence we accept it “with the other” in order to take into account the needs of the English language. Actually, from our side our original thought was when you came there was only one point of disagreement. That was our thought when you first came.

Dr. Kissinger : When I first came here?

VM Chiao: No, when the President first came.

Dr. Kissinger : You can't blame me for having some difficulties with a proposition I have never heard.

VM Chiao: I don't quite understand the implication of what you said.

Dr. Kissinger : You said you thought we only had differences about Taiwan when I came. I assume you mean when I came with the President.

VM Chiao: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : I agree with you, but this is not an issue we are raising.

VM Chiao: And I said I admit our mistake.

Dr. Kissinger : I know, but …

VM Chiao: It was after another re-checking with the Chinese that we discovered we made this mistake in translation. Premier Chou En-lai himself told us “will” cannot be accepted; it should be “should” according to the Chinese. Because we must treat each other on a basis of equality. Chinese, too, should have a restraining effect, as should the English.

Director Chang: The mistake was made in the translation. We admit it. But it is not a change and our position is the same. It is merely to change the interpretation.

Dr. Kissinger : This was originally our sentence; we introduced this sentence.

VM Chaio: Our intention was “should” but I made the mistake in the translation of the word “will.”

Dr. Kissinger : The American illusion is that disagreements arise because people don't understand each other. The fact is disagreements arise because they understand each other very well.

VM Chiao: That appears to be correct, and also incorrect. I am a legalist. “Neither should seek hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region, and each is opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish hegemony.”

Dr. Kissinger : You want to keep open the option of accusing us of exercising hegemony.

Director Chang: Exactly, and we give you the same option on an equal basis. You cannot expect to say your way in Indochina is anything against … . You cannot expect us to say nothing.

Dr. Kissinger : Okay, let's accept this. All right. How should we proceed?

Director Chang: About the Taiwan clause, then you withdraw these points? With regard to the clauses on Taiwan and Japan—frankly speaking at the present moment we are not absolutely sure of the precise implications. So we cannot say at the moment. So if this wording is insisted on we cannot be sure what will be the result.

Dr. Kissinger : We each have our difficulties. I don't see what purpose of yours is served by myself, who has the major responsibility for this being, being destroyed when I come back for statements that could be modified. But in that case we will just have to wait till tomorrow.

VM Chiao: I think there is a misunderstanding here. I just would like to say this: prior to the final ratification by the leaders of our two countries, can it be that you and I will both resolve with this reservation that it is not finalized until our leaders do. So let us solve the remaining questions, just you and me. Then after talking about the meeting between President Nixon and Premier Chou En-lai, we can say Secretary of State Rogers and Foreign Minister Chi Peng-fei also hld useful talks.

Then the question of the change of commitments, the wording will be as you have handed over for the time being.

Director Chang: And I, for the sake of better understanding, would like to say, we understand your intention of not saying “commitment.” The question is we are not certain about a point.

Dr. Kissinger : On the other hand, it does not refer to existing obligations.

VM Chiao: “It will continue the existing relationship.” Something in abstract terms instead of relationship?

Dr. Kissinger : How about “foster?

Interpreter (Chi): “It will continue to foster the existing close bonds.”

VM Chiao: “Continue to maintain"?

Dr. Kissinger : I tell you why I like a word other than “maintain.” We don't want this to be a synonym for treaty” and don't want people to say “why did you say it here and not there?” “Foster” is an active word; less than strengthen.

VM Chiao: Something in general terms.

Dr. Kissinger : “Foster” is not in English a very strong word.

VM Chiao: ”… foster the Japanese militarists.”

Dr. Kissinger : “to promote"?

(VM Chiao suggested another word.)

Mr. Kissinger: I would prefer “strengthen.” We have relations in the previous … .

VM Chiao: Your original word is “honor.”

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, but there we are talking about a legal obligation—we are here not talking about a legal obligation.

Mr. Lord: “Cherish"?

Dr. Kissinger : He's getting silly. “To develop"?

Mr. Holdridge: “To expand"?

VM Chiao: With better English I will conquer you.

Dr. Kissinger : You have already conquered me. I hope you are listening in on my telephones, because then you will know what I am up against. I hope very much, not you personally, but … .

“Will develop” is not a strong word. We have a great ability; no one who hasn't sat through these meetings would believe what we can do with words. You don't have to like this. This is our statement. There are a lot of things in your statement we don't like.

VM Chiao: Just telling you about our feeling. How about “honor and obey.”

Director Chang: How about “reduce"?

Mr. Lord: You must be kidding.

Dr. Kissinger : I think you can explain it on the grounds that we are using a slightly more active verb and a slightly less active noun.

VM Chiao: We will just tell you our thinking and put that aside. Not to create new possible trouble, but still to have to publish tomorrow. That's still our hope.

Dr. Kissinger : So is it ours. So we use “develop.”

Director Chang: We leave it for you to … .

Dr. Kissinger : Take any one of them?

Director Chang: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : Except cherish?

Director Chang: Foster, develop … .

Dr. Kissinger : I am slightly torn because I think if we don't agree we can have another night session and publish it the next morning. All right, lets leave it aside and let Mr. Chang pick one of the three verbs. Shall we continue while Mr. Chang reflects?

VM Chiao: At the beginning of that paragraph, “the two sides agree that it is … .”

Dr. Kissinger : It just doesn't make any sense otherwise—has no substantive meaning.

VM Chiao: At this stage, it is our inclination if possible not to change it at all—keep it as is. A matter of structure.

Dr. Kissinger : But every other statement says . . It is now there without reference to anything. You said you would consider it, and it doesn't make any …

VM Chiao: I am just thinking out loud again on this matter. It is not very accurate, but we might consider putting it at the end, after these four points. Then we might use wording like this “both sides are of the view that it would be against the interests of the peoples of the world, or for major countries to divide up spheres of interest in the world.”

Dr. Kissinger : Is that supposed to be better English?

VM Chiao: Just keep it as it is?

Director Chang: To divide up the world into … .

Dr. Kissinger He's terribly subtle; you have a good point. That's a very good point. I know what he's trying to say. ”… or for major countries to agree on spheres of interest among each other.” He does have a good point. I would support you; you have a good point.

Interpreter (Chi): To carve out spheres of influence.

Dr. Kissinger : If you say “carve out” it becomes unilateral. His mind fascinates me. If he is willing to say “both sides are of the view, “ I don't much care where it is placed. We can put it at the end of the four points. It's more logical there. Logically, it just doesn't fit here because we say with these principles in mind—what principles?

VM Chiao: Let us decide something ourselves. It will be at the end of the four points. Do you think Mr. Chang is being frivolous?

Dr. Kissinger : Before we get to Taiwan. The trouble with him is he always knows what he's doing. He's not frivolous; a nuisance, but he's never frivolous.

VM Chiao: How about “to divide up areas of the world into spheres of influence,” We are not discussing a document but are engaged in a philosophical argument. Actually “areas of the world” doesn't help us much. We keep the original?

Dr. Kissinger : We keep the original and we understand we are also opposed to dividing up areas. It's a very subtle point and maybe something will occur to us by tomorrow morning. I think we should get this typed up and run through it tomorrow morning just to be absolutely sure.

VM Chiao: That's all right.

Dr. Kissinger : I have just one other suggestion. At the end of page 7, every excluded field is going to scream it is being left out so I suggest we say “they discussed exchanges in such fields as …” so this is just demonstrative. We don't want this to be an inclusive list.

VM Chiao: At this end they discussed specific areas in such fields as …

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, then this way we don't have to discuss education… One last change, in the last sentence, we want to include Mrs. Nixon. Say President Nixon, Mrs. Nixon, and the American party …

VM Chiao: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : We have one other change and that is literally the last one—where it says the leaders of China … we want to say the Peoples Republic of China. In the rest of the document we use China, but here… . Page one, “the leaders of the People's Republic of China and the …” Leave out the middle names.

VM Chiao: All the middle names?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, mine too. If there is a change I will check it tomorrow. One other slight suggestion … . Add to “accompanied by” … “and other American officials.”

VM Chiao: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : Now, how should we proceed, because I do want to discuss the press briefing with you before I give it.

VM Chiao: We will do that.

Dr. Kissinger : Tomorrow?

VM Chiao: When?

Dr. Kissinger : As soon as we get to Shanghai?

VM Chiao: The most important things will be finalized by the President and the Prime Minister. As to specific wordings, we can see to it it is a very beautifully worded document.

Dr. Kissinger : All right, how shall we do it?

VM Chiao: Now this communique is fixed between you and me, and now ve will hand it over to our President and our Prime Minister and let us hop they can finalize it tomorrow morning. And for the sake of an early completion of this work, if necessary may we meet once again just for a shot time?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, but it's going to be an American press conference on Chinese soil. I want to be fair with you and to make sure I don't say anything that's embarrassing to you. And I want to tell you what I intend to say in introducing it, what the certain questions will be and how I intend to answer them.

VM Chiao: Let us do two pieces of work tomorrow morning. First to se if we can finalize this communique tomorrow morning, and then when we have finalized it tomorrow morning the other work will be much easier. And when it is finalized we will discuss how you tell your press.

Dr. Kissinger : When is all this going to happen? I don't feel that I must go to the industrial exhibition.

VM Chiao: Surely we can delete that.

Dr. Kissinger : We will get this typed tonight. You will be on the airplane?

VM Chiao: Also then, or on the plane tomorrow.

Dr. Kissinger : All right. So they can't do it on the plane. Must they do it?

VM Chiao: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : Okay, so we go straight from the plane to a meeting place?

VM Chiao: Yes, we can do it. It will probably be very tight. Or early tomorrow morning to meet here.

Dr. Kissinger : What is your definition of early? We will be in Shanghai, at 10:00. If we go immediately to whatever meeting place you designate we can settle this in half an hour. I expect that we will just read it through tomorrow.

VM Chiao: You know our Chinese typing is more difficult than yours. Of course what we want to be able to do is to type out a complete copy in Chinese.

Dr. Kissinger : After we are finished, you mean?

VM Chiao: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : We will agree, then get a copy typed. While the copy is being typed, you and I discuss the press conference.

VM Chiao: See how much time we spend on a single word like “foster” or “strengthen” or something like that. We spent about an hour. Although I am a perfectionist I am quite against this perfectionism. It is really not easy.

Dr Kissinger: What do you suggest? What is the practical solution?

VM Chiao: As soon as we arrive in Shanghai we will meet.

Dr. Kissinger : We have to meet to discuss questions for the press conference in any event. We will have a text and in our text we will put the American position first. And everything that is published by the U.S. will have the American side first; everything that is published by the Chinese will have the Chinese side first.

VM Chiao: About that, who is first, only applies to these two paragraphs, nothing else.

Dr. Kissinger : Oh no, on Taiwan you go first. It only applies to pages 2, 3, and 4.

VM Chiao: Just these two paragraphs.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, it emphastically does not include anything else. It begins from the top of our page 2 to the top of page 5.

VM Chiao: All right.

Interpreter (Chi): The Vice Minister emphasizes it has to be agreed upon by our two leaders. Both sides consider this to be an important document. And for our side, we are being very serious. What was discussed and agreed upon by us yesterday was discussed and approved by our leaders Of course, I am aware your system is different from ours, so please don't think I had any other idea in mind when I expressed my views. Because I really had that apprehension.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand this. At the same time, if you can agree to this it will help so much in getting a friend to put this to our people that having to spend another night is worth it.

VM Chiao: I agree to this working method. Once we arrive in Shanghai we will meet.

Dr. Kissinger : Good, and you arrange where we go and so forth.

Director Chang: … . words, “cherish,” “promote,”… .

Dr. Kissinger : Let's take one and get it over with. “Develop.”

Director Chang: Another word. How about “preserve.”

Dr. Kissinger : You prefer “develop"?

VM Chiao: We prefer “develop.” You are not agreeing to it … just …

Dr. Kissinger Let us say “develop.” If over the night you come up with something else we will still consider it.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. Ellipses in the source text. The meeting was held at the Hangchow Hotel.

105. Memorandum of Conversation, Shanghai, February 27, 1972 105. Memorandum of Conversation, Shanghai, February 27, 19721

Shanghai, February 27, 1972

Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: February 27, 1972

SUBJECT: Call by Premier Chou on Secretary Rogers in Shanghai

PARTICIPANTS:

PRC

Premier Chou En-lai

Foreign Minister Chi Peng-fei

Chiang Chiung-chiao, Chairman of the Shanghai Revolutionary Committee

Wang Hung-wen, Vice Chairman of the Shanghai Revolutionary Committee

Tang Wen-sheng, Interpreter

US

Secretary of State William P. Rogers

Marshall Green, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Alfred le S. Jenkins, Director, Office of Asian Communist Affairs

Nicholas Platt, Assistant to the Secretary

PLACE: Guest House, Shanghai, PRC

COPIES TO:

S S/S

U EA

J

WH - Dr. Kissinger

Premier Chou paid a call on the Secretary just after he had arrived at the guest house, explaining upon arrival that he wished to welcome the Secretary personally to Shanghai.

After discussing the merits of different types of tea, the Secretary told Premier Chou that he hoped for the opportunity to meet with the Foreign Minister in third countries. He traveled often and would welcome a chance for contact whether it be at the UN, in Canada, or any other mutually convenient place. He also said that he would welcome an arrangement that would enable him to get into direct telephone contact with the Foreign Minister.

The Premier asked the Foreign Minister whether he had made any progress on this.

The Foreign Minister replied that he had not.

The Secretary said he marvelled at the Premier's grasp of detail.

The Premier replied that he also paid attention to broad issues as well.

The Secretary responded that one could not be effective on broad issues unless one had mastered the details. If you don't know the details you don't know how things work.

The Secretary then asked the Premier how he felt the trip had gone so far and whether or not he had had a reaction from the people within the PRC who had opposed it.

The Premier replied that he felt the trip had been beneficial. From his channels he knew that there are still some that do not understand the significance of the visit. He had made very careful efforts to explain the significance of the trip before the President came and was continuing these efforts.

The Secretary asked the Premier whether there had been wide TV and radio coverage of the visit.

The Premier answered there had been news coverage all over the country. The PRC reads the world press very carefully, the Premier continued. Two publications, a restricted newspaper called Reference News with a circulation of 5-6 million and a more tightly held daily 2-volume survey called Reference Materials carry daily excerpts from the world press. Chairman Mao is the most careful reader of Reference Materials. It was he who spotted in Reference Materials the 1967 Foreign Affairs article by Mr. Nixon which advocated closer ties with the PRC, and pointed out its significance to us. Though he did not approve of all President Nixon's policies, of course, Chairman Mao voted for him in spirit in 1968.

The Secretary remarked that the President might need another such spiritual vote in 1972.

The Secretary said he wished to underscore the President's statement to Premier Chou that controversy equals news in the United States. There will be attacks on the visit and adverse commentary, but these will neither reflect US policy nor affect it.

Premier Chou said that he understood.

The Secretary told the Premier that Assistant Secretary Marshall Green will be visiting several countries after the visit to explain American policy. The Secretary will be briefing Ambassadors and appearing before Congress. It will be important to tell America's allies and the elected representatives of the American people that the United States stood up for its principles during its visit to Peking.

Premier Chou commented that he had heard that the Secretary had been very busy on the telephone the day after the July 15 announcement. He said he understood that the Secretary would have to discuss his policies with others. He reiterated that the PRO is interested gradually in normalizing its relationship with the US.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 7 US/NIXON. Secret; Nodis; Homer. Drafted by Platt and approved in S on March 8. Copies were sent to S, S/S, U, J, EA, and Kissinger at the White House. The meeting was held in the Guest House Hotel, Shanghai. The time of the meeting is not indicated on the memorandum.

106. Memorandum of Conversation, Shanghai, February 27, 1972, 11:30 a.m.-1:55 p.m. 106. Memorandum of Conversation, Shanghai, February 27, 1972, 11:30 a.m.-1:55 p.m.1

Shanghai, February 27, 1972, 11:30 a.m.-1:55 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John H. Holdridge, NSC Staff

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Jonathan T. Howe, NSC Staff

Ch'iao Kuan-hua, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Chang Wen-chin, Director of Western Europe, North American, and Australasian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chao Chi-hua, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Chi Chao-chu, Interpreter

One Notetaker

DATE & TIME: Sunday, February 27, 1972—11:30 a.m. - 1:55 p.m.

PLACE: Guest House (Hotel), Shanghai

VM Ch'iao: Is there any new question your side would like to raise?

Dr. Kissinger : Just one really trivial point which was suggested by one of my colleagues. Where you say, “the U.S. stated that the peoples of Indochina …”, instead of “stated” say “stressed.” That's all.

VM Ch'iao: No more?

Dr. Kissinger : No more.

VM Ch'iao: We too have a small change of wording, that is, concerning your suggested wording for something about the talks between the Secretary of State and the Foreign Minister. The word suggested by you yesterday was “useful” talks.

Dr. Kissinger Yes.

VM Ch'iao The word for useful in Chinese is yu li; that is the same as “beneficial.” But in the immediately following paragraph we say the leaders found it beneficial …”

Dr. Kissinger : I see.

VM Ch'iao: So in order to avoid repetition, we would delete the word “useful.”

Dr. Kissinger : Could Mr. Chang from his infinite vocabulary come up with a word?

VM Ch'iao: Another reason is that when we describe discussions between the President and the Chairman we use “serious and frank” in describing the attitude, and also in describing talks between the President and the Prime Minister we use “extensive, earnest and frank.”

Dr. Kissinger : I understand. I am not concerned. An adjective will do, but if we have it without an adjective it just will sound critical in English. So I am not quarreling with you.

VM Ch'iao: Yes, because to just follow “extensive, earnest and frank …”

Dr. Kissinger : In addition, we should also say that Secretary of State William Rogers and Foreign Minister Chi Peng-fei held talks “in the same spirit.” I have always wanted to put in a phrase, “although voices were raised, it is not true that they came to blows.”

VM Ch'iao: All right. No more.

Dr. Kissinger : I guess it's rejected.

VM Ch'iao: Now I will suggest that I would read out the Chinese, sentence by sentence and …

Interpreter: The Vice Minister suggests this procedure. He reads out a sentence of Chinese; I read it in English; and you check it.

Dr. Kissinger : All right. The only thing I request is a copy of it in Chinese—we have an interpreter here—before we make it absolutely official.

VM Ch iao: Only when there is no question we will go on to the next sentence.

Dr. Kissinger : What should we call it? We have never said what we will call it.

VM Ch'iao: Do you have any suggestions?

Dr. Kissinger : No.

VM Ch'iao: Not an important matter. But I would think that it might be better for you to give more thought to this because of your press.

Dr. Kissinger : We had tentatively thought “Joint Communique”, but it doesn't make any difference.

VM Ch'iao: We agree to “Joint Communique.”

Dr. Kissinger : All right, and I will check with our State Department experts whether there is some legal significance to the word “communique” which I don't understand. And the date is today?

VM Ch'iao: Today.

Mr. Chang: Same date in Washington now.

Dr. Kissinger : I have a slight suggestion; could we drop the words “accompanying the President” because we have already said “he visited.” It's obvious.

VM Ch'iao: I accept that.

Dr. Kissinger : I have a slight change which is stylistic. After “the Chinese side stated”, could we add a colon to make sure that the whole paragraph is what the Chinese side says?

VM Ch'iao: Yes, I agree. You have a comma after South Vietnam in your paragraph on Vietnam. Can that be deleted?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

VM Ch'iao: I have one question. It was our impression that when the President announced the proposals of January 25 he announced only on behalf of the United States Government, and the South Vietnamese Government expressed its support for that.

Dr. Kissinger : No, the formal proposal was made at the plenary session, which was on the 27th, and the speech of January 25 said it was done with the full concurrence and on behalf of the South Vietnamese Government.

Mr. Chang: But wasn't the original date of the proposal then on January 27th?

Dr. Kissinger : We will probably make it the 27th. It's a good point. I think you are quite right—I think it was formally submitted on the 27th. Let's say the 27th.

VM Ch'iao: “to seek a relaxation of the tension.”

Dr. Kissinger : I think we should drop “the”—don't you think? (Ch'iao nods)

Interpreter: “The cease-fire line in Jammu and Kashmir"- we add to yours too. And then also purely stylistic for our side—we add “to their own sides of the cease-fire line.” How about having that in yours too?

Dr. Kissinger : “to their own sides.”

VM Ch'iao: “And the withdrawal of all military forces to within their own territories, and to their own sides of the cease-fire line in Jammu and Kashmir.”

(There then followed a reading of the communique, including punctuation, to confirm the final version.)

Dr. Kissinger : Now may I make a few points, questions, first about the communique? This communique is going to present us with major difficulties in the United States, which we will attempt to meet with energy and in the spirit of our talks. You will have formed your own judgments by now as to where the support for this present China initiative comes from in the United States, and the problems that can arise when it becomes a political issue. We have made this communique on the basis that both sides should benefit and not that it was a victory for one, and the other was the loser. It would make the realization of our common objective immeasurably more difficult if Chinese domestic propaganda or Chinese foreign propaganda or Chinese friends were to represent this as a major American defeat, or as any American defeat.

(Ch'iao nods.)

Dr. Kissinger : So I hope we will both practice the spirit of equality in presenting this publicly.

(Ch'iao nods.)

Dr. Kissinger : Secondly, it is important for us that this communique in America not be presented entirely as a Taiwan communique. And therefore, it is important that we do not concern ourselves too much about press speculation in which every fine point that Mr. Chang has so skillfully woven into this communique may not be made.

Interpreter: “It will be important that we …”

Dr. Kissinger : Not contradict every speculation that the press may make. Let me give you an example. On the issue of the renunciation of force, if I am asked or if we are asked, we will say this communique speaks for itself. And we will not go into the subtle elaborations of your colleague, Mr. Minister. It would help if you did not explain all the sophisticated analyses in your propaganda. I am giving this only as an example. Also, it would help if it could be avoided that you give precisely the explanation of the meaning of “should” that you gave yesterday. In other words, we are trying to set a direction with this document. We are not going to be able to wave it at each other in the sense of a binding obligation. And we should maintain the spirit that makes it possible, especially over the next few months.

VM Ch'iao: It is only a direction.

Dr. Kissinger : Because if we spend the next few months arguing what it doesn't mean, then it will have defeated its purpose.

VM Ch'iao: What we are doing is opening up a prospect.

Dr. Kissinger : We can apply the same principles to ourselves of course. We have an obligation not to embarrass you just as we hope you will not embarrass us.

I want to give you our interpretation of our diplomatic contacts.

VM Ch'iao: There is no word “diplomatic.”

Dr. Kissinger No, I mean the channels, the means we will use to keep in contact; our understanding, no, our interpretation. Our understanding is that Ambassador Huang Hua will be the secret channel, and we will pass to him or you to us all matters of substantive importance. Secondly, you will notify us fairly soon of an open channel where the State Department can pass messages back and forth about such issues as exchanges, contacts and so forth. You can designate any capital you wish.

VM Ch'iao: Last night I asked for instructions from Premier Chou En-lai on this matter so we now agree to your first point, that is, Ambassador Huang Hua as the secret channel. As for the second point, which capital will serve as the open channel, we will consider that further but hope you will too.

Dr. Kissinger : Paris has the advantage for us that the Ambassador who is there now and almost any successor will be appointed by the White House, as opposed to coming from the bureaucracy, and therefore will be controllable. So for us, Paris is very convenient.

VM Ch'iao: Well, can we tentatively agree on Paris as an open channel, but subject to further considerations?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

VM Ch'iao: And also the possibility of more capitals for such contacts?

Dr. Kissinger : More than one would be very confusing for us.

VM Ch'iao: All right, then, we will just keep Paris. Because, honestly speaking, this word was put forward by you so we are not clear on what you mean by various channels. But for one secret and one open, I suggest Paris.

Dr. Kissinger : I would suggest that within the next two to three weeks you notify us through the secret channel, and then we will make a very low-key announcement that we will be in touch with each other through Paris. I am assuming the secret channel is open now.

VM Ch'iao: Yes. Actually, we have already used it, and so far as we are concerned, we have been keeping it confidential very well.

Dr. Kissinger : And we have also.

VM Ch'iao: And will continue to keep it in strict confidence.

Dr. Kissinger : One other matter. It is conceivable that once the open channel is established, if something is put into it that you consider substantive, just put it back into the secret channel … give us the reply in the secret channel. My office has conducted many secret negotiations and there has never been a leak.

VM Ch'iao: I understand.

Dr. Kissinger : All right. Now, for your information, I have told you our position on Bangladesh, so there is no sense repeating it. I think they will announce within the next days the relief formula which I mentioned to you—33 and 1/3 percent. And again nothing will be treated as official unless we tell you and we will tell you first. The same about any specifics with respect to Soviet negotiations.

One other matter. As you know, I have been pressed by the Japanese to visit Japan for many months. It may be unavoidable in the next six weeks to two-months. If I go it will, however, not be an official visit, but I will go there on the invitation of a private group. We simply wanted to let you know. It is not fixed. If it should be fixed, I will let you know in time. But I did not want to have been in Peking without letting you know the possibility.

Now, about the press conference this afternoon. First, let me make a general point, though it will be a painful one, but we have to understand it. We will, without any question, be asked whether our defense commitment to Taiwan remains in force. And we will have to refer to the President's World Report and say what is written there remains in force.

Any attempt to avoid it would simply create an impossible situation, and the Prime Minister, I believe, understands this. But I want you to know we will do this in as low-key a way as we can. I am not asking you to approve it; I am asking you to understand the necessity of it.

I want to review with you what I intend to do this afternoon. I will first describe the process by which this communique was achieved. I will not bore you with the details. The basic point that I will try to achieve with this is to create a commitment by all the elements of our government to this cOmmunique. And I will therefore claim a greater degree of participation for the bureaucracy in the process than you may remember. The intention will be good. Another purpose will be to move most of the discussions into this period rather than to October, since we told everybody that my visit in October was primarily technical.

Secondly, I will describe the substance of the communique, specifically, the answer to the question of what does this communique mean. I will make two points. One, that, of course, there is the text of the communique which everybody can read, and secondly, there is the spirit of our discussions. And that we are talking … that after this long interval it has been a very delicate and difficult task for both of us, in which there are many obstacles ahead and in which both sides have had to exercise great restraint on many issues which are quite complex for them, but that it is in this spirit that it should be considered, and not every single word in the communique.

Now, I have had some questions written out of the kind that we expect to be asked, and I want to tell you about them. For example, “were there any secret deals?” “No.”

“Were there any topics discussed which are not mentioned in the communique?” I will say “no.” I will say the discussions, of course, were somewhat more detailed than in the communique. That will be all right, won't it?

(Ch'iao nods.)

Dr. Kissinger 'What was I doing during the sightseeing?” “I was working on the communique and other matters.”

“Did I ever meet the Prime Minister alone?” I will say: “Yes, briefly, to arrange some technical matters.” Wherever possible I will try to tell the truth. (laughter) Do you object?

VM Ch'iao: No.

Dr. Kissinger : They will undoubtedly ask did we mention the prisoners in North Vietnam? I will say “yes, it came up in the general context of Vietnam. But the Chinese position has been explained in the communique.”

VM Ch'iao: How do you anticipate the correspondents will raise this question:

Dr. Kissinger : They will say 'Was it mentioned?” They probably will also ask me about Downey. I will say we recognize this is a matter of Chinese domestic jurisdiction, but we are of course concerned about it. But it is not an international matter as such.

VM Ch'iao: Yes, and I would hope that when you reply to that question you will reply just in the way you put it now because that will facilitate how we deal with this matter.

Dr. Kissinger : You can be sure.

VM Ch'iao: We don't want to complicate this matter.

Dr. Kissinger : No, but I wanted to be sure. It's an unusual thing to have an American press conference on Chinese soil.

VM Ch'iao: And the fact an American President has flown on a Chinese plane is also unprecedented.

Dr. Kissinger : I similarly will not give details. But if they bring up Andre Malraux's mention of economic aid I think in fairness to you I should say no, you never brought it up or asked for it.

VM Ch'iao: That's a fact.

Dr. Kissinger : It is a fact. I just don't want to breach the confidence of the discussions without mentioning it. If I am asked about anything concerning Chairman Mao, such as his health, I will make no comment. Or you tell me what I should say.

VM Ch'iao: You can say you have all seen the television of that interview, and he is in fine health.

Dr. Kissinger : He certainly was vigorous. Can I say this?

VM Ch'iao: He was vigorous.

Dr. Kissinger : I am not saying it isn't true, I am saying whether it is proper for me to comment on him at all.

VM Ch'iao: Yes, you can say that. Proceeding from the facts you can say you all saw him on the television and saw he is vigorous.

Dr. Kissinger : I am delighted. It's no problem at all. I just want to be correct. When I am asked, 'What do we mean by normalization of relations?”, what do you think we mean?

VM Ch'iao: We mean by “normalization,” the establishment of normal diplomatic relations.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, and a gradual movement in that direction.

VM Ch'iao: “Normalization” is aimed at the establishing of normal state relations, and what we are suggesting now is a process toward that goal.

Mr. Chang: As its object.

VM Ch'iao: In our communique establishing diplomatic relations with Mexico and Argentina we didn't use this, the word “establishment of diplomatic relations”, but used the words “establishment of normal relations.” Establishment of normal relations means establishment of diplomatic relations.

Dr. Kissinger : You don't use words idly. I think I can handle the rest of this. Have you any questions?

VM Ch'iao: From my repeated many contacts with you it is my view that Dr. Kissinger has been very prudent in dealing with these matters.

First of all, I would like to express my deep appreciation for your letting us know about this in advance. The only question here is the question of the so-called “Defense Treaty.” Of course, I cannot know exactly how you will raise this question and how you will make your low-key reply in concrete terms.

Dr. Kissinger : I will answer it once. I will say, “Gentlemen, we are here on the soil of a country with which we have no diplomatic relations and for which this is the most sensitive issue. Therefore do not keep asking this question. I will answer it once. We stated in the World Report our position on this, and the statement in the World Report remains intact. Then when the President goes back to Congress he will have to answer it again.

VM Ch'iao: Are you certain that this is what will happen?

Dr. Kissinger : It is certain to happen.

VM Ch'iao: And also a fact you describe. It is a fact in existence.

Dr. Kissinger : And I will not mention that. I only mentioned this to you so I will not claim any discussion between us on the subject. All this discussion about the press is between us.

VM Ch'iao: We appreciate very much what Dr. Kissinger has said in telling this to us. We hold this in the spirit of our discussions. Of course, you have a lot of difficulties. You cannot stop the press from raising these questions. We can only express the hope that you will be as prudent as possible.

Dr. Kissinger : Better that the question is asked and answered today. Because the longer it is not answered, the more extreme the answer will have to be when it is raised. But it will certainly be raised, so we will not get into that difficulty. But I will answer it only once.

VM Ch'iao: I only like to state that, first of all, we thank Dr. Kissinger very much for telling us about this. I also would like to say we do believe you will be able to handle this properly. We only hope you will avoid a situation where we would be forced to make a reaction.

Dr. Kissinger : What would be such a situation?

VM Ch'iao: I cannot anticipate all the things which might happen, but from what you have told us so far and if you proceed as you have said, we will need no response.

Dr. Kissinger : It is highly improbable that I will go beyond this. In fact, I would say that flatly now if it were not for various uncertainties and the fact I have had only three hours sleep. But we both have interest to avoid a controversy, and I will go to great lengths to avoid your difficulty. One way I could handle it, for example, is not to wait for a question but just to state it and say I know you are going to ask me this and rather than wait for your question … but that may be a little too provocative.

VM Ch'iao: Keep it flexible.

Dr. Kissinger : It's certain to come.

VM Ch'iao: It might not be so good.

Dr. Kissinger : I agree.

VM Ch'iao: Sometimes you want to …

Dr. Kissinger : And I don't have to answer the question they give me anyway. Whatever the question is I will move it in the direction I gave you. All right, so we are finished. Now what happens next?

Mr. Chang: Your date (for the communique) is the 27th, but you say “visited until the 28th.”

Dr. Kissinger : Let's date it the 28th. Or we could say “visited the 21st to the 27th and plans to stay another day.” Now I have one other point which is a question of indifference to me. I promised Vice Chairman Yeh some information which would take about 15 minutes. When should we do it? It's up to you.

VM Ch'iao: When do you plan your press conference?

Dr. Kissinger : I would think, 5:00.

VM Ch'iao: That's too early, 5:00, because we still have the text in Chinese to give to you.

Dr. Kissinger : The problem is they have to go to your banquet, don't they? And they have to file their story. So 5:00 is probably the latest they can do it.

VM Ch'iao: What we are concerned about is to be able to give him the Chinese before. But we can go ahead, since we agreed on the English text even if you check on the Chinese text. You won't release it right away, will you?

Dr. Kissinger : No, and then when both our sides retype this communique we should like to recheck it, but that can be done by the staff.

VM Ch'iao: Yes.

Mr. Chang: You hand yours to us, and we hand ours to you.

Dr. Kissinger : Do we know how to find you?

VM Ch'iao: Oh, yes.

Dr. Kissinger : Just make sure we know how to find you. I will have this typed. The question is, when can they release it? I am assuming right after we are finished with the press conference.

VM Ch'iao: No problem with us. I believe there will be no question left, but in the spirit of honesty I will get in touch with the Prime Minister as soon as possible.

Dr. Kissinger : And I with the President. I will have Marshall Green with me at the press conference for reasons which are obvious. I will do most of the talking.

VM Ch'iao: Some of our correspondents will also attend.

Dr. Kissinger : Certainly.

VM Ch'iao: I will not.

Dr. Kissinger : You should.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 92, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in the People's Republic of China during the Presidential Visit, February 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe. Ellipses in the source text. The meeting was held at the Guest House Hotel.

107. Memorandum of Conversation, Shanghai, February 28, 1972, 8:45 a.m. 107. Memorandum of Conversation, Shanghai, February 28, 1972, 8:45 a.m.1

Shanghai, February 28, 1972, 8:45 a.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: February 28, 1972 8:45 a.m.

SUBJECT: Counterpart Meetings Between the Secretary of State and the Foreign Minister of the People's Republic of China - V

PARTICIPANTS:

Chi Peng-fei - Foreign Minister

Hsiung Hsiang-hui - Secretary to the Premier (Foreign Affairs)

Chang Wen-chin - Director, West European, American and Australasian Affairs

SHEN JO-YUN - Interpreter

Hufang Shien, Stenographer

Hu Fang-hsien

William P. Rogers - Secretary of State

Marshall Green Assistant Secretary of State - EA

Alfred le S. Jenkins Director for Asian Communist Affairs - EA

Nicholas Platt - Assistant to the Secretary

Charles W. Freeman - Interpreter

PLACE: Guest House, Shanghai, PRC

COPIES TO:

S S/S

U EA

J

WH - Dr. Kissinger

A Gradual Approach

After pleasantries, the Foreign Minister opened by saying the President's visit had been a good beginning for a gradual development of relationships between the two governments. Now that the communique has been published, more contacts will follow. Differences will continue, but we should exchange views in an effort to find areas of agreement. We shall agree on those things that are possible and leave to later the items on which we cannot agree. Although we have agreed views as set forth in the communique, implementation will be gradual. We will tackle it slowly. As far as exchanges in people and materials on culture, sports, medicine and science are concerned, we must go through certain formalities. The exchanges must be carried out gradually. The same is true of trade.

Channels of Communication

We want to consider channels of communications further, the Foreign Minister continued, and will let the US side know. Though the communique mentions that we will stay in touch through different channels, we still wish to study how and where implementation is to take place.

At the moment it is difficult for the US to establish any permanent non-governmental institution in Peking. The PRC prefers to deal through a third country, although we would like to consider further which one to use. As you know, the Foreign Minister continued, the Prime Minister criticized me yesterday for not having looked into the question of direct telephone communication with you. I will look into it.

The Secretary asked the Foreign Minister whether he had communication with his Ambassador in New York.

Not around the clock, the Foreign Minister replied, only during certain times of the day.

The Secretary suggested that although the UN could not be used as a permanent vehicle of contact without arousing resentment, it might be useful under special circumstances. If the need arose, the UN Ambassador might get in touch with the PRC Ambassador.

The Foreign Minister said that he preferred to study this question. The PRO UN Mission is new and not very effective yet.

The Secretary asked whether the Foreign Minister had given thought to the establishment of a non-governmental trade office such as those which had been established with the Japanese. Two could perhaps be set up, one in New York and one in Peking.

The Foreign Minister said that the PRO had considered it, but does not think the conditions are right. The question can be considered later.

The Secretary added that as trade develops, the question can be reviewed.

As contacts develop, we shall see, was the Foreign Minister's rejoinder.

Canton Fair

The Secretary asked the Foreign Minister whether the US could publicize the fact that the PRO would invite several American businessmen to the Canton Fair.

Director Chang Wen-chin noted that Seymour Topping had raised this point during his interview with Premier Chou. The Premier said that we would consider the application of several businessmen. The PRO is ready to accept some applications, but the number is not great.

The Secretary asked whether a statement to that effect could be made when we return to the United States.

The Foreign Minister replied that some applications would be selectively endorsed.

The Secretary replied that this would be most helpful.

Language Exchange

Director Chang said that the PRC was considering an exchange of interpreting and language teaching materials.

The Secretary stated that he gathered the PRC side felt that our interpreter had done a capable job, but that linguistically at least he had not yet been “liberated.” Of course the English language used in the US had changed too.

The Foreign Minister confirmed that the Chinese side felt that the US interpreting had been very competent but agreed that language usage had changed. Time magazine, for instance, had been very easy to follow twenty years ago but now it was very difficult.

The Secretary said that he was not sure that he could be of very much help there.

The Foreign Minister said that if the US side had some materials ready they could be exchanged now, but the PRC materials were not yet prepared. Charles Freeman, the American interpreter, noted that US materials were not ready either.

The Secretary mentioned that the State Department would probably expand its course in Chinese at the Foreign Service Institute. Also, Assistant Secretary Green added, the President's trip would be an encouragement to our younger officers to study Chinese. The Secretary suggested further that Chinese interest in English would probably expand as a result. Language studies which are basic to international communication represent a profitable field of cooperation which is to the mutual advantage of both nations.

Follow Up

The Secretary made it clear that Marshall Green, with the help of Alfred Jenkins, would be in charge of planning and supervising the follow-up for the visit. They would work with the White House staff, but now that the communique had been agreed upon, the Secretary wanted to develop contacts in a normal way. He hoped that Assistant Secretary Green would have the opportunity to get to know the Chinese side well.

The Secretary thanked the Chinese side deeply for their gracious hospitality. The entire visit had been planned and carried out to perfection. The treatment we had received at the banquet table and at every meal, the Secretary continued, would be a challenge to our wives when we returned to the United States.

Both sides have to recognize, he continued, that once we are 12,000 miles apart again it will be difficult for misunderstandings not to arise. The United States has misunderstandings with other nations with whom we have instant communications and full diplomatic staffs. The Secretary pledged to do all he could to avoid misunderstandings. Although both sides must move slowly, it was very important to keep the momentum of the relationship going. In view of all the publicity given the trip, it would be disappointing if nothing concrete developed. The US would do its part to move gradually. Nevertheless, it was important that there be sufficient activity to provide evidence that the relationship was moving forward. In this connection, the results of the discussion just concluded on exchange of language materials will be welcomed even though it has little political significance in itself.

National Committee for US-China Relations

Assistant Secretary Green reminded the Foreign Minister that he had asked for US recommendations on what private group might coordinate exchanges in sports, medicine, science and culture. The US suggests merely as one possibility the National Committee for US-China Relations as an entirely private and effective organization which is representative of a broad range of opinion in the United States. The Committee has been involved in preparing for the visit of the PRC Table Tennis team. The Secretary added that this was simply a suggestion. The government has not mentioned the matter to the National Committee. If the PRC preferred another group, that would be fine.

Director Chang Wen-chin pointed out that when the Chinese Table Tennis team invited the US team to China last year, the US Table Tennis Association returned the invitation. The PRC team accepted, and this was the understanding between the two organizations. Later, the US Table Tennis Association told the Chinese Table Tennis team that the National Committee would like to join in the arrangements for the visit. But the Chinese team has not given an answer.

The Chinese team, Director Chang continued, believes it better for the US Table Tennis team alone to present the invitation. If others are involved in the invitation, other friendly organizations will be unhappy. We have no objection, however, if the American Table Tennis team asks other organizations to help them make preparations.

The Secretary pointed out to the Chinese side that we were talking about two different things. We were not concerned about the table tennis visit in particular. What we were interested in was finding a coordinating body in which we both have confidence. Mr. Jenkins added that individual organizations will, in some instances, at least, need a central organization to help on the mechanics of visits: reception, hospitality, funding, etc. Otherwise, the only recourse would be some kind of government body. The Secretary added that the US is looking for a liaison group for people-to-people contact to whom other groups in the United States can come for help. The Secretary concluded with the hope that the Chinese would consider the National Committee and advise the US of the suitability of that organization or any alternative for this purpose.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 7 US/NIXON. Secret; Nodis; Homer. Drafted by Platt and approved in S on March 10. Copies were sent to S, S/S, U, J, EA, and Kissinger at the White House. The meeting was held in the Guest House Hotel.

108. Message From the Government of the United States to the Government of the People's Republic of China, Washington, March 3, 1972 108. Message From the Government of the United States to the Government of the People's Republic of China, Washington, March 3, 19721

Washington, March 3, 1972

Delivered by Peter Rodman to Miss Shih, 3 March 1972

March 3, 1972

1. The U.S. Government proposes to disclose on March 10 the location of the public contact point with the People's Republic of China as agreed upon during the President's visit. Without making a formal announcement the U.S. side would talk along the following lines: The U.S. Government and the government of the People's Republic of China have agreed that the contacts mentioned in their February 28, 1972, Joint Communique will be maintained by their Ambassadors in Paris, France.

2. The U.S. side believes it would be beneficial if the actual contacts could begin soon in order to show some concrete results to the American public.

3. The Soviet Ambassador called on Dr. Kissinger on March 1, 1972, to obtain an account of the President's trip to the People's Republic of China. Dr. Kissinger talked in a most general way, repeating what he said in his press conference in Shanghai about the discussions on world affairs. In reply to a question, Dr. Kissinger said that the People's Republic of China expressed no objection to the relaxation of tensions between the Soviet Union and the United States. When asked whether the People's Republic of China felt threatened by the Soviet Union, Dr. Kissinger said that the matter did not arise. The Soviet Ambassador inquired whether the U.S. was prepared to make a joint appeal to the People's Republic to participate in talks on nuclear disarmament. Dr. Kissinger replied in the negative.

4. The President appreciates the invitation extended to Senators Mansfield and Scott to visit the People's Republic of China. At the same time he has found an equally intense interest on the part of the leaders of the House of Representatives—a co-equal branch of the Legislature. The President would therefore be extremely grateful if the Prime Minister would also entertain a request for Congressmen Hale Boggs, Majority Leader of the House of Representatives, and Gerald Ford, Minority Leader, to visit the People's Republic of China in the near future but subsequent to the visit of Senators Mansfield and Scott.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the message. A typed notation on the message indicates that Peter Rodman of the National Security Council staff delivered the message to Shih Yen-hua, a member of the PRC delegation to the UN.

109. Message From the Government of the People's Republic of China to the Government of the United States, undated 109. Message From the Government of the People's Republic of China to the Government of the United States, undated1

undated

1. The Chinese side has no objection to the U.S. side disclosing the Paris channel on March 10 along the lines envisaged by the U.S. side. The Chinese Government will not make an announcement on this matter, but when asked, it will reply in the affirmative.

2. The Chinese side agrees to invite Mr. Hale Boggs, majority leader of the U.S. House of Representatives, and Mr. Gerald Ford, minority leader, to visit China. Their visit will be arranged to take place after the visit of Mr. Michael Mansfield and Mr. Hugh Scott. All the abovementioned leaders of the Senate and the House will be received as guests of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs. The letters of invitation will be transmitted later through the Paris channel as one of the earliest results of the functioning of that channel.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. No classification indicated.

110. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, March 6, 1972, 7:15-8:20 p.m. 110. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, March 6, 1972, 7:15-8:20 p.m.1

New York, March 6, 1972, 7:15-8:20 p.m.

March 6, 1972

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

SUBJECT: Meeting Between Ambassador Huang Hua and Cdr. JONATHAN T. HOWE in New York City, March 6, 1972 - 7:15-8:20 p.m.

During the meeting, which was conducted in a most cordial atmosphere, the Chinese UN Ambassador raised four subjects: — The first concerned Chinese agreement to disclosure of the Paris channel on March 10.

— The second concerned Chinese agreement to invite Congressmen Hale Boggs and Gerald Ford to visit China. Their visit would occur after that of Senators Mansfield and Scott and invitations would be transmitted through the new Paris channel.

— The third concerned security of the Chinese UN Mission following the death of a member of their delegation whom they believe was poisoned. They expressed the hope that Dr. Kissinger would ask the New York Police Department to strengthen security measures for the Chinese Mission. This is not so much in terms of numbers but in the type of security measures provided in light of the poisoning incident. They also indicated that when a written report from the medical examiner is received, they will ask the police department to formally investigate the death. They expressed the hope that the police department would do its utmost in the investigation to determine the cause.

— The fourth matter concerned a problem associated with the purchase of a house for their UN Mission. They have found a place, a Motor Inn near Lincoln Square on West 66th Street, and are close to an agreement with the present owners on price. They have been told it would take about two months before they can move in after terms of purchase have been agreed upon. Their lawyer has told them that this period could be shortened and as they are most anxious to move as soon as possible, they wondered whether Dr. Kissinger could render assistance.

The following is a more detailed report on the meeting and these four topics:

At about 4:00 p. m. the Chinese had called to request a meeting. At 7:15 p.m. the Ambassador, accompanied by his interpreter Miss Shih, entered our special meeting place in New York City. After social amenities and small talk, the Ambassador indicated that our message of March 3 had been transmitted to their government and they had received a reply. The Ambassador indicated that he would leave a copy of the message from his government, and then slowly read the note at Tab A concerning disclosure of the Paris channel on March 10 and Chinese agreement to invite Congressmen Boggs and Ford to visit the PRC. In answer to a question concerning announcement of the invitation to the two Congressmen, the Ambassador indicated that it was his assumption that there would be no announcement of the invitations until they had been received in the Paris channel. He referred to the fact that the visit of the two Senate leaders had already been announced.

The Ambassador then raised two other concerns:

Security of Chinese Mission. In presenting his concerns about security, the Ambassador referred to a prepared text. He began by stating that Dr. Kissinger on a number of occasions had expressed concern about the security of the Chinese Mission in New York. The Chinese appreciated this very much. There had been one unfortunate incident which the Ambassador would like to mention. On the night of February 6-7 a staff member, Wang Hsi Tsanh, died in his room on the 14th floor of the Roosevelt Hotel. He was a young man, being only 26 years old.

The Ambassador then gave the following details concerning the death. On the night of February 6 at 11:30 p.m. Mr. Wang went to his room which he lived in by himself. At 9:00 a.m. on February 7 some of the Chinese personnel knocked on his door. When there was no reply, they entered his room and found him dead in his bed. They also found the blanket on the body and everything else in the room in order.

They immediately informed the New York Police Department as well as Mrs. Loeb's Commission (apparently a UN or N.Y. group that helps take care of the missions). They also informed the lawyer and doctors of the Mission. The police called an ambulance and the doctors and lawyer soon arrived. After the examination by a doctor they ascertained that Mr. Wang was dead. The Chinese then sent the body to the New York Chief Medical Examiner for autopsy to determine the cause of the death.

Between 6:00 and 8:00 in the evening of February 7 the police sent people to the Roosevelt Hotel to inspect the surroundings. After their inspection the police expressed the opinion that it was not possible that the death was caused by outside causes because they hadn't found any sign of “outsiders.” The police took away what was left in a tea cup and also the pillow case because it contained some blood spots and saliva.

On February 12 members of the Mission met Dr. Helpern and associates of the Chief Medical Examiner's Office. According to Dr. Helpern, the autopsy did not find any cause of death. The Chinese were informed that a toxicological examination was being carried out.

On February 18 some members of the Chinese Mission also met Dr. Helpern again. This time, according to chemical reports and toxicologic analysis, they reported finding in the blood, liver, and in the tea a large amount of nicotine, an amount large enough to cause death. The Chinese were told that additional examinations would be needed of Mr. Wang's brain, stomach, and urinary system. Dr. Helpern also told them that the tissues of the dead body indicated no abnormal phenomenon and that Mr. Wang had not died of natural diseases or physical causes but rather from chemicals, i.e. toxicosis.

The Ambassador then said that with regard to toxicosis, the medical examiners estimated there were two possible causes: — The deceased could have injected himself, but they had found no holes in his body indicating injection.

— Another cause might be that it was done by “outsiders.”

The Ambassador said that the Chinese had studied and analyzed the case and ruled out the possibility of self-injection of nicotine or the possibility of Mr. Wang himself taking the nicotine. He indicated that this was not possible because Mr. Wang seemed very lively and happy. He was not gloomy, upset or depressed. In addition, Mr. Wang seldom went out to shops or drugstores to buy things. He couldn't speak English and therefore always went out with his friends. The Ambassador, stated, “We think he might not know such a thing as nicotine.” For this reason they had ruled out the possibility of suicide.

The other possibility left, the Ambassador continued, was that someone had entered the room and put nicotine in the teacup and water Mr. Wang drank. He stated that they had asked Dr. Helpern to give them a written report of the chemical analysis so that they could inform the New York Police Department of the investigation and find out the reason. They wanted to find out what was behind all this and find out who was the murderer.

On February 25 some members of the Mission again contacted the Chief Medical Examiner's Office and Dr. Helpern told them they had found nicotine in the water of the thermos bottle that Mr. Wang had used but the nicotine in the thermos was not as “obvious” (clarified as not as concentrated) as was the nicotine in the tea cup. The medical examiners had also analyzed the stomach of the deceased but had found no nicotine. It was explained that any nicotine in the stomach had probably been rapidly absorbed. This, according to the Ambassador, was the result of the investigation up to February 25.

For the present he stated we are still waiting for the report of the Chief Medical Examiner's Office. When they have a written report, the Chinese will formally ask the New York Police Department to carry out an investigation and find out the cause. Since Dr. Kissinger had on many occasions asked about the safety of the Mission, they hoped that Dr. Kissinger would ask the New York Police Department to strengthen security measures for the Chinese Mission. The Ambassador added that when they have the written report, they will ask for an investigation. They hope that the police department will do its best to investigate and find the cause of the death. The Ambassador asked Commander Howe to convey this to Dr. Kissinger.

After expressing sympathy and indicating that Dr. Kissinger would do all that he could, Commander Howe asked if they were also concerned about the delay in receiving the written report of the Chief Medical Examiner. In reply the Ambassador stated that on February 25 Dr. Helpern had indicated that the report would be ready within two weeks. He said the Chinese would get in contact with Dr. Helpern at that time. He also remarked that Ambassador Phillips and Mrs. Loeb had expressed sympathy after the incident and that it had been greatly appreciated.

Location for Mission The Ambassador then, speaking without notes, indicated that the President and Dr. Kissinger had expressed an interest in China in rendering assistance in helping the Chinese find a house. He stated that they had found a Motor Inn near Lincoln Square on West 66th Street. During the negotiations thus far they had come quite near in price but had not yet come to an agreement. They had entrusted their lawyer, Mr. Popper (this is phonetically correct, the Chinese were not certain of the exact spelling), to conduct the negotiations. They had also received active assistance from Mrs. Loeb's office. She had become involved because the Motor Inn has a mortgage for a long period—over a decade. After talking to Mrs. Loeb and the Board of the insurance company, it was agreed to receive payment now with $106,000 interest paid by the Chinese side. The Chinese had agreed to this condition. At the present time the two sides are negotiating on price and the lawyer representing the Chinese is negotiating with the broker of the owners of the Inn. The Ambassador expressed the hope that they would soon come to an agreement.

He then reiterated that when in China, both the President and Dr. Kissinger had expressed a desire to render assistance and this was greatly appreciated. The main concern now, he stated, was that after agreement was reached on price, it would take a long time to move in. They had been told it would take about two months. Mr. Popper had told the Chinese that the time period could be shortened and the Chinese hoped this was so. Their hope is that as soon as possible after agreement is reached they would be able to move in. The Ambassador then said, “We wonder whether Dr. Kissinger can render assistance in connection with this?” He added that because the Roosevelt Hotel is in one of the busiest areas of the city, it was difficult for them to concentrate on their work. Commander Howe replied that he would convey the message to Dr. Kissinger and he was sure that we would look into possible ways to facilitate more rapid Chinese possession.

The Ambassador said that this was all he had to convey but that he did wish to send his warm greetings to Dr. Kissinger. Commander Howe reciprocated.

While eating a light snack, the Ambassador commented that the communique had received extensive attention by the American people and by people abroad.

He noted in answer to a question that he didn't feel that more numbers of police were needed or superficial protection but that measures should be taken in other protective areas. He also commented that when they asked the New York Police Department to conduct an investigation, we should all be aware that it will probably cause an “uproar” in the press.

Jonathan T. Howe

[Attachment]

1. The Chinese side has no objection to the U.S. side disclosing the Paris channel on March 10 along the lines envisaged by the U.S. side. The Chinese Government will not make an announcement on this matter, but when asked, it will reply in the affirmative.

2. The Chinese side agrees to invite Mr. Hale Boggs, majority leader of the U.S. House of Representatives, and Mr. Gerald Ford, minority leader, to visit China. Their visit will be arranged to take place after the visit of Mr. Michael Mansfield and Mr. Hugh Scott. All the abovementioned leaders of the Senate and the House will be received as guests of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs. The letters of invitation will be transmitted later through the Paris channel as one of the earliest results of the functioning of that channel.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Transmitted by Haig to Kissinger under a March 7 covering note. Attached is a message from the Chinese Government discussing the prospective visit of Boggs and Ford; Document 109. Howe indicates that the meeting was held at “our special meeting place in New York City.” For additional information about the death of the delegation member, see Documents 113 and 114.

111. Letters From President Nixon to the Chairman of the Communist Party of China Mao Tse-tung and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai, Washington, March 14, 1972 111. Letters From President Nixon to the Chairman of the Communist Party of China Mao Tse-tung and Chinese Premier Chou En-lai, Washington, March 14, 19721

Washington, March 14, 1972

ACTION

March 10, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT

FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER

SUBJECT: Thank-you Letters to Mao and Chou

Attached at Tabs A and B, respectively, are thank-you letters to Chairman Mao and Prime Minister Chou. They have been cleared by Ray Price.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you sign the letters at Tabs A and B.

[Tab A]

March 14, 1972

Dear Mr. Chairman,

Please accept my warm thanks, as well as those of Mrs. Nixon and all of the Americans who accompanied us, for the gracious consideration with which we were received in the People's Republic of China. We have come away from your country with a far deeper appreciation of the beauties of its land, the qualities of its people, and the views of its government.

I especially benefitted from, and I will always remember, our conversation on the afternoon of my arrival in Peking. Your frank and wise observations, as well as your warm welcome, set the framework for the entire week which did so much to further the interests of our two great peoples. My conversations with Premier Chou En-lai were marked by the same tone of candor; they enabled both sides to clarify their views, articulate our differences; and explore common ground.

World realities brought us together after a long separation. I believe these realities will continue to shape our future. If, together, we maintain the mutual candor and comprehension that marked our discussions during my visit, we can move further down the road on which we have now embarked. There is no more important goal for our two nations and for our two peoples.

Sincerely,

Richard Nixon

Chairman Mao Tse-tung

Peking, People's Republic of China

[Tab B]

March 14, 1972

Dear Mr. Premier,

On behalf of Mrs. Nixon, the official party, and all the other Americans who accompanied me on my visit to the People's Republic of China, I would like to express my deep appreciation for the generous courtesy and thoughtfulness of your government, your people, and you personally. For all of us, the week in Peking, Hangchow and Shanghai was a truly memorable and historic occasion. Please extend our gratitude and thanks to the many Chinese officials who treated us with such efficiency and hospitality.

The most significant and rewarding aspect of my visit was, of course, my meetings with Chairman Mao and yourself. I believe our discussions, and the joint communique which reflects them, served as a model of candor and comprehensiveness for leaders of nations who seek to bridge a wide gulf of isolation and differences. My understanding of your country's views was greatly enriched, and I found our discussions of the broader aspects of international affairs most rewarding. I hope that our talks also served to define the purposes and direction of American policy.

In your toast at the opening banquet you expressed the “hope that, through a frank exchange of views between our two sides to gain a clearer notion of our differences and make efforts to find common ground, a new start can be made in the relations between our two countries.” This was my purpose in travelling to your country. Together, I believe we have served that goal and, in so doing, have advanced the interests not only of our two great peoples but of all the peoples of the world.

We both recognize that we have only marked a beginning. Before us lies the challenge of developing what we have started. This process will require mutual understanding and restraint as well as continuing candor. The United States will approach this important task in that spirit.

Chou En-lai

Premier of the State Council of the People's Republic of China

Peking, People's Republic of China

Sincerely,

Richard Nixon

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 525, Country Files, Far East, PRC, Vol. III, Jan-Mar 1972. No classification marking. Kissinger's covering memorandum, sent for action, is dated March 10 and indicates that Ray Price cleared the letters. A notation on memorandum indicates that Nixon saw it. A handwritten note from Nixon reads: “K-where an occasion justifies it-see that I write Chou from time to time.” The letters are published from copies that bear Nixon's handwritten signature.

112. Message From the Government of the People's Republic of China to the Government of the United States, undated 112. Message From the Government of the People's Republic of China to the Government of the United States, undated1

undated

In the fortnight since the conclusion of President Nixon's visit, the United States has carried out incessant, large-scale bombings against the Democratic Republic of Viet Nasa. On March 10, the U.S. Government further proclaimed the week from March 26 to April 1 a so-called “national week of concern for prisoners of war.” The Chinese Government cannot but express grave concern over all this.

The Chinese Government would like to state frankly that the United States will not be able to attain its goal by this line of action. If the U.S. Government truly wants to bring about an early release of its prisoners of war, it should accept the seven-point proposal and the two points of elaboration put forward by Viet Nam and enter into earnest negotiations with the Vietnamese side. Any attempt to exert pressure by war threats can only arouse the people of the three countries of Indochina to even stronger resistance. With the war continuing and the casualties of the three Indochinese peoples increasing, how are the prisoners of war to be released? The Chinese people, who share weal and woe with the people of the three countries of Indochina, can only express their indignation and support the three Indochinese peoples in their war of resistance through to the end.

We hope that the U.S. Government will give serious consideration to this view.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. No classification indicated. A notation on the memorandum indicates Nixon saw it. Attached to the March 24 memorandum of conversation; Document 114.

113. Airgram A-925 From the Delegation to the United Nations to the Department of State, June 19, 1972 113. Airgram A-925 From the Delegation to the United Nations to the Department of State, June 19, 19721

June 19, 1972

TO: Department of State

FROM: USUN

DATE: June 19, 1972

SUBJECT: Death of PRC Mission Staff Member

REF: USUN

Summary

Ambassador Bush called on Ambassador Huang Hua June 7 to report on the status of the Wang case. In a meeting that lasted for more than an hour, Ambassador Bush covered all aspects of the case, reporting that the investigation is at a standstill but that the case is still open. Ambassador Bush emphasized the sincerity of the United States' concern over the death of Mr. Wang and the thoroughness of our effort to resolve the case. His presentation also reflected the investigators' disappointment over the Chinese Mission's denial of access to, and fingerprinting of, individual Chinese staffers. Ambassador Huang's low-key response stressed continuing Chinese concern that such an episode occurred so soon after the Chinese delegation's arrival in New York. He noted that the Chinese Mission had already explained their negative position on access to the Mission's staff and asserted once more that the cause of the “murder” lies outside of the Mission. Huang seemed to accept that Bush's report reflected the good faith of the United States Government's effort but maintained a posture that effectively leaves the burden completely on the United States to come up with a solution.

It appears that we have successfully passed through this stage of the case. Ambassador Huang's reaction to the report, although firm, was not contentious and did not imply any Chinese plans that would exacerbate the situation. Before we can rule out further troublesome Chinese action, we will have to see what further instructions Peking, following receipt of Ambassador Huang's report, gives the Chinese Mission here.

Report on Case

As anticipated reftel, Ambassador Bush called on Ambassador Huang Hua on June 7th to discuss the Wang case. Counselor Hsing and Mrs. Shih Yen-hua were present, as were USUN Advisers Joseph Glennon and Harry Thayer. The meeting lasted about one and one-quarter hours.

After a brief exchange regarding the Ambassadors' plans to take leave this summer (with Ambassador Huang saying that he is “still waiting to hear” about his own plans), Ambassador Bush turned to the subject of the Wang case. He said that he wanted to bring Ambassador Huang up to date on a matter that has troubled the United States side, as it has troubled the Chinese. He said that to insure clarity he would read from a paper prepared in the United States Mission. He said he would be glad to have Mrs. Shih (notetaker and interpreter) interrupt at any point to clarify her notes.

Ambassador Bush, reading from the prepared notes, said that he very much regretted the death of Mr. Wang. This has been a sad episode in what we hope has otherwise been a relatively smooth move to New York. Ambassador Bush said he appreciated Ambassador Huang's courtesy in having his staff inform us of the cremation of Mr. Wang's body last Friday and of the fact that the ashes are being returned to Peking. Ambassador Bush said he understood from Dr. Helpern that Ambassador Huang was able to utilize the Medical Examiner's assistance in the cremation and we are glad that the City Government was able to be helpful,

Ambassador Bush said that he personally has been kept fully informed regarding all developments in the case of Mr. Wang and that the White House, as well as the State Department, has also been kept abreast of all developments. The United States Government has been extremely concerned about Mr. Wang's death and, therefore, we have made every possible effort to resolve the mystery. So far, however, we have been unsuccessful.

Ambassador Bush said that on Monday (June 5th) he had a final meeting with the head of the New York City Police investigation and his principal assistant, and with Dr. Halpern. Our Government has also called in other agencies to assist in the investigation, as Ambassador Huang is aware, and they have cooperated with the New York City Police, which has been the focal point for the investigation. The investigation is continuing and the case will remain open until it is solved.

At the Monday meeting, Ambassador Bush said, he had gone over all aspects of the case once again to satisfy himself personally that all available avenues of investigation were being explored. Ambassador Bush said that he is satisfied that all avenues have been explored and will continue to be explored: The police and other agencies have exhaustively sought to find a likely source of nicotine, have thoroughly investigated all hotel employees, have questioned persons in the hotel area, checking all sources of information or leads as to how the nicotine got to Mr. Wang's room. Other agencies have made investigations elsewhere in the United States, as well as abroad.

Ambassador Bush said that when there had seemed to be a dead end to the investigation, Mr. Glennon had personally encouraged the police to explore other possibilities—such as various ways of using nicotine and sources for the substance—both here and abroad through channels that are available to the United States Government.

Ambassador Bush noted that one troubling aspect of the case has been the Flora Lewis article. Several agencies have also investigated this article's origin and we believe we have resolved this aspect of the case. The article's reference to the Chinese Mission was based on a fabrication by an acquaintance of Miss Lewis. We have checked out the acquaintance's story and have satisfied ourselves that he had made up the story of the “plot” completely, and that the article indeed was based on a total fabrication. Ambassador Bush said he, himself, has found it hard to believe that the appearance of such a story only five days before Mr. Wang's death was a mere coincidence but the facts now force him to accept this. These facts were arrived at by several agencies of both the New York and the Federal Governments.

Ambassador Bush said that overall, despite what he is satisfied has been our intensive investigative efforts, we have not turned up any productive leads to a resolution of the case. Intervention by the United States Mission and by Washington officials have insured that the investigation has been even more thorough than normal.

Although the investigation has been thorough, Ambassador Bush said he was obliged to add, however, that the Police, in the meeting on Monday, had again expressed to him their sincere regret, speaking as experienced professional investigators, that they were unable to fingerprint and discuss the case with all the individual members of the Chinese Mission.

Ambassador Bush said that we fully understand the Chinese reluctance to grant these Police requests. Ambassador Bush said that he and Ambassador Huang had been frank with each other, but that he regretted that they did not see eye to eye on this aspect of the case. However, the experience of investigators here has been that details, although often seemingly insignificant, turned up in the questioning of innocent associates of a deceased person often are helpful. Such questioning, although the Police, of course, cannot guarantee anything, might have provided leads back into the American community for example and this would have been of great help to the investigation and might have been in our mutual interests.

Ambassador Bush said that the only way to sum up the situation is by saying that the case is at a standstill but is not closed, and that the Police will continue their investigation. Since the case is not resolved we would be grateful if Ambassador Huang would give us the benefit of any information that the Chinese side might acquire in the future and that might be useful to our investigators. He said that we would also appreciate receiving any word that the Chinese might have from Peking regarding the examination of the body tissues that the Chinese Mission had shipped back for examination. This matter had been particularly brought up in the Monday meeting. If there were some information or some discovery made in Peking, this might be useful in opening up new leads. Ambassador Bush told Ambassador Huang that he is grateful for the cooperation of the Chinese Mission in the handling of the press and for informing us before the release of the Chinese press statement. We have not had any recent inquiries and hope that this remains the case. Finally, Ambassador Bush said that he regrets that we are unable to give the Chinese conclusive answers regarding the case. He said, however, that he can assure Ambassador Huang that every effort has been, and will continue to be, made. Ambassador Bush said that he is sorry for Mr. Wang's family and sorry that we have not been able to resolve the case. The foregoing remarks, Ambassador Bush said, concluded his oral report. He said he would be happy to discuss any aspect of the case.

Ambassador Huang's Reaction

Ambassador Huang, who reflected for a full minute before speaking, said that he appreciated Ambassador Bush's summary report regarding Mr. Wang's death. He said that “we are disappointed that so far you have not been able to resolve the case. But of course we also take note of what you have said—that the case is still open and that the United States side will make every effort to resolve it. It remains our request that the United States side will continue to investigate and to resolve the case, and that the United States side will use every channel to do so.” Ambassador Huang, turning to Ambassador Bush's remarks about the refusal to permit fingerprinting and questioning of individual members of the Chinese Mission, said simply: ”I have explained our position to you before. On this question I have no further explanation to make.”

Referring to Ambassador Bush's request for any information on Peking's examination of Mr. Wang's tissues, Ambassador Huang said that he would let Ambassador Bush know if he receives any information from Peking.

Ambassador Huang then asked Mr. Hsing if he had anything to say. Mr. Hsing said he did not.

Ambassador Huang then resumed his comments, noting that Ambassador Bush had expressed the United States' concern, and saying that “the Chinese Government also is very much concerned because this happened in the Chinese Mission to the United Nations and because it was caused by nicotine poisoning. This has caused us great concern. It is an unusual case. Whether considered from the point of view of the security of the Chinese Mission or from the point of view of the responsibility of the United States Government towards other missions, it is necessary for both of us to have the case resolved.

“We hope (Ambassador Huang continued) that we can finally resolve this case. We hope that the United States side will continue to exert every effort to resolve it. On this matter, we will not look into the details of the United States' efforts, because that is the concern of the United States side.”

Discussion

Ambassador Bush confirmed that we will continue to seek to resolve it, although there are no leads at this time, It is in the interests of the United States Government, as well as that of the Chinese Government. In response to Ambassador Bush's indication that he would regret that any such incident might be detrimental to relations between the two countries or to the operations of the Chinese Mission, Ambassador Huang said that this case is very peculiar and “possibly very serious—more so than cases of other missions.” He asked if we were aware of any other similar cases and Ambassador Bush said we were unaware of any cases of just this nature. Ambassador Huang continued by saying that it was the nature of this case, not the individual involved that “implies a very serious attempt to sabotage, to undermine the work of the Chinese Mission and the relations between China and the United States. Since this is such an unusual case, it should cause the United States to give serious attention to it.”

Ambassador Bush replied that the concern expressed by Ambassador Huang about possible political motives had caused us concern as well. He said that both the Police and Dr. Helpern had concluded that if a person wanted to cause friction between the two governments, he would not have used this kind of a method to take an individual's life. The presence of nicotine in the body would normally not have been detected. The theory of the Police and Dr. Helpern is that if somebody had wanted to disrupt relations for political purposes, nicotine would not have been used because it would have been known that nicotine normally would not have been turned up in the autopsy or chemical analysis. Ambassador Bush said that he was “not prejudging” the matter but simply wanted to report that the experts feel that nicotine was unlikely to have been chosen as a method for a political murder. Ambassador Huang interjected that the points just made by Ambassador Bush reflected “just one kind of consideration.” Ambassador Bush went on to say that that was the only thing that Dr. Helpern and the Police said on that point. He stressed again that we are not closing the door on the political murder possibility. The experts' comments showed merely their judgment “on methodology.”

Ambassador Huang said that “most important is that in the Chinese Mission in New York there was such an incident of poison death.” Just as Ambassador Bush had constantly expressed the concern felt by the United States side, the incident itself will “most likely cause concern in various quarters. This could be used to further create public opinion to effect the work of the Chinese Mission here and this will also effect our relations with the United States side. We believe, therefore, that it is also in the interests of the United States side to investigate and resolve this very grave incident.”

Ambassador Huang then invited Counselor Hsing to comment. Hsing said that Dr. Helpern once told the Chinese side that there had been such cases wherein nicotine was used to end a man's life. When Dr. Helpern had reached his preliminary conclusions on the cause of Mr. Wang's death, the Medical Examiner had let Hsing see samples of nicotine (presumably those found in fluids and tea leaves in Mr. Wang's room). Hsing said that, therefore, it is “not totally impossible to detect nicotine as the cause of Mr. Wang's death.”

Ambassador Bush noted again that a murderer with political motivations would have wanted to have the cause of death detected. Indeed, people have died before from nicotine and nicotine can be traced but if the motivation for murder were political, which would include a desire to have the death known to have been caused by murder, this purpose might not have been achieved because nicotine ordinarily would escape detection. Mr. Glennon added that he understood there had been one case where nicotine had been used in a suicide. Hsing responded that the sudden death of a member of the Chinese Mission, shortly after the Mission's arrival in New York, presents a “serious question” which leads others to raise questions. Ambassador Bush said that he wanted to reiterate that the United States Government shares the Chinese concern: “there is no difference between us on this.”

Ambassador Huang, referring to Mr. Glennon's statement about use of nicotine for suicide, said the Chinese side had also heard from U.S. detectives about such incidents. He said that “we made it clear that we ruled out the possibility of suicide; we completely ruled it out. We not only knew Mr. Wang very well, but we also know other members of the Mission very well.” Hsing added that the Chinese, in the course of the medical examination and after the autopsy, had asked Dr. Helpern for further analysis. Dr. Helpern also felt it to be unusual for such a young man to have had such a sudden death. That is why Dr. Helpern continued his analysis until he was able to conclude that nicotine was the cause, Hsing said.

Ambassador Bush said he was totally in accord with the remarks made by the Chinese side. Dr. Helpern had told us that he is “mystified,” as to the origin of the nicotine, and he wishes he could have been of more help. Ambassador Bush said again that he agreed with Mr. Hsing's comments. Hsing said that “no matter what measures one takes to end a man's life, his political purpose can be achieved. So, in other words, just because a certain method is used, it cannot be said that the political purpose could not be achieved.” Ambassador Bush said that he had simply been conveying Dr. Helpern's judgment. He said that “I make no conclusions because we have made no final judgment.”

Ambassador Huang told Ambassador Bush that he had no more comments to make about the case. Ambassador Bush replied that he had made his report with regret but with satisfaction that all available facts had been presented to the Chinese. He added that both he, himself, in a personal capacity and the United States Government feel' a desire to do everything possible and feel a deep responsibility regarding the case. He said that he had nothing further to report at this time.

Ambassador Huang concluded the discussion of Mr. Wang's death by saying that his Mission would convey to his Government the facts reported by Ambassador Bush.

Ambassador Bush, after a brief exchange on plans to attend the ECOSOC meeting and on host country concerns about general security of foreign missions in New York, asked if there had been any threats or any other security matters about which the Chinese Mission was concerned. Ambassador Huang, seconded by Hsing, said that there were no other such concerns; that “everything is very good.”

Comment

The meeting throughout was conducted in a low-key and serious manner. As in previous meetings between the two Ambassadors, Ambassador Huang did not use Mrs. Shih to interpret small talk. On substance, however, Ambassador Huang, as on previous occasions, spoke in Chinese only, in a very low voice, directed to Mrs. Shih. While listening carefully to Ambassador Bush's remarks in English, Ambassador Huang consistently waited to hear Mrs. Shih's interpretation before showing any reaction whatsoever.

The Chinese continued to maintain their forward position: insisting on the likelihood of political murder, offering no assistance in proving this, and refusing to consider further police access to PRC Mission personnel. Nevertheless, they did not, either directly or by implication, indicate suspicion that the United States was not doing its best to resolve the case. Doubtless, the investigators' original emphasis on the possibility that Mr. Wang was taking nicotine for medicinal purposes and newspaper statements that the police had suspended their investigation have led the Chinese Mission to doubt the continuing vigor of the United States' effort. However, the Chinese at this meeting in no way indicated that they harbor such doubt. From this point of view, we believe that we have passed through this stage of the case with less damage than we might have expected.

We will continue to monitor—and, where appropriate, stimulate—the Police investigation, but we have no basis now for expecting that the case will be resolved.

It seems unlikely that Ambassador Huang or his staff will raise this case again with us in the immediate future unless Peking's reaction to the report given by Ambassador Bush is stronger than that apparently felt personally by Ambassador Huang. We will have to be prepared, nevertheless, to demonstrate to the Chinese, after the passage of a few months, that the Police are continuing to do what they can to solve the case.

It remains an open question as to whether or not the Chinese know more about the origin of the nicotine ingested by Mr. Wang than they are telling us. However, from the way they have handled the case, despite our earlier concern that they were preparing to use the death against us in some fashion, we now believe that this is unlikely.

BUSH

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL 17 CHICOM-US. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Harry E. T. Thayer on June 8 and cleared by Joseph Glennon and Bush. Received at the Department of State on June 21.

114. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, March 14, 1972, 4:40-6 p.m. 114. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, March 14, 1972, 4:40-6 p.m.1

New York, March 14, 1972, 4:40-6 p.m.

March 14, 1972

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Huang Hua, PRC Ambassador to the the United Nations

Shih Yen-hua, Interpreter

Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, NSC Staff Member

DATE & TIME: Tuesday, March 14, 4:40 - 6:00 p.m.

PLACE: New York City

Ambassador Huang: I am sorry we are late. I was caught in traffic.

Dr. Kissinger : That often happens. I missed you in Peking.

Ambassador Huang: I watched television every day and saw much of the President and Dr. Kissinger.

Dr. Kissinger : Many people saw more details than I did.

I spent a lot of time with the man who headed your delegation here. I am waiting to meet the first stupid Chinese. There has got to be one among 800 million.

Let me mention a few things to you. First, on the death of your official here. We have taken a direct interest at the White House. We have talked to the police department. I talked personally to Governor Rockefeller. I told Ambassador Bush first to keep it in White House channels so as to see what the problem was. We have … our concern was to get minimum publicity in order not to give any crackpots any ideas.

Normally the protection of the Mission is the responsibility of the New York Police; they have to pay for it from New York city funds. But we have told them to take any additional measures that are necessary, and if it is a question of money we will pay out of confidential funds. Mr. Bush doesn't know this. I recommend that you have a meeting anytime after today with Ambassador Bush, the local FBI representative, and the local police representative. We will keep a personal eye on it from my office, and if there is anything that is lacking, will you let us know. Ambassador Bush has been instructed to develop a specific plan together with you. We are going to have undercover people in the mission and we will take other measures. If there is anything you can think of that is not being done, and you will let us know, if it is humanly possible we will do it.

Do you have any special ideas now that I could take care of?

Ambassador Huang: I agree with what Dr. Kissinger has just said, that we prevent as far as possible publicity to prevent any uproar in the public, because it would help the unveiling of the plot. I once briefed Mr. Phillips… .

Dr. Kissinger : On Saturday.

Ambassador Huang: He originally hoped to have a discussion with us earlier, but I preferred to wait until today's meeting. I told Ambassador Phillips that we have made a very careful study of the life history of Mr. Wang Hsi-tsanh and the internal situation of our Mission, and we have completely ruled out the possibility of suicide by Mr. Wang Hsi-tsanh or any other internal reason related to it. It seems to be that it is a deliberate murder.

Dr. Kissinger : But why him?

Ambassador Huang: It is aimed at creating a political event. With regard to the security issue, I told Mr. Phillips that it is not necessary to strengthen security measures just on the appropriate number of policemen; it is necessary to strengthen other fields.

Dr. Kissinger : We have to get undercover people in the kitchen and find other undercover people so we can find who might have done this.

Ambassador Huang: I wonder if you have received the report by Dr. Helpern, the Chief Medical Examiner of New York City. We have given the report to Mr. Phillips.

Dr. Kissinger : I have not actually seen the report, but I have seen the report of Mr. Phillips. There is no question about what has happened.

Ambassador Huang: As to what kind of security measures to enforce, we leave that to you to decide.

Dr. Kissinger : Mr. Ambassador, first of all we are embarrassed and outraged. Second, the White House will take a personal interest in the matter. You can be sure that even though you are dealing with others, we are fully involved. We will do everything humanly possible to prevent a repetition.

Ambassador Huang: That is all I want to say about this question.

Dr. Kissinger : Feel free to call me any time, and if anything at all is needed, you can be sure that it will be done. So you will call Ambassador Bush tomorrow or set up a meeting with Ambassador Bush, and he will be prepared. (Ambassador Huang nods)

Incidentally, Ambassador Bush doesn't know about our meetings any longer. I will bring him in only if United Nationè business is involved.

The second point I want to mention is real estate.

Ambassador Huang: (smiles) Thank you for your concern.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand from my sources that you have not made a definite offer.

Ambassador Huang: Yesterday our lawyer told us that he had struck a final bargain on the Motor Inn on prices. They are now preparing the final document.

Dr. Kissinger : Good. Here is the problem, and I will be honest with you about the two months delay. My friend, a member of the Rockefeller organization, tells me that your lawyer is not experienced in real estate, but an old friend. Therefore, according to my friend, it will take your lawyer a little longer than it would an expert to get the matter completed. If you want to—this is entirely up to you—we could find an expert in real estate law if your lawyer were willing. Mr. Marshall thinks that it could save you between three to four weeks. It is entirely up to you. It would speed it up a little, but, it will take four weeks anyway to complete the formalities. My people think it would take your, lawyer about eight weeks. You don't have to change lawyers; only your lawyer would have to be willing to take an expert as an adviser.

Ambassador Huang: When we go back we will consider this 'question.

Dr. Kissinger : It is entirely up to you.

Ambassador Huang Because according to our lawyer in a day or two we can sign a contract.

Dr. Kissinger : But there…

Ambassador Huang: And the owner of the Inn says that within ten days they will be cleared out.

Dr. Kissinger : You could move in?

Ambassador Huang: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : There is no problem then. You may have a better lawyer than anyone recognizes.

(Dr. Kissinger then asked the local intermediary who was serving refreshments to stay out of earshot during the next portion of the conversation.

Dr. Kissinger : I want to report two conversations to you that I had with the Soviet Ambassador which I think will be of some interest to the Prime Minister and Vice Chairman Yeh Chiengying. The Soviet Ambassador came to see me on Thursday, March 9 and said that they had information from Chinese sources that I had given, during the October visit to China, that I had given to Chinese authorities information about the “dislocation”—I am giving you his words—of Soviet forces on your border and the location of Soviet missile installations on your border. He said that if this were true, it would be taken with the greatest gravity in Moscow. I said to him that it must have been Chinese sources from Taiwan, and made no other comment.

He came back the next day and said that they were Chinese sources from the mainland who thought that matters were going too far. I said one, I never discuss my conversations with him, and two, it was complete nonsense, and a provocation. This is the position we will maintain. But I thought the Prime Minister might want to know this. That's really all I need to say about it. (Ambassador Huang nods)

I think this could be what we call a “fishing expedition. “ (Ambassador Huang smiles and explains the phrase to the interpreter.) That is, he is simply trying to see what my reaction was.

They are also spreading rumors to this effect about the July visit, but that is on a low level. You can take a look at it - this is an internal memo. (Dr. Kissinger loans the Ambassador a copy of the John Scali memo to him - attached at Tab A.) This man does not know anything about our relations he is one of our public relations advisers. (Ambassador Huang reads the memo slowly and carefully.)

Dr. Kissinger : This sort of thing I don't propose to pay any attention to. (Ambassador Huang chuckles.) But the other point might be worthy to be looked into in Peking. (Ambassador Huang nods.) If they want to make any comment, it would be interesting.

While we are preparing for … we will announce this Thursday—we have already talked to the Prime Minister but wanted you to know—that we will go to Moscow on May 22. I have refused an invitation to go to Moscow prior to the summit similar to the visit I made to Peking. So I am doing preparations in Washington with the Soviet Ambassador.

Now, as you know, we agreed in Peking that after the summit I would come to Peking and talk to the Prime Minister in greater detail about it. (Ambassador Huang nods.) I wanted to let you know our present impression is that the Soviet strategy, is to conclude a very large number of agreements with us. Every agreement that has been negotiated for three years, every negotiation that has been going on for years, is suddenly moving simultaneously. As the President told the Prime Minister, we will conclude those agreements which we think are in our interest, and we will conclude no agreement which is directed at the People's Republic.

For example, France has wanted to join the agreement on nuclear accidents that we have concluded with the Soviet Union, and we have told France we don't want this. If France wants to make an agreement, it should agree separately with the Soviet Union, because we don't want the situation where every country has concluded an agreement except the People's Republic. You haven't asked us to do this; I am just telling you.

(Ambassador Huang speaks to the interpreter in Chinese, but there is no translation.)

Dr. Kissinger : We have agreements which we are now discussing with the Soviet Union. You are familiar with the strategic arms negotiations, and there is no change in that situation. There are the following bilateral discussions going on (Ambassador Huang again comments in Chinese with no translation): — A possible sale of some American grain in the Soviet Union, and an American delegation headed by the Secretary of Agriculture will visit Moscow in April.

— A settlement of lend lease debts; these talks will start within the next two to three weeks.

— We will start talks about the possibility of creating a joint committee for scientific exchange; similarly an agreement about pollution and the environment.

— You know that we are negotiating an agreement on health matters.

— And there is a proposal to have an agreement on a joint space exercise, the docking of which is called a space bus. (Ambassador Huang demonstrates docking with his hands.)

— And finally a maritime discussion on the opening of ports. This is largely technical on how much advance notice has to be given.

The basic problem is that all these are on the agenda, but they have suddenly started moving simultaneously. The intent is very obvious. But I think you understand our general purposes now, and there is no possibility of any collusion on any political matters. Of course, we are prepared to make agreements with you in any area that we make with the Soviet Union, but that is up to you.

As for the President's itinerary in the Soviet Union, he will go to Moscow and Leningrad and one other city not yet picked, but it will not be East of the Urals. On the way home he will stop in Iran as you know Iran is a good friend of Pakistan—to underline our concern for South Asia. But this has not yet been announced.

I wanted to inform the Prime Minister also about a call on me by the Indian Ambassador. I could spend my life explaining the Shanghai Communique. (Ambassador Huang laughs.) You should bring your colleague back over here, and we will do it jointly. The first week after Peking I couldn't get used to the change; I used to meet him from 10:00 to 3:00 in the morning. (Ambassador Huang laughs.)

The Indian Ambassador asked me what the phrase “Asia-Pacific” meant in the Communique and wanted to know whether… he thought it did not apply to India and thought it meant that we might agree to Chinese hegemony over India. I said that first, I was not a spokesman for Chinese policy, and second, that the People's Republic had said that it did not consider itself a superpower and rejects power politics of any kind. I said as far as the U.S. were concerned, we rejected the hegemony of any outside country over the subcontinent and of any country within the subcontinent.

I share these conversations only because it is conceivable to me that people who do not particularly appreciate our relations may spread various versions, and I wanted you to know directly whether we discussed your affairs with the Indians and the Soviets.

Finally, the President told the Prime Minister when he was in Peking that after Indian troops were withdrawn we were considering recognizing Bangladesh, and the Prime Minister asked us to be sure to let you know a week ahead of time. Our present plan is, now that Indian troops have been withdrawn, to recognize Bangladesh during the first week of April. But we have not yet told the bureaucracy, so if your government wants to express a view, we can still adjust our timing. (Ambassador Huang comments in Chinese without translation.)

These are the political things that I have to discuss with you. There are a number of other things which really belong in the Paris Channel, but I just wanted to mention to you.

Senator Mansfield and Senator Scott have written a letter to the Prime Minister. This is a copy. (Dr. Kissinger shows a copy of the Mansfield/Scott letter to Ambassador Huang at Tab B.) You can keep the copy. We will send the original to Ambassador Watson, and he will give it to your Ambassador in Paris on Monday.

Now these are two leaders of the Senate, and they are terribly spoiled. (Ambassador Huang laughs.) They are not used to the bad treatment the Executive Branch always gets—not by the Chinese but by the press. This is to prepare you, and to give Peking a head start. They would like to come for from two to three weeks, either starting April 16 or April 27. They haven't put that in there—I have forced them to write in a very general way, but I am giving you this information. They would like to bring their wives. Each would like to bring two staff men. The President's and my recommendation is that if you permit one staff man, he can do less mischief.

(At this point Mr. Lord was called to the phone for a couple of minutes. There was further discussion of the Mansfield/Scott trip.)

Dr. Kissinger : How should we handle this? Should we submit this letter to your Ambassador in Paris?

Ambassador Huang: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : (Cuts off the bottom of a memo from Clark MacGregor to Dr. Kissinger and hands over the remainder containing questions on the Mansfield/Scott visit.) You have more of my papers than some of my colleagues. (Laughter on both sides.) There has never been reciprocity either. (MacGregor memo at Tab C)

Ambassador Huang: These are questions… .

Dr. Kissinger : They were put to me by our Congressional liaison man. This is not an official communication to you. They do not know that you have these questions.

I don't want to interfere in your affairs, but the easiest way to handle this would be in response to their letter, you could volunteer some of this information. In that manner; you would eliminate many questions.

Ambassador Huang: Ithink the original copy of the letter should be handed over to our Ambassador in Paris, and the questions related to it should be discussed by the two Ambassadors in Paris.

Dr. Kissinger : Should we do it in Paris?

Ambassador Huang: Yes, these can be discussed in Paris.

Dr. Kissinger : Unless there are some questions you prefer not be put to you, because we can control it. I think the questions here can all be discussed in Paris.

We appreciated the rapid reply to the request about the two House leaders. We will submit a letter from them, say a week after the other one.

Ambassador Huang: You mean after the letter of the leaders of the Senate is delivered in Paris?

Dr. Kissinger : Then we will deliver the House letter. They should not go at the same time.

Now we get a great many questions from people wanting to visit the People's Republic, as I am sure you do. What should we do with them?

Ambassador Huang: I think this question has been discussed in Peking during your visit.

Dr. Kissinger : Should these questions be submitted in Paris directly or through Ambassador Watson?

Ambassador Huang: Ordinary people coming such as business men, scholars, scientists, and others can supply their applications through ordinary channels, that is the Chinese Embassy nearest them. Generally that place is Ottawa.

Dr. Kissinger : They don't have to do it in Paris.

Ambassador Huang: Not necessarily. It is more convenient to be nearer. I think during the discussions in Peking the Chinese side told you that we are limited in equipment and documentation to receive American guests, so that it must be done gradually.

Dr. Kissinger : We understand. We are not recommending any particular number. We just want to know how to respond. I have a nightclub singer who wants to perform in your country. (Ambassador Huang laughs.) And a comedy team.

Alright, we will do the following. Ordinary people we will tell to go to Ottawa, and it is entirely up to you how to handle them. Maybe the Ambassador should say this to Ambassador Watson on Monday when they meet, because nobody knows I am seeing you. I will instruct him to ask the question.

Especially important people we will raise through Ambassador Watson in Paris. If I ever want to mention somebody, I would take the liberty of doing this with you. This will happen very rarely.

I am being harassed about your tabletennis team. (Ambassador Huang laughs.) But I want you to know that having seen your players, if they lose one game when they come here, I know that you are being polite. But I won't tell anyone. We will raise that also in Paris.

One gentleman who I know quite well and who would like to visit the People's Republic is Joseph Alsop. (Ambassador Huang nods.) I know he is very well disposed toward the People's Republic. Of course, the decision is up to you. He should apply in Ottawa also?

Ambassador Huang: Yes, he could go to Ottawa or write to Ottawa. If he wants to contact us first, he can do so.

Dr. Kissinger : Whom should he contact?

Ambassador Huang: The person in charge of these matters, Mr. Kao.

Dr. Kissinger : I also want to say that I read with embarrassment many stories about the President's visit. I hope you know enough about the bureaucratic maneuvering to be able to identify the sources. (Ambassador Huang nods.) I hope you have been able to see that anything coming from the White House has been pointing to a high regard of the human and political qualities of the leaders with whom we have had the privilege of speaking.

Ambassador Huang: I will report what you have said to Prime Minister Chou and Vice Chairman Yeh.

If you don't have anything more to say, I have … .

Dr. Kissinger : You have something?

Ambassador Huang: Yes (laughs nervously and reads from a piece of paper, attached at Tab D).

“In the fortnight since the conclusion of President Nixon's visit, the United States has carried out increasingly large-scale bombings against Democratic Republic of Vietnam. On March 10 the United States Government further proclaimed the week from March 26 to April 2 as the so-called National Week of Concern for Prisoners of War.

“The Chinese Government cannot but express great concern over this. The Chinese Government would like to state frankly that the United States will not be able to attain its goal by this line of action. If the United States Government truly wants to bring about the early release of prisoners of war, it should accept the seven points and the two-point elaboration put forward by the Provisional Revolutionary Government and enter into earnest negotiations with the other side.

“Any attempt to exert pressure by war threat can only arouse the peoples of the three countries of Indochina to ever stronger resistance. With the war continuing and the casualties in the three Indochina countries increasing, how are the prisoners of war to be released? The Chinese people, who share weal and woe with the Indochinese people, can only express indignation and support the three Indochinese peoples' war of resistance to the end.

“It is hoped that the U.S. Government will give serious consideration to this view.”

Upon instruction of the Chinese Government, I have transmitted this message to the United States Government and Dr. Kissinger.

Dr. Kissinger : Have you a copy?

Ambassador Huang: It is not an official copy.

Dr. Kissinger : Only for our records. We will not treat it as an official communication. We will destroy it after we are through with it.

Ambassador Huang: There may be some mistakes. (He handed it over.)

Dr. Kissinger : Don't worry about it. Just a technical point. This communication will go only to the President.

I want you to understand that we take any communication from the Chinese Government extremely seriously, and I want to answer you frankly.

First, it is not true that we have engaged in large-scale bombing of North Vietnam since leaving China. This is really for the information of the Prime Minister. I don't want to get in an argument with him, but you are not getting the correct information. We were accused last week by the North Vietnamese of bombing from March 1-6. I investigated it. We had given no authority, and there was no intensive bombing in there.

Secondly - again, I had no interest in raising the Vietnam issue with you, but this is a frank exchange of opinions. Before we left for Peking, the North Vietnamese Government proposed a meeting to us on March 15 in Paris. We accepted this for March 20 for technical reasons. On March 1, they accepted March 20—(correcting himself) on February 29 they accepted March 20. On March 7, after I had already made arrangements for a secret visit which is rather complex for me, they cancelled it again and proposed a date in April. It is a very peculiar procedure.

Ambassador Huang: April 1?

Dr. Kissinger : They proposed April 15.

Ambassador Huang: You mean negotiations or secret talks?

Dr. Kissinger : Secret talks. But I can't come the 15th, so I have to be delayed a week. It is a very peculiar method of proceeding.

I would like the Prime Minister to know, as we have already said to him, that we are prepared, we would like to talk to the Democratic Republic of Vietnam honestly and openly and in the spirit of justice. We are not seeking a military victory, and we hope finally these negotiations will start.

In the meantime I want to assure the Prime Minister that we will not increase our military operations over North Vietnam unless there is an offensive on their part.

Ambassador Huang: I will convey your explanation. I have also noted—this is outside the instructions of our Government—I have also noted from the press there are four aircraft carriers of the U.S. which are concentrated in nearby areas.

Dr. Kissinger : This is only because of our concern of an attack, an offensive by the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. We will not be the first to take an offensive step.

Ambassador Huang: I don't think it is necessary for me to make further explanations, because the basic view of the Chinese side is expressed in the communication.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand your point of view. I wanted to tell the Prime Minister. We are not engaged in propaganda. What I tell you represents our real view, and I wanted the Prime Minister to understand it. I know he doesn't agree with it.

Is that all?

Ambassador Huang: I have nothing more.

Dr. Kissinger : All of us have the warmest recollections of our visit to Peking, and I am constantly being accused of having been taken in by the Chinese, and it is a problem to me. I have certain sentimental feelings about my trip.

Ambassador Huang: “Taken in?”

Dr. Kissinger : I mean “charmed.” All of us have really friendly recollections and will work on this policy with great seriousness.

Ambassador Huang: Some Ambassador told me that they studied our communique, and they published the support of their government for the communique. I am referring to Yugloslavia. I think Romania is very happy to.

Dr. Kissinger : Mr. Ambassador, it is always a pleasure to see you. I may go on vacation some time during the next three weeks for a week. I have not decided yet. I will let you know which week. General Haig is available. Please feel free to get in touch with me at any time.

Ambassador Huang: In our last meeting with Mr. Howe I expressed our thanks for the President's and your concern for the Chinese Mission, as well as the concern you expressed in Peking on the question of a house. I hope in the near future the problem will be solved. (Ambassador Huang laughs.) Whether our lawyer is an expert or not.

Dr. Kissinger : I am sure he is capable.

Ambassador Huang: (in English) Whether he is capable of settling in shortest possible time or not.

Dr. Kissinger : We'll help, but if it is 10 days, no one can be faster than that.

Ambassador Huang: But the matter of the first question, the death of Mr. Wang by poisoning, we hope to make a serious investigation and unveil the plot.

Dr. Kissinger : We will make one. You understand our system of government. It places the police here outside our jurisdiction.

But we will make the maximum effort that we can, and we use federal police to assist the investigation. I will give it the personal attention of the White House.

Ambassador Huang: Thank you for your reception today.

(There were then some closing pleasantries during which Dr. Kissinger and then Ambassador Huang expressed their happiness at the prospects of dealing with one another. Dr. Kissinger added that he had warm memories and associated Ambassador Huang with his first trip to China which was quite an experience. The two Chinese then left for their Hotel.)

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The precise location of the meeting is not indicated. Ellipses in the source text. Lord sent the memorandum to Kissinger under a March 18 covering memorandum, on which he had written “Thru Haig.” Kissinger wrote: “OK HK” on the covering memorandum. Tabs A-C are attached but not published. Tab D, the attached message, has no classification marking. A notation on the message indicates the President saw it. It is published as Document 112.

115. Telegram 5316 From the Embassy in France to the Department of State, March 20, 1972, 1612Z 115. Telegram 5316 From the Embassy in France to the Department of State, March 20, 1972, 1612Z1

March 20, 1972, 1612Z

O 201612Z MAR 72

FM AMEMBASSY PARIS

TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5320

PARIS 5316

REF:

A) STATE 046040

B) STATE 047029

C) STATE 042369

SUBJECT: MARCH 20 MEETING WITH AMBASSADOR HUANG

1. I MET THIS MORNING FOR 65 MINUTES WITH AMBASSADOR HUANG. HE WAS ACCOMPANIED BY AN INTERPRETER AND FIRST SECY TSAO. THE SPIRIT OF THE MEETING EXTREMELY OPEN AND FRIENDLY.

2. HUANG CONFIRMED PRC TABLE TENNIS GROUP WILL ARRIVE IN US ON APRIL 10 AND WILL REMAIN FOR TWO WEEKS. DELEGATION WILL BE LED BY TCHOUANG TSEH-TONG, AND WILL BE COMPOSED OF TWENTY PEOPLE, ACCOMPANIED BY SIX JOURNALISTS. HUANG WILL PROVIDE US WITH NAME, PLACE OF BIRTH AND PASSPORT NUMBER OF EACH MEMBER OF THE DELEGATION AND TEAM OF JOURNALISTS.

3. HUANG SAID THERE HAVE BEEN PRESS REPORTS THAT CARL MCINTIRE OF “US MARCH OF VICTORY” WILL INVITE A GROUP OF TABLE TENNIS PLAYERS FROM THE “CLIQUE OF CHIANG-KAISHEK” TO VISIT THE US DURING THE SAME PERIOD. THE CHINESE GOVT HOPES THAT THE US GOVT WILL STOP THIS SO THAT EXCHANGES CAN PROCEED WITHOUT IMPEDIMENT.

4. THE CHINESE TABLE TENNIS ASSOCIATION WILL DESIGNATE A MEMBER OF THE CHINESE DELEGATION TO THE UN TO MAKE ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS FOR THIS VISIT. HE WILL THEN CONTACT THE US TABLE TENNIS ASSOCIATION DIRECTLY. THE US GOVT WILL BE KEPT INFORMED OF ALL ARRANGEMENTS. CHINESE GOVT HOPES THAT US WILL ASSIST THE CHINESE TABLE TENNIS DELEGATION AND WILL TAKE ALL NECESSARY SECURITY MEASURES. IF US GOVT HAS ANY PROPOSALS TO MAKE RE THE VISIT, THEY CAN BE MADE THROUGH THE PARIS CHANNEL.

5. I GAVE HUANG TEXT OF TELEGRAM ON MUSK OXEN/PANDA TRANSPORTATION ARRANGEMENTS. HE WAS PLEASED AND SAID HE WOULD PASS THIS ON AND GET APPROVAL ROUTE FROM HIS GOVT.

6. ALSO HANDED HUANG THANK-YOU LETTERS FROM THE PRESIDENT AND THE SECRETARY.

7. WE DISCUSSED IN SOME DETAIL HANDLING OF PRESS INQUIRIES AND AGREED TO HANDLE THEM AS PER PARA 3 REFTEL (B) AND PARA 9 REFTEL (A).

8. I MADE POINTS DESCRIBED PARAS 1-6 REFTEL (A). AMBASSADOR HUANG SAID HE WOULD REQUEST INSTRUCTIONS.

9. WE AGREED THAT RATHER THAN SCHEDULE REGULAR MEETINGS, WE WOULD ARRANGE MEETINGS WHEN THERE WAS SOMETHING IMPORTANT TO DISCUSS. FOR ALL ROUTING MATTERS, WE AGEED THAT THEY WOULD BE HANDLED BY TSAO AND OUR POLITICAL COUNSELOR, ALLEN HOLMES. GP-3.

WATSON

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73,POL CHICOM-US. Secret; Nodis; Homer; Immediate. Received in the Department of State at 12:49 p.m. Telegrams 46040, 47029, and 42369 to Paris are ibid.

116. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, March 5, 1972 116. Memorandum for the Record, Paris, March 5, 19721

Paris, March 5, 1972

23 March 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: 45th Meeting with the Chinese - Paris, 5 March 1972

1. On the evening of 4 March 1972, Tsao called me and said that the Ambassador had learned that I was leaving shortly and insisted that I must come to dinner on Sunday night—they could not allow me to leave without dinner together. I agreed to do so.

2. On Sunday evening, the fifth of March, I went to the Chinese Embassy Residence on Boulevard du Chateau in Neuilly—on foot, leaving the car at a considerable distance. Met at the gate by Wei and at the door by Tsao, I was taken into the Red Room, where the Ambassador waited. After a drink, we repaired to a large dining room I had never seen before and sat down to dinner. On the wall was a tapestry of “Mao with the representatives of the ethnic minorities” covering the entire wall. It must have been more than twenty feet across. The Ambassador said that they had ordered it from a factory in Shanghai to fit that wall.

3. We then started what turned out to be about a fourteencourse meal with Chinese flower wine and French Chateau Haut Brion of an extremely old vintage. Ambassador Huang Chen said, “We could not let you go like this, even though we have completed our task together. You have become old friend, and we wanted to have a meal together before you left. We cannot, unfortunately, give you shark fin soup as that takes a week to prepare and we did not have enough notice. Whatever happens in the future, we at least successfully performed our mission and put our chiefs in contact. The fact that we were both soldiers made it easier for us to work together. Each understood what moved the other. Now you are going to more important functions.”

4. I broke in to ask if he knew where I was going, and he grinned and said, “Yes, I know where you are going.” He then drank a toast to me. I drank one to him, who had always been so helpful and understanding to me, especially during the early days of our contacts when we knew little about one another. I said to him, “You know that in my new job I will always serve my country faithfully, but I will always remember the friendship you showed me and the importance of the friendship between our two countries and peoples (another toast). He replied that he would have thought less of me if I had not expressed the will to serve my country faithfully.

5. The Ambassador then said that he felt a historic mission had been accomplished—doors closed between our peoples for nearly a quarter of a century had been opened; the President had had a good visit to Peking; almost everyone seemed pleased except the Soviets and Americans who are pro-Chiang Kai-shek or pro-Soviet. I said that some pro-Soviet elements exist everywhere, even in China (he grinned) but that the overwhelming mass of the American people are in favor—even, as he had noted previously, Senator Goldwater and Governor Reagan. He said he believed that the American press had by and large been satisfied with the treatment that they had received in China. Eighty-seven newsmen might seem like a small figure to us, but to them it was enormous and without precedent. No Chief of State who had ever visited the People's Republic had ever brought more than eight or ten pressmen with him. Besides, the Americans, coming from a highly industrialized and technological society, had requirements which were different from those of the average visitor to the People's Republic.

6. Ambassador Huang asked me whether the Soviets had commented to me about the President's visit to China. I said that none of them had, which made me believe that they had had instructions not to do so. All of them, however, had asked my officers or me what the President would bring up when he went to Moscow. When I told them I did not know, they had asked, “Will he bring up the Middle East?” I had replied cryptically that I thought that depended on what the Soviets did. He laughed and said this must have confused them.

7. Ambassador Huang then said that he felt that the negotiations had been completed successfully because so few people had known about them. In his embassy only Tsao and Wei had known. I agreed, saying that in our case only my secretary had known. He wondered how many people in the French government did—“because they listen to the telephones and watch us.” I said that I thought that knowledge of the contacts was very closely held in the French government. He agreed. At this point, a historic event occurred—I ate my first 100-year egg.

8. Ambassador Huang then went back to the beginning of our contacts, saying that I had shown good judgment in coming to his residence early in the morning before he went to the chancery. I confessed that I had watched the residence for several mornings before my first contact, to see what time he drove to work, and that was why I had come at the time at which I had. He repeated, “Good judgment.” He said that he understood that after my departure further arrangements would be made to ensure contact between the two governments but did not elaborate.

9. Ambassador Huang said that, regardless of political or ideological differences, we had become friends—they regarded me almost as a member of the family—and he hoped that, either in China or the United States, we would meet again as relations between our two countries normalized. He noted that we had met forty-five times. As he rose from the table, he raised his glass and toasted “our forty-sixth meeting, wherever it may be.” He then said that I would always be welcome in China. The President and Dr. Kissinger had taken courageous action to reopen the door between our peoples, and he had told Peking of the part I had played in this. He then presented me with a green Chinese vase on a wooden stand, and I gave him a book of colored photographs of the United States with text in French. This time he himself walked me to the gate of the embassy residence, and we shook hands.

Vernon A. Walters
Major General, USA

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Walters on March 23. A notation on the memorandum reads: “C-exchange.” The meeting was held at Chen's residence in Neuilly.

117. Telegram 625 From the Embassy in France to the White House, March 13, 1972, 1219Z 117. Telegram 625 From the Embassy in France to the White House, March 13, 1972, 1219Z1

March 13, 1972, 1219Z

[text not declassified]

O 131240Z ZYH

FM: PARIS

TO: THE WHITE HOUSE

ZEM

131219Z MAR 72 [text not declassified]

FM: AMBASSADOR WATSON PARIS 625

TO: THE WHITE HOUSE EYES ONLY FOR DR. HENRY KISSINGER

JUST HAD MY FIRST MEETING WITH AMBASSADOR HUANG, WHICH WAS EXTREMELY CORDIAL AND FRIENDLY. I HAD NOT ANNOUNCED THE MEETING TO THE PRESS, BUT THE CHINESE DID. AS THE AMBASSADOR SAW ME TO MY CAR, SEVERAL PRESS MEMBERS WERE THERE AND QUESTIONED ME. I MERELY STATED WE HAD A FRIENDLY CONTACT WHICH WOULD BE THE FIRST OF MANY AND THAT WAS ALL. NOW WE ARE BEING QUERIED BY THE PRESS, AND I WOULD APPRECIATE GREATLY INSTRUCTIONS AS TO HOW TO HANDLE ANY FUTURE PRESS CONFRONTATIONS—SUCH AS, SHOULD I ANNOUNCE BEFOREHAND THAT WE ARE GOING TO HAVE A MEETING? OBVIOUSLY WOULD NEVER DIVULGE ANY TALKS OF SUBSTANCE, AND MY INSTINCT WOULD BE TO REFER ANY QUESTIONS ON SUBSTANCE TO THE WHITE HOUSE.

THE AMBASSADOR IS PAYING ME A RETURN CALL AT 1100 THURSDAY. HE COULD POSSIBLY ANNOUNCE SUCH A CALL, AND I WONDER IF YOU THINK IT WISE FOR ME TO ANNOUNCE IT IN ADVANCE AS WELL. WARM REGARDS.

WATSON

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1037, Files for the President-China Material, China, March 10, 1972-April 1973. Secret; Eyes Only. Sent to the White House eyes only for Kissinger. A handwritten notation on the telegram reads: “HAK, Haig, Lord.”

118. Telegram 626 From the Embassy in France to the White House, March 13, 1972, 1219Z 118. Telegram 626 From the Embassy in France to the White House, March 13, 1972, 1219Z1

March 13, 1972, 1219Z

[text not declassified]

O 131248Z

FM PARIS

TO THE WHITE HOUSE

ZEM

131219Z MAR 72 [text not declassified]

FM: AMBASSADOR WATSON PARIS 626

TO:

THE WHITE HOUSE EYES ONLY FOR DR. HENRY KISSINGER

HAVE JUST COMPLETED MY FIRST VISIT WITH AMBASSADOR HUANG. HE WAS EXTREMELY GRATEFUL FOR YOU LETTER AND ASKED ME TO SEND YOU HIS WARMEST REGARDS. THE ATMOSPHERE WAS VERY CORDIAL. HE HAD A CHINESE WITH HIM WHO INTERPRETED THE CONVERSATIONS INTO FRENCH. ALSO PRESENT WAS MR. TSAO, FIRST SECRETARY. THE AMBASSADOR SAID THAT FOR MAJOR MATTERS HE WOULD LIKE TO SEE ME. FOR LESS IMPORTANT, ROUTINE THINGS, HE ASKED ME TO DESIGNATE SOMEBODY HERE AT THE EMBASSY THAT COULD DEAL WITH MR. TSAO. I TOLD HIM THAT AT PRESENT I HAD NOT CHOSEN ANYBODY FOR THIS ROLE, BUT AS HE PRESSED THE POINT, I HAVE DESIGNATED ALLEN HOLMES, POLITICAL COUNSELOR, IN WHOM I HAVE THE UTMOST CONFIDENCE AND WHO WILL SEND NO MESSAGE TO WASHINGTON WITHOUT CLEARING IT WITH ME. HE WAS ALSO PLEASED BY MY ASSURANCES THAT ANY MESSAGES FROM ME WOULD BE DIRECTLY TO YOU AND THE PRESIDENT, THEREBY AVOIDING ANY LEAKS. HE OBVIOUSLY IS WELL INFORMED ABOUT JACK ANDERSON.

AS I MENTIONED IN MY OTHER CABLE, HE IS RETURNING MY CALL THURSDAY AT 1100. I DID MENTION TO HIM THAT YOU ALL WERE EXTREMELY PLEASED BY THE WARM WELCOME YOU RECEIVED IN CHINA, THE RESULT OF WHICH WILL UNDOUBTEDLY CAUSE NUMEROUS REQUESTS FOR VISITS, WHICH HE QUITE UNDERSTOOD AND WHICH HE DID NOT PROTEST. WOULD APPRECIATE ANY INSTRUCTIONS YOU MIGHT HAVE FOR MY THURSDAY MEETING. HAVE SENT SECRETARY A SHORT MESSAGE MERELY STATING WE HAD HAD A FRIENDLY DISCUSSION.

ON MY RETURN TO MY OFFICE WAS INFORMED THAT JAPANESE EMBASSY HERE IS MOST ANXIOUS TO BE KEPT UP TO DATE ON THESE MEETINGS. UNLESS INSTRUCTED TO THE CONTRARY WILL TELL THEM THAT ATMOSPHERE IS FRIENDLY AND SAY NO MORE.

WARM REGARDS,

WATSON

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1037, Files for the President-China Material, China, March 10, 1972-April 1973. Secret; Eyes Only. Sent to the White House eyes only for Kissinger. A handwritten notation on the telegram reads: “HAK, Haig, Lord.”

119. Memorandum From Winston Lord of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), New York, April 3, 1972 119. Memorandum From Winston Lord of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), New York, April 3, 19721

New York, April 3, 1972

April 3, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR:

HENRY A. KISSINGER

FROM: WINSTON LORD

SUBJECT:

My April 3 Mission to New York

Here is a brief rundown of this evening's mission to New York which, as I phoned in to Al, was accomplished uneventfully.

At 8:30 p.m. I walked into the front entrance of the Chinese Mission from the Amsterdam Avenue side, past a single unquestioning policeman. The lobby contained eight to ten uncurious Chinese and an atmosphere of having just moved in. Miss Shih greeted me at the door and immediately escorted me into the elevator. We went to the second floor and proceeded to Room 204, a little way down the hail to the left, a modest suite.

Miss Shih served me jasmine tea, and after two sips worth of small talk on the weather and the Lincoln Center, I handed her an envelope with our message inside it. She read it carefully, with serious countenance, for about five minutes. She then impassively said that they would transmit it immediately to their Government and let us know if they had any instructions as a result of it. She had no questions or comment. She then poured me a second cup of tea.

Then (as you instructed) I made an informal comment on a personal basis along the following lines. I had been with Dr. Kissinger on all his trips and sat in on all his meetings, and I knew personally that there was no policy he believed in more than improving relations with the People's Republic of China. This was the spirit in which we approached our relationship and one which we were prepared to apply also to North Vietnam. And this was the framework of the message I had just given her. It was also in this light that we had issued the instructions concerning the Paracel Islands contained in the message. Frankly speaking, I added, this had been a very difficult issue within our Government.

She nodded understanding and then resumed the small talk in a relaxed fashion. For a few more minutes we discussed the varied scenery in the United States which I hoped she would get to see and the impending visit of the Chinese table tennis team. (I noted that they had managed to lose one match in Canada which was very diplomatic, and quickly added that it was friendship not competition that counted.)

When she started to pour me another cup of tea, I politely refused saying that I had to leave in order to catch the last plane back to Washington. She then escorted me down the elevator and out to the front door. We shook hands at the entrance and I walked back toward Amsterdam Avenue.

A few miscellaneous comments: The street was quiet and relatively deserted, with no one hanging around. There seems to be only one entrance, with the garage right next to it, facing on the side of Lincoln Center. Miss Shih was very friendly both before and after we did our business. I was friendly without being effusive. When I commented that there must be many empty rooms in the inn, she said that more people were coming. When I said that I hoped this included families, she said “not children.”

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the new quarters for the PRC Mission, located near Lincoln Center. The precise time of the meeting is not indicated. The United States message that Lord delivered is printed as Document 219, Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII.

120. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, March 24, 1972, 6:05-7:05 p.m. 120. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, March 24, 1972, 6:05-7:05 p.m.1

New York, March 24, 1972, 6:05-7:05 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Huang Hua, PRC Ambassador to the United Nations

Shih Yen-hua, Interpreter

Major General Alexander M. Haig, Jr., Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

DATE & TIME: Friday, March 24, 1972 - 6:05 p.m. - 7:05 p.m.

PLACE: New York City

General Haig: There was not too much traffic tonight.

Ambassador Huang: There was not too much. It took about twenty minutes to get here.

General Haig: We got in quickly from the airport. Everything was going the other way.

Ambassador Huang: (Taking out a type-written note) There are two things which we would like to notify General Haig. (Reading from note)

“From 1840 hours on March 18, 1972 to 0935 hours on March 20, 1972, one U.S. warship, the George K. MacKenzie intruded into Chinese territorial waters near Tung Island, 16°, 14', 6” north, 112°, 43', 48” east, off the Hsi Sha Islands, Kwantung Province, China.

On March 19, one U.S. military aircraft further intruded into Chinese air space on five successive occasions: 0738 to 0759 hours, 1500 to 1504 hours, 1510 to 1517 hours, 1546 to 1644 hours, and 1743 to 1802 hours.

The Chinese Government has consistently in public warned the United States against intrusion, on whatever grounds, into the territorial air space or waters by U.S. aircraft or warships. Considering the fact that the above intrusion occurred shortly after President Nixon's visit to China, we are raising this matter privately and asking the U.S. side to guard against similar occasions.”

(Lord check with Miss Shih on the island names and coordinates.)

General Haig: I was not aware of this, and if these kinds of things happen, we are usually notified. In the first place, it is against our policy to do that. We have been especially careful during the period before and since the President's trip. All we can do is investigate and find out what the circumstances were, and we will come back to you with a detailed explanation about what this is about.

Ambassador Huang: As stated in the verbal message, the Chinese side wishes that the U.S. side will guard against such intrusions into Chinese territorial waters and airspace.

General Haig: I will, of course, report this immediately to Dr. Kissinger and we will get the facts. I think the location you mention is off the southern coast of China, an island off the southern coast, and there have been some incidents of armed vessels moving from North Vietnam down to South Vietnam. These are usually the subject of surveillance which could have resulted in the penetration, which, of course, was not authorized. I prefer to get the facts. These are generally the source of the air activity; several attempts have been made in recent months to move contraband into South Vietnam. We will get an answer as soon as we can. I can assure you that penetrations of your territorial waters and air space are not authorized.

Ambassador Huang: As stated in the message, the Chinese Government has consistently issued public warnings against such intrusion on whatever grounds. Now we are raising the matter privately and ask the U.S. side to assure against the occurrence of such incidents.

General Haig: Yes, I understand.

Ambassador Huang: On the one hand we will wait for the results you mentioned. On the other hand, the Chinese side has raised the matter on the basis of facts and has asked the U.S. side to guard against reoccurrences of such situations, because this would be harmful to the Chinese situation.

General Haig: Well, I think the best way to proceed on this … assurances that are verbal mean nothing if actions run counter to verbal assurances. I will have to have an investigation made. We have no facts from which to talk on my side. Until I get the facts I can do little but report the matter. I don't mean to question that the event happened; a similar event occurred when I was in China with respect to a drone aircraft. When I looked into the circumstances—this didn't make it right—it was an accident. While that does not excuse it, it puts the motives into the proper context.

Ambassador Huang: I have noted your statement. In principle, I think the U.S. side must affirm, at least in principle, that you will assure against the reoccurrence of such incidents. As to the incidents themselves, we will wait until you have reported and made an investigation.

General Haig: I have already made clear that if anything like this occurs, it is against our policy. Our policy is very clear. I don't think anyone can categorically say that it cannot occur and never occur, because they might. If they do occur, they are unauthorized and may require disciplinary action or whatever is necessary.

I can assure you that there is no policy that permits intrusion into territorial waters or air space.

Ambassador Huang: As to the authority, what do you mean? Authority from what quarter?

General Haig: There can be no authority to do it. It would be contrary to policy. So there can be noauthority, and if it happened, it either happened against orders or by mistake.

Ambassador Huang: Thank you for your clarification. That is all I want to say.

General Haig: Those are the two items you wished to discuss today?

Ambassador Huang: Yes.

General Haig: I think it would be good to take this opportunity to raise two minor administrative things. I understand you are moving shortly. Could you be sure to have Miss Shih call Mr. Lord and give the new telephone number when you move?

Miss Shih: I have it with me. (She takes out a slip of paper and hands it to Mr. Lord with the address and telephone number of the Lincoln Motor Inn, the new Chinese Mission at the UN.) If there is any change we will let you know. We will probably move early next week.

Ambassador Huang: We will probably move next Monday or Tuesday.

Mr. Lord: You must be happy to do that.

Miss Shih: You should ask for me. We will get a direct line later.

General Haig: The second point is that I talked to Ambassador Bush yesterday, and I understand that you had a discussion with him on security arrangements. I want to emphasize that we stand ready fully, along with the security people - both the local police and the FBI - to help you; and to be sure that the new arrangements are as secure as possible; and also to move to investigate as carefully as we can the circumstances of the very unfortunate incident which occurred earlier.

Ambassador Huang: We appreciate very much your new arrangements for security measures in our new home. And Ambassador Bush has expressed concern about our security. We believe that you will take the necessary measures according to the need of the situation.

With regard to the unfortunate death of Mr. Wang, a staff member of the Chinese Mission, by poison, I talked with Ambassador Phillips as well as Ambassador Bush the other day. We have raised the matter that we hope the U.S. side will make a serious investigation and unveil the plot and have the culprits punished. This was an incident of political murder. We also believe that the U.S. side will give it serious consideration.

As to how to proceed with the investigation and what kind of people to take part, we leave the matter to the U.S. side to decide. Ambassador Bush said he would like to have some people sent to investigate the environment before we move. We are ready to contact him tomorrow to make arrangements.

General Haig: Very good. I am sure the Ambassador knows we were outraged by the incident. We are going to make every facility and technical skills that we have available to ensure that such a thing can never happen again and hopefully trace out the source of this crime.

Ambassador Huang: We appreciate your attention to this incident, and we hope that you will get to the bottom of this matter quickly.

General Haig: Yes. We hope so too. Everyone is giving his fullest attention, and we think there may have to be some discussion with you. Our people did not want to push nor to make themselves a problem. We want to be sure to do everything tactfully and carefully and in accordance with your wishes.

Ambassador Huang: As to how to pursue the investigation and get to the bottom of the case - this is with respect to the U.S. side—we will leave it entirely to you to decide.

Both Ambassador Bush and Ambassador Phillips have expressed the desire that they don't want the news to leak out so that the press makes big news in the papers and makes for big speculation.

General Haig: I think that is important, but enough time has gone by so that I would like to tell Ambassador Bush that if necessary to interrogate your people or look at your facilities at the hotel and ask questions about the habits and the whereabouts of the victim, that he feels free to do it. I think sometimes it is a case of protocol and sensitivity. It is like two men waiting at the door and no one goes through it. We want to get to the bottom of the thing as quickly as possible. We think that is the most important thing.

Ambassador Huang: We understand the desire expressed by Ambassadors Bush and Phillips to avoid newspaper reports about the matter, and this is for the convenience of the investigation and unveiling the plot. So we can agree to it. We will try to do our best to prevent the news from getting to the papers. In my talks with Ambassador Phillips I mentioned the above suggestions.

General Haig: That is very good, and we are all pleased at this way of approaching the matter. It is important that the kind of investigation that is necessary is completed before you move to a new location and new facilities. There is a lot of information on facilities and procedures that may no longer be evident to people.

Ambassador Huang: About the on-the-spot investigation, I will contact Ambassador Bush as soon as possible.

General Haig: Excellent and I will … We would like to be sure that our federal investigative assets are included, so there is no limit of funds or resource skills of a technical nature not being applied because of the local shortages of capability.

Ambassador Huang: Well, we leave it to you to decide.

Just now you mentioned enough time has passed, and I will explain the reason for this,. As soon as we found Mr. Wang dead in his bed, we immediately notified the policeman on duty, as well as Mrs. Loeb's office, and an ambulance came to our hotel, and the policeman came to the spot.

That afternoon on the same day, some detectives were sent to make an on-the-spot investigation. Afterwards we asked the Chief Medical Examiner's Office of New York City to make an autopsy of the body in an attempt to find the reason. (Ambassador Huang corrects the interpreter by saying “cause” instead of “reason.”)

The resulting autopsy failed to show the cause of death. Later, we asked them to carry out a toxicological analysis. That took some time, and later the Chief Medical Examiner of New York City - he got the preliminary results of the toxicological analysis which was acute nicotine poisoning. So we asked them to give us a written report of the conclusions of the analysis as soon as possible. And that also took quite a lot of time, and we pressed them quite a few times.

The next day, after we got the written report, we transmitted this to Ambassador Phillips and affirmed that this was a political incident of murder; we asked the U.S. side to make an investigation and unveil the plot and have the culprits punished.

So some time had passed before we got the results of that, and this was acute nicotine poisoning; and between the preliminary report and the written report some time also passed, but we notified the police at the beginning.

General Haig: Oh yes, It is very difficult because of the local jurisdictions, the local New York police. I was aware that much time had passed before realizing they had foul play. Now they must move for two purposes. One is to make every effort to find the culprits. Then we must be sure as you move into the new location, be sure that there is no possibility of repetition. So we have the two problems.

I have one other thing. I have learned that your ping pong team is coming. We are very pleased and very honored that they are going to come. We want to be very sure that their tour is made as comfortable and enjoyable for them as I am sure it will be for our people to observe it. I am talking here too about security. We want to be absolutely sure that as they travel, there are no incidents that they are not subject to incidents of any kind that would discomfort or embarrass them, or us as your host. We hope to do as well for your team as you did for our team when they visited your country.

To ensure this hospitality we think it would be very helpful … and we have assigned Mr. Scali, who went to China with me and with President Nixon when he was there. The President has asked him to watch over the project and to give his personal attention to assure that this is a most successful tour.

Ambassador Huang: The original plan was for the ping pong team to leave Ottawa and arrive in the U.S. on April 10. And now the plan has changed, and they will leave on April 12 because they will get some rest there.

As to the members of the delegation, originally there were twenty men on the ping pong team, and six correspondents and photographers, and later the team was increased by two. We have already notified Mr. Steenhoven about this.

As to what city the ping pong team will arrive at first, and as to their itinerary, these are things that are still under discussion between us and Mr. Steenhoven. The visit here will last two weeks, and then they will leave for Mexico. This is one of the items in the exchange of sports between the two sides agreed upon during the President's trip to China. As you do, we also hope the visit will be a success.

General Haig: I want to say, as I told the Premier when we took newspapermen with us on our trip, these are independent people as Mr. Steenhoven is and other organizations assisting. We cannot control them with the same kind of precision as government officials. Maybe at times they will be more difficult than we would like. If there is some incident or misunderstanding that gives you a problem, Mr. Scali will be watching from behind the scenes. But we want to make sure that nothing like this occurs. We want you to alert us. Our principle is to do everything you want us to do and to make the visit a success. The working out of the details sometimes is not as smooth as you or we would like. With some patience we will get the job done.

Ambassador Huang: When we have agreed upon the itinerary with Mr. Steenhoven, we will let you know.

General Haig: That is fine. I just want to let you know that we are pleased and will approach this with a most positive attitude, as we did with some of the more troublesome details with the newspapermen in China. (Ambassador Huang smiles.)

I hesitate to raise one last thing; Dr. Kissinger would be very made at me. He is in Acapulco enjoying a vacation. He left me with a newspaperman who calls me every day and is driving me crazy. And this is our friend, Mr. Alsop, who is so anxious to go to China that he will not let me sleep. I would like to tell him to go to Ottawa or write to Ottawa or something. I think he feels no one understands his special problem.

Ambassador Huang: Joseph Alsop?

General Haig: Yes. (Ambassador Huang smiles.)

Ambassador Huang: I can convey the desire of Mr. Alsop to the Information Department of the Foreign Ministry.

General Haig: Anything to help my sleep at night. (Ambassador Huang laughs.)

I am pleased and happy to see the Ambassador again. I haven't had the opportunity to thank you for the wonderful reception in China that was given to me and my party and to tell you what a wonderful visit it was.

Ambassador Huang We also were very pleased that your visit was a comfortable and enjoyable one.

General Haig: It was wonderful.

Ambassador Huang: I know Mrs. Lord (looking toward Mr. Lord), your mother.

Mr. Lord: She mentioned she met you and was very pleased to do so. She thinks that we only met in Peking.

Ambassador Huang: Yes.

(There was some more closing pleasantries as the Ambassador waited for his car and then left.)

[Attachment]

1. The Chinese side has noted the promise conveyed in the April 3, 1972 message from the U.S. side that U.S. ships and aircraft would no longer come within 12 nautical miles of China's Hsi Hsa Islands. At the same time, the Chinese side reiterates that the Hsi Hsa Islands are indisputably Chinese territory, that the width of the Chinese territorial sea stipulated by her is 12 nautical miles, and that it requires all quarters to show full respect for this.

2. Regarding the second point of the April 3, 1972 message, the Chinese side has the following comments:

The spirit with which the Chinese and U.S. sides have conducted relations consists of frankness in the exchange of views without concealing the great differences existing between them and an effort to seek common ground. The Chinese side has always acted in this spirit. The U.S. message reproaching against the Chinese side is unacceptable.

The U.S. side can be under no misapprehension concerning China's principled stand on the question of Indochina. The U.S. side knows full well that the Chinese side firmly supports the peoples of the three Indochina countries in their war against U.S. aggression and for national salvation. The Chinese side is convinced that the Vietnamese 7 point proposal and the 2 points of elaboration have provided a reasonable basis for a peaceful settlement, that any attempt by the U.S. side to intensify the war and exert pressures can only give rise to even stronger resistance by the Indochinese peoples, that the Chinese people sharing weal and woe with the Indochinese peoples will certainly give them strong support, and that the Chinese believe that such actions on the part of the U.S. side can only exacerbate tension/and provide opportunities for others to take advantage of it.

In the light of these conditions one cannot but be surprised that the U.S. side should express difficulty in understanding recent Chinese statements on the Indochina issue. China realizes that the United States of America is in a difficult position on the Indochina issue. However, the U.S. side must understand that this situation was brought about entirely by the U.S. itself. The concentration of U.S. naval and air forces for the wanton bombing of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, the clamors about expanding the war, the indefinite suspension of the Paris talks, etc. decidedly will not help the U.S. gain its objective but can only make the U.S. even more bogged down in an embarrassing position.

The Chinese side wishes to call attention to the following passage in the Shanghai Communique: ”… the two sides agreed that countries, regardless of their social systems, should conduct their relations on the principles of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all states, non-aggression against other states, non-interference in the internal affairs of other states, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence.”

On the question of Indochina, it is the U.S. that has violated these principles and harmed Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos, and not Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos that have harmed the U.S. If the U.S. takes its above statement seriously and truly has a desire to effect a reasonable settlement of the question of Indochina, then it should reexamine its own attitude.

The Chinese side reiterates that it attaches importance to the normalization of Sino-U.S. relations and that it is firm in upholding its principles.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Ellipsis in the source text. The precise location of the meeting is not indicated.

121. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, April 16, 1972, 3-3:35 p.m. 121. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, April 16, 1972, 3-3:35 p.m.1

New York, April 16, 1972, 3-3:35 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Peter W. Rodman, NSC Staff

Shih Yen-hua, PRC Mission to UN

DATE AND TIME: Sunday, April 16, 1972 - 3:00-3:35 p.m.

PLACE:

PRC Mission to UN

New York City

On a day when the New York Times had an 8-column, 2-line headline on the U.S. bombing of the Haiphong area, I was received more warmly than on either of my two previous visits—with three cups of Jasmine tea, plenty of smiles, and 35 minutes of very friendly small talk. This was the first time I had received the tea treatment. My previous visits had been short and perfunctory—opening pleasantries followed by closing pleasantries.

After the first cup of tea and about ten minutes of small talk, at a lull in the conversation, I offered the note and invited her to read it if she wished. She read it, put it back in the envelope, put it down on the table—and poured another cup of tea and resumed the conversation with uninterrupted cordiality.

The conversation covered such stirring subjects as the weather, her visit to the Bronx Zoo, the pandas and their dependence on bamboo shoots, the variety of cultural activity at Lincoln Center, her hometown (Shanghai), my hometown (Boston) and its revolutionary past, the teaching of history in American and Chinese secondary schools, pollution in the Great Lakes and the President's Ottawa agreement, and so forth.

[Attachment]

The U.S. side wishes to bring up to date the negotiating record on Indochina which it outlined to the Chinese side on April 12, 1972.

On April 15, 1972, the North Vietnamese informed the United States they they were calling off the April 24, 1972 private meeting and made their attendance at a future private meeting conditional on a resumption of the public meetings on April 27, 1972.

The President wishes to emphasize the seriousness and urgency with which he views this new development.

For the information of the Chinese side, the United States side is proposing to the North Vietnamese the following compromise: The United States is prepared to state that it will agree to resumption of the plenary sessions on April 27, 1972 if the North Vietnamese attend the private meeting agreed upon for April 24, 1972. The United States would be willing to announce publicly its agreement to a plenary session on April 27, 1972 as soon as the North Vietnamese indicate that they will attend the private meeting on April 24, 1972.

The cavalier behavior of the North Vietnamese whereby for the third time they have cancelled an agreed upon private meeting after planning arrangements have been completed, is inconsistent with the dignity of the U.S. This has forced the President to take certain limited retaliatory measures. A continuation of the North Vietnamese effort to impose a military solution on the U.S. must have very serious consequences.

The President wants to reiterate that his fundamental objective remains a rapid end to the war on a basis just for both sides. His strong preference is for a negotiated solution and it is not by his choice that a resurgence of the conflict takes place.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Attached is the U.S. note, upon which is written: “Handed by Rodman to Miss Shih 3:00 PM.”

122. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, April 18, 1972, 1-1:35 a.m. 122. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, April 18, 1972, 1-1:35 a.m.1

New York, April 18, 1972, 1-1:35 a.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Ambassador Huang Hua, People's Republic of China Mission to UN

Peter W. Rodman, NSC Staff

Miss Shih Yen-hua, Interpreter, PRC Mission to UN

DATE & TIME: Tuesday, April 18, 1972, 1:00-1:35 a.m.

PLACE:

PRC Mission to UN

New York City

Miss Shih apologized for the inconvenience of the hour, once when I arrived and a second time as I left, and the Ambassador did so as well upon greeting me. Neither offered any explanation and I did not ask.

Ambassador Huang Hua welcomed me cordially upstairs, and we sat down for the first of three cups of jasmine tea. Miss Shih promised me green tea next time. After an exchange of other pleasantries, the Ambassador said he had a message for me to deliver to Dr. Kissinger. He explained that it concerned an intrusion by a U.S. military aircraft over Hainan on April 16, that the details were in the note, and that besides the note he had no other message to convey. He handed over the note [attached] and I said I would deliver it to my Government.

He asked a few questions about the mechanics of my getting to New York, whether I had a place to stay, and how I would be getting back. All of this seemed a way of fishing around for when I would be conveying their message back to Washington. Therefore, when I indicated I would be returning in the morning. I also mentioned that I would nevertheless be able to convey the message to Dr. Kissinger immediately.

We then indulged in very friendly small talk for the remainder of the meeting, over the second and third cups of tea. The Ambassador hoped the tea wasn't so strong that it prevented me from sleeping. I said that at that hour I probably would have no trouble getting to sleep. They laughed.

The Ambassador asked about my background, and then about the study of government and international relations at Harvard. He asked if I knew of any good books on world history in the postwar period. I said I was not aware of many, partly because not many scholars these days attempt so ambitious a project, but I mentioned Fontaine's History of the Cold War (which I had not read) and explained who Fontaine was. He said he had heard of a book by Hart. I thought he was referring to Liddell-Hart's History of the Second World War. The Ambassador said yes, that's the one. I hadn't read that one either, but I explained who Liddell-Hart was. The Ambassador mentioned Toynbee, and we talked about historians and philosophers I had studied under Dr. Kissinger (Thucydides, Machiavelli, Rousseau, Kant, Hegel, Marx, Spengler, Toynbee, etc.) The Ambassador asked if I had read Lenin's Imperialism - The Highest Stage of Capitalism I said yes. He said he had found it a “useful analysis” of historical development. I did not comment.

The Ambassador pointed out that the history of China is usually divided into the pre-modern and modern periods at around the 1850's, because that was the beginning of the imperialist depredations. He said he realized that American history didn't really have a pre-modern period.

Miss Shih then mentioned to the Ambassador that I was from Boston. The Ambassador said he had heard of the Boston Tea Party, and I explained the circumstances of that. It couldn't have been Chinese tea that they threw overboard, I added, because Chinese tea is too good to throw out. The Ambassador laughed. Whether it was Chinese or Indian tea, he said, it was British imperialism they were protesting against. I said yes, but in any case Chinese tea was too good to dump overboard.

We finished a few more cups of it, chatted about the ping-pong team tour (I made the mistake of asking how the matches had come out) and its call on the President, and other great events. We shook hands, and I was escorted downstairs and to the door by Miss Shih.

[Attachment]

At 0406 hours, April 16, 1972 (Peking time), one U.S. military aircraft intruded into the airspace west of Changkan County, Hainan Island, Kwangtung, China (point of intrusion: 108°30' E. 19°33' N.), penetrating up to ten kilometers into China. The aircraft was very obviously one of the U.S. planes that bombed Haiphong on the same day. The Chinese Government lodges a protest with the U.S. side against this intrusion, and demands that the U.S. side prevent the recurrence of similar incidents.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Shih Yen-hua was also present. Brackets in the source text. Published from a copy that bears Rodman's initials. Attached is the Chinese note, which bears the handwritten notation: “Amb. Huang handed to Rodman 4/18/72-1:00 AM

123. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, April 19, 1972, 10:05 a.m.-12:52 p.m. 123. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, April 19, 1972, 10:05 a.m.-12:52 p.m.1

Beijing, April 19, 1972, 10:05 a.m.-12:52 p.m.

INFORMATION

May 12, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR:

HENRY A. KISSINGER

FROM: WINSTON LORD

SUBJECT:

Mansfield/Scott Reports on Their China Trip

Attached are the materials that Senators Mansfield and Scott left personally with the President when they saw him earlier this week concerning their China trip: — Tab A - Senator Mansfield's Report

— Tab B - Senator Scott's Report

— Tab C - Memoranda of Conversations with Chou En-lai and CHIAO KUAN-HUA

— Tab D - the Senators' public statement in Hong Kong about their trip

— Tab E - a short piece by Senator Scott, apparently given to Roscoe Drummond

There is nothing in these materials that is particularly sensitive or startling. John Holdridge is staffing this package for the President, but you may wish to leaf through it in advance.

A few quick impressions from a fast reading: — Senator Mansfield's report, which is a genuine effort to be thoughtful, basically confirms the Senator's prior perspective of China, as well as his great concern over our Indochina policy and its possible impact on U.S./PRC relations.

— Senator Scott's report is very thin gruel. One interesting fact is Chou receptivity to the Senator's inquiry on Senator Magnuson and some members of the Commerce Committee visiting China to discuss trade and commerce. Also Chou's generally positive attitude on exchanges in general.

— The reception for the Senators and their party was very cordial and very efficient. This was reconfirmed to me by a debriefing of the trip that I got from Ken Calloway, our contact in State who was personally tremendously impressed by Mao's China.

— The conversations with Chou and Chiao did not reach great philosophic heights. The bulk of the time was spent on Indochina, with the Chinese repeating familiar positions and the Senators displaying their own divergent views.

— Chou specifically ruled out discussions on Taiwan, on the grounds of his confidential exchanges with the President.

— I don't see anything in the attached that bears out Mansfield's emphasis in the Senate yesterday that no further progress in U.S./PRC relations is possible until Indochina is settled. The current situation since the President's speech may be a new factor, but in the context of the Senator's discussions in China in April, the PRC line seems to be similar to the one we have always heard, i.e. that Indochina is the “most urgent” issue for reducing tensions in the Far East.

FIRST MEETING

Peking, China - April 19, 1972

CHINESE DELEGATION

Mr. Chiao Kuan-Hua, Vice-President of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs, Vice-Minister of the Chinese Foreign Ministry

Prof. Chau Pei-yuan, Vice-President of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs, Vice-Chairman of the Revolutionary Committee of Peking University

Mr. Chang Wen-chin, Director of Department of American and Western European and Australasian Affairs of the Foreign Ministry

Mr. Chau Ch'iu-yeh, Secretary-General of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs

Mr. Hu Hung-fan, Council Member of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs

Miss Tang Wen-sheng, Interpreter

Mrs. Tzu Chung-yun, Interpreter

Mr. Chao Chi-hua, Interpreter

Mr. Lian Cheng-pao, Stenographer

AMERICAN DELEGATION

Sen. Mike Mansfield (D., Mont.), Majority Leader, U.S. Senate

Sen. Hugh Scott (R., Penn.), Republican Leader, U.S. Senate

Mr. Frank Valeo, Secretary of U.S. Senate

Mr. Bill Hildenbrand, Admin. Asst. Republican Leader, U.S. Senate

Mr. Norvil Jones, Staff Member - Senate Committee on Foreign Relations

Meeting lasted 2 hrs. 47 mins. (10:05 a.m.-12:52 p.m.)

April 19, 1972

The Vice-Minister opened by saying that contacts between the two peoples has increased since President Nixon's visit. American businessmen (30) will be attending Canton Trade Fair and the pandas have arrived in Washington and President Nixon has received the Chinese ping pong team and understands that they were well received in U.S. cities. The Vice-Minister is very glad to see these visits occurring and feels a frank exchange of views despite differences in two systems is most beneficial. Both leaders (Scott-Mansfield) desire to exchange views on Asia and the world as well as visit various Chinese cities. The Vice-Minister welcomes the opportunity to have a frank discussion of views. 20 years of non-communication has brought many changes in the world that need discussion.

Mansfield - We have been apart too long - China cannot be ignored - China has many problems and the sooner we arrive at communication between the two countries the better both countries will be. Hope the Chinese understand the system of Democratic majority in Congress and a Republican Administration. Will do our best to answer any question and will try and be frank.

Scott - Following President's visit there was almost a miracle. There has existed for 22 years a feeling among the American people for better relations with China, though politicians of both parties were not fully aware of the peoples' desire - the high regard for both peoples was there all the time. Both parties endorse President's visit and visit of the two leaders we would like to say that we laid the groundwork for other visits and exchanges, i.e., House Members, governors, mayors, cultural and athletic. Meetings such as this must not be squandered with small talk but must be meaningful and frank discussions.

Chiao Kuan-Hua - Believe differences exist but believe differences need not obstruct our coming together. We understand the system of two parties, this is natural, we respect your differences between parties—how you resolve them is an internal matter. Mansfield and Scott can give views of their two parties. In our party we cannot say we agree on specific issues but we are all in agreement on direction. Frank exchange of views is not to cover up but to discuss differences openly - debate of differences will be helpful - natural to have differences. I understand President has just indicated a desire to come to China in the spring - you are lucky because you are seeing China in the spring before your President.

Mansfield - Spring is the time for new life, new awakening and better understanding.

Scott - Would you comment on Nixon Doctrine long range aspects despite present unfortunate South Viet-Nam situation?

Chiao Kuan-Hua - As for Nixon Doctrine, have read it and have had it explained. At present, under existing circumstances, not in accord with Nixon Doctrine. Of course, when I say this I am not necessarily in opposition to all President does - agree to his visit - it was good.

Mansfield - As a Democrat I agree with the Nixon Doctrine call for withdrawal of U.S. troops or sizeable reduction from many parts of the world where they now exist. Due in part to vacuum created after great war, U.S. overextended, too far, too wide, too thinly. Bring about gradual withdrawal, facing up to recognition that U.S. has limited number of people and limited resources. Purpose is to make possible more people in all parts of the world to be dependent on themselves and less on others. Nixon Doctrine to take in all the world. (Mentioned NATO.) It means in Asia that the U.S. is basically a Pacific power and not an Asian power - our interest is off the mainland of Asia, not in Asia. Nixon Doctrine cannot be put in action overnight you must recognize we are facing up to political realities and economic realities ot today. Keep in mind we have much to learn compared to China - we are still in swaddling clothes - you have had much time, you have made great contributions. We will develop policies in accord with today, not yesterday. Nixon Doctrine has tremendous possibilities not only to the U.S. but to the rest of the world if the rest of the world will join in that understanding. We recognize the problems but do not have all the solutions - need all countries to join in to find those solutions.

Chiao Kuan-Hua - Believe many points in Mansfield statement we agree with.

Scott - Nixon Doctrine as I view it is directed toward Asia. I agree with Mansfield that what is contemplated but not active is an extension. Mansfield and I disagree with numbers of withdrawal in Europe. Desire never again to be involved in Asia. Our wish to avoid through American power or presence so that Asian countries will not call upon us to get involved. American public will more quickly approve gradual withdrawal. We speak of trends of withdrawal—your view is our commitment should be complete. Is that a fair statement?

Chiao Kuan-Hua - Believe exchange should be frank - we would like to be frank. I would like to enlarge my comments on the Nixon Doctrine. It is nearly 27 years since end of World War II and as for our view since 2nd World War U.S. has been reaching its hands out too far. And in those 27 years both Administrations in America have put forth various doctrines to cope with these situations. Preceding from personal experience - shortly after World War II I met Dulles and at that time it was the Truman Doctrine during Korean War and then Eisenhower put forth his doctrine and then in the 60's the Kennedy Administration also had a strategy to go any place to meet any challenge. After that Johnson and during that Administration there was an expansion of war in Viet-Nam. This question is of great concern to China. Then came Nixon Administration. I would also like to say frankly our attitude has been consistent in listening to their words but watching their deeds. Would not want to dwell on past matters—although no opportunity to have friendly exchanges—many times we met as enemies. For instance, Korea - 1st Geneva Conference - 2nd Geneva Conference—during “54” Geneva Conference American representative refused to shake hands with Premier. While this belongs in the past, it is in our memory. From what the two Senators just said you have common feeling that world has changed and old policies cannot meet these changes. Should be said that we have noted and attached great importance that Nixon has courage to face the fact that old policies cannot meet today's problems. Nixon also expressed desire to improve relations with China. This admittance of a changed world reflects desire to have better relations with China and have found common points in this sense. As for Nixon Doctrine, Scott asked whether we wished speedy and complete withdrawal from this area - of course, that is true - one point of difference between two Senators - once military presence is withdrawn from area that area becomes a vacuum—not so. For instance China - I have discussed with Harriman before in Geneva - he took part in Yalta Conference—what we are having now is not diplomatic but friendly—China partly in sphere of influence of U.S. and partly in sphere of influence of U.S.S.R. but more closely to U.S. But later on could also be said the U.S. had to loosen hold on China and what was the result - we both can see China did not become a vacuum. There are two super-powers—U.S. and Russia—China belongs to neither. That is one example and therefore we do not agree to the idea that once American presence is withdrawn that area becomes a vacuum - that when one super-power leaves the other one must enter. Our philosophies different, therefore there is no need to debate at great length. We also take analysis when we discuss Nixon Doctrine. Another question not ready to debate at great length, American involvement in Viet-Nam. Should be ended and we see unfortunately that this has not happened - am not prepared to debate at length - to ease tensions in Far East basic issue is Viet-Nam and the rest of Indo-China. Also in Shanghai Communique crucial question is Taiwan that obstructs normal relationship but Viet-Nam is still overriding and without settlement there can be no normalization of relationship. We believe there has been change since Nixon took office - big change. It is not to say that we agree that the present way the U.S. is handling Viet-Nam government is the way to bring results - I am not prepared to deal at great length because of differences between two Senators. As for aspect of Nixon Doctrine fixing first objective and then gradual approach to that objective - we cannot say there is not merit to that approach. Question of Taiwan not settled - only found some common points of view on this issue - and if on basis of these common points able to reach solution we Chinese are patient and able to wait a while. General view of Nixon Doctrine is analytical, not one monolithic piece.

Mansfield - Don't intend to engage in debate or make public statement here - will confine to my own country. _You mentioned many doctrines - Truman Doctrine separate from Eisenhower Doctrine—any blame both parties responsible. During Truman became involved in Viet-Nam before “54” Accord. Continued under Eisenhower - maintained military advisor group in Viet-Nam. Continued under Kennedy and 16,000 troops at time of assassination - still advisors. Kennedy statement, “Be prepared to meet any challenge at any time at any place” was spoken in defense of U.S. and not foreign adventures. Under Johnson increased to 548,000 in Viet-Nam. Under Nixon reduced to 85,000 today. As we all know build-up in air and sea power because of increased activity. Deed of reduction fits into desires of President.

Scott - Further reduction by end of this month to 69,000.

Mansfield - Disagree with statement that we met as enemies numerous times - I say only a few times - Korea and Geneva Conference - not even active participant when Dulles refused to shake hands.

Scott - In 1956 at Yugoslavia reception in New Delhi did not agree with American policy but was not permitted to get close enough to Premier Chou to shake his hand.

Mansfield - Also mentioned Guam declaration - Nixon has courage to change - goes to disprove the French saying, “The more things change, the more they remain the same.” Most respectfully disagree that we should withdraw completely from this area - no actual interest in Asian mainland - must maintain peace in Pacific - not alone but hopefully with China and Japan - all have common responsibility. I dislike the word “super-power” - any sovereign nation is a power - completely surprised by your reference to Harriman and dividing China as spheres of influence between U.S. and Russia - never heard of it.

Chiao Kuan-Hua - One misunderstanding: that was my opinion, not that Harriman said this.

Mansfield - Unthinkable position. I was in Chungking in 1945-46 - Russia helping Kuomindong, not Mao or Chou. Is this correct?

Chiao Kuan-Hua - I say again - spirit of discussion - major issues - was reviewing history - if I didn't express my view would not be frank - don't think advisable to have misunderstanding in a friendly discussion - this is friendly. We on our side should proceed frankly and sometimes bluntly and give our views and you yours even bluntly - no help to mutual understanding otherwise.

Scott - This is a new experience for me since Sen. Mansfield is regarded as laconic - I revert to statement regarding present American view toward North Viet-Nam is not way to bring results it is our clear intent to withdraw subject to POW issue particularly. Nixon desires to be known as a peacemaker - time is right towards step to peace in Korea time has come - good offices of PRC and U.S. bringing about withdrawal of forces around the world as well as Korea.

Chiao Kuan-Hua - Maybe we can discuss that next time - mention one point - appreciate Mansfield statement that these talks are off record and not for public consumption. So it is important no misunderstanding - also like to mention I did not want to review past 22 years only went into historical significance in answer to question - relations between two countries has not been good and we should look forward. Like to thank both Senators very much for views although we differ, appreciate opportunity to exchange views. This is our first meeting and we do not know each other very well. Just as Scott said, not engage in small talk but discuss major issues - that is spirit of discussions - have great respect for both Senators and will not try and impose our views on you or your views on us. Am surprised by some of your views but glad to have them. Will meet again tomorrow same time.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1038, Files for the President-China Material, Mansfield/Scott Trip to China [April-May 1972]. The precise location of the meeting is not indicated on the memorandum. Lord transferred the memorandum to Kissinger under a May 12 covering memorandum that was sent for information. No classification marking appears on the memorandum of conversation. The covering memorandum is classified Secret; Sensitive. Attached but not published at Tabs A and B are Mansfield and Scott's reports. Attached at Tab C of the covering memorandum are the memoranda of their conversations with Chou En-lai and Ch'iao Kuan-hua. The text of the first conversation is published herein and is presumably drafted by Norvil Jones, a staff member of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. Texts of the subsequent conversations are published as Documents 124-26. Tabs D and E are attached but not published.

124. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, April 20, 1972, 10:45 a.m.-1:22 p.m. 124. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, April 20, 1972, 10:45 a.m.-1:22 p.m.1

Beijing, April 20, 1972, 10:45 a.m.-1:22 p.m.

SECOND MEETING Peking, China - April 20, 1972

CHINESE DELEGATION

Mr. Chiao Kuan-Hua, Vice-President of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs, Vice-Minister of the Chinese Foreign Ministry

Prof. Chou Pei-yuan, Vice-President of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs, Vice-Chairman of the Revolutionary Committee of Peking University

Mr. Chang Wen-chin, Director of Department of American and Western European and Australasian Affairs of the Foreign Ministry

Mr. Chou Ch'iu-yeh, Secretary-General of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs

Mr. Hu Hung-fan, Council Member of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs

Miss Tang Wen-sheng, Interpreter

Mrs. Tzu Chung-yun, Interpreter

Mr. Chao Chi-hua, Interpreter

Mr. Lian Cheng-pao, Stenographer

AMERICAN DELEGATION

Sen. Mike Mansfield (D., Mont.), Majority Leader, U.S. Senate

Sen. Hugh Scott (R., Penn.), Republican Leader, U.S. Senate

Mr. Frank Valeo, Secretary of U.S. Senate

Mr. Bill Hildenbrand, Admin. Asst. Republican Leader, U.S. Senate

Mr. Norvil Jones, Staff Member - Senate Committee on Foreign Relations

Meeting lasted 2 hrs. 37 mins. (10:45 a.m. - 1:22 p.m.)

Chiao Kuan-Hua - Discussion yesterday very useful - I propose we proceed as follows - like to ask two Senators to give views on international situation - particularly Viet-Nam, Korea and Taiwan. This is frank discussion of views and will reassure we will not take advantage of discussions and not use anything said for propaganda purposes.

Mansfield - Agree - place to express our views is at home.

Scott - Repeats request as to PRC view as to what is the right attitude to bring peace in Viet-Nam, bearing in mind U.S. has withdrawn one-half million men, concern for POWs and our intention to withdraw all forces if peace can be had at the table.

Chiao Kuan-Hua - Position clear as announced in Shanghai Communique.

Mansfield - Opposed to war there - my belief that war will not end on the battlefield but through talks at Paris. The sooner the better. I desire neutralization of all of Indo-China with observance of both Geneva Accords and some sort of external guarantee of future peace - we have no business in that part of the world and we ought to get out.

Chiao Kuan-Hua - Since neutralization is common view of U.S. and PRC, does Mansfield have any further view on Laos and Cambodia?

Mansfield - Enlarge talks at Paris - Sihanouk should represent his country and King Sri Savang Vatthana to represent Laos.

Scott - No personal objection to enlargement of talks at Paris - Laos and Cambodia should have representation from competing groups so that all will be bound.

Chiao Kuan-Hua - As to international guarantees, we had experience with 1954 agreement what could be more solemn - U.S. made a statement it would not disturb the agreement, U.S. later took action. It is because of that we are still studying that question.

Mansfield - U.S. was not a signatory.

Chiao Kuan-Hua - Of course that could involve historical facts I must respectfully disagree with you.

Mansfield - Most respectfully but what is China's attitude on neutralization?

Chiao Kuan-Hua - Concept very general with different meaning we have not opposed concept of neutrality. You may have noticed our two positions (1) all forces should be withdrawn - (2) all questions should be settled within countries by their own peoples and should be free to choose their own system. As to presence in three countries, exclude big country interference and countries following big countries and before this matter is settled is premature to discuss neutralization. And if you ask our position no matter the “54” Accord or “62” Accords, our position has been consistent adherence to these agreements. And it will continue - what the Chinese say counts and they abide by agreements which they sign.

Scott - Renews question of peace in Korea - leading steps by U.S. and PRC toward substitution of peace agreement for armistice, thus facilitating withdrawal of U.S. forces.

Chiao Kuan-liua - Reviews history including Chinese volunteers vs. U.S. forces. If situation in Korea were to develop into situation present in Europe then China need not have withdrawn forces. But we withdrew voluntarily in 1958 but your troops have remained until Nixon took office and withdrew some troops. Here opinions of our two sides disagree - you regard U.S. presence as preserving peace. We believe the presence obstructs chances of peace and increases tension - therefore we believe that from whatever point you look at it the U.S. should withdraw from Korea, as essential to a peace treaty and the coming together of North and South Korea and the reunification of that country. We have noted Richard Nixon statements as to gradual reduction of troops - all have noted in Sino-U.S. Communique - U.S. expressed hope that contacts between two sides should be increased and U.S. has encouraged this. To put it in a nutshell - the withdrawal of that military presence is the one issue we agree upon - nations of the East have long history of unification - if objective is to allow states to exist for long period in state of division we believe that is not possible-2 Chinas - 2 Koreas - 2 Viet-Nams. Erroneous and impossible to continue such a policy. How can a few decades of division affect the long history of unification? If these countries can be left to themselves without foreign intervention, they will effect peaceful unification of their countries - if we thought no hope we would not have advocated peaceful solutions within the countries without foreign intervention.

Mansfield - No disagreement with your analysis - these countries will have to decide own destinies without outside interference, near or far.

Scott - Speaks of very quick reversal of U.S. policy and U.S. sentiment - reversing decade of policy in Viet-Nam - 2 decades in Korea and as to China - with only very small percentage of dissension - U.S. opinion. This change is too great not to be well understood.

Chiao Kuan-Hua - Question of Korea, Viet-Nam and China are different from East and West Germany. Sen. Mansfield may be right that East & West Germany may take longer to settle very happy to note that majority in both U.S. parties have expressed support of Nixon's policies and to note also the developments which have followed.

Mansfield - PRC attitude toward Japan has surprised me - why do you place so much emphasis on Japan as a hindrance to better relations in the Pacific and why you give Japan such emphasis in view of the fact that Japan has become close to greatest trading nation and is now less militarily oriented than in past years?

Chiao Kuan-Hua - First, you are a strong country far from Japan. We are its close neighbor. Japan has in the past committed aggression against both of us, but deeper and greater against us. Impossible for this not to influence us. But we have never taken attitude of revenge against country or people of Japan. About 1955 Japan held an exhibition in Peking. In front of the hall they ran up the flag of Japan. Our officials thought that was normal but popular reaction was very strong they were still sensitive to Japanese aggression since 1890 in spite of this our government worked to persuade our people to differentiate between Japanese people and their government.

Japanese people most apologetic about Japanese aggression - we stress no need for this. In the future we look forward to equality in all our relations - why then do we have concern - you have great influence over Japan and Japan is embarking on a great course of war preparation (Scott notes underlined my notes say military). Lessons to be drawn from World Wars I & II if revenge is followed both countries will suffer and could be counter-productive and offensive to people. We believe present Japanese government policy is not defense but expansion and aggression - not happy to point out that in the joint communique between Sato and Nixon Japan stated that they regarded Taiwan closely related to the defense of Japan (Nov.1969). Obvious that Japan's view is to control Taiwan, Korea and other Asia nations. Our view is a lesson of history that economic outward expansion inevitably leads to military outward expansion during World War II the spearhead was directed first against China and when strong enough against the U.S. We remember that lesson and we believe we should be vigilant.

Scott - Surprised by depth of concern - have met Japanese leaders in all four parties and have found reluctance to increase military budget much beyond 1% of their GNP.

Mansfield - Surely Japan is aware how much stronger China is today - and non-aggressive.

Chiao Kuan-Hua - Reason in that argument - but it must not be forgotten that when Japan attacked U.S. you were strong - like to add that although no relations with present government exist, volume of trade and meetings with Japanese people is quite great. Bulk of China visitors are Japanese - have been happy to have this exchange. Propose we break off here.

________________

(Mike Mansfield suggested a third meeting, but in the end we got a second meeting with Chou En-lai instead, since this suggestion occurred before our first meeting with the Premier.)

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1038, Files for the President-China Material, Mansfield/Scott Trip to China [April-May 1972]. No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Jones. Presumably the meeting was held at the Great Hall of the People.

125. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, April 20, 1972, 8:55-10:40 p.m. 125. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, April 20, 1972, 8:55-10:40 p.m.1

Beijing, April 20, 1972, 8:55-10:40 p.m.

THIRD MEETING

Great Hall of the People

Peking, China - April 20, 1972

CHINESE DELEGATION

Premier Chou En-lai, Premier of the Chinese People's Republic

Prof. Chou Pei-yuan, Vice-President of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs, Vice-Chairman of the Revolutionary Committee of Peking University

Mr. Chiao Kuan-Hua, Vice-President of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs, Vice-Minister of the Chinese Foreign Ministry

Mr. Chang Wen-chin, Director of Department of American and Western European and Australasian Affairs of the Foreign Ministry

Mr. Chou Ch'iu-yeh, Secretary-General of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs

Mr. Chu Chuan-hsian, Deputy-Director of the Protocol Department of the Foreign Ministry

Mr. Hu Hung-fan, Council Member of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs

Mrs. Cheng Chi-hung, Council Member of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs

Miss Tang Wen-sheng, Interpreter

Mrs. Tzu Chung-yun, Interpreter

Mr. Chao Chi-hua, Interpreter

Mr. Lian Cheng-pao, Stenographer

AMERICAN DELEGATION

Sen. Mike Mansfield (D., Mont.), Majority Leader, U.S. Senate

Sen. Hugh Scott (R., Penn.), Republican Leader, U.S. Senate

Mr. Frank Valeo, Secretary of U.S. Senate

Mr. Bill Hildenbrand, Admin. Asst. Republican Leader, U.S. Senate

Mr. Norvil Jones, Staff Member - Senate Committee on Foreign Relations

Meeting lasted 1 hr. 45 mm. (8:55p.m. - 10:40p.m.)

April 20, 1972

Premier - How many more days in Peking?

Mansfield & Scott - Three.

Premier - Do not want to overtire you. Let's set limit for 10:30 p.m. and resume later if we do not finish. What way could tension in Far East be reduced?

Mansfield - Settlement of war in Viet-Nam.

Premier - War in Indo-China.

Mansfield - Correct way to put it - other steps in due time will be taken - question of Taiwan for China to settle. Japan - apprehension understandable - but maybe not as bad. Korea - U.S. not Asian power but Pacific power - Pacific power in Pacific, not on mainland. Equality of all nations and all peoples in the area. Viet-Nam - neutralization. Korea - reunification. Japan-U.S. & USSR - getting together to guarantee neutralization of Indo-China.

Scott - With belief that solution will be pacific and may take a while - the reunification of China without U.S. presence, including Taiwan, can occur after the end of Viet-Nam conflict both Mansfield and I want end. It should be brought to end immediately. Question of POW is of emotional concern to Americans but must Americans want U.S. out totally, air, ground and sea. Should occur at the peace table under mutual conditions. People of Viet-Nam should choose freely their government - my view cannot be resolved without settling POW question. U.S. people agreed to total withdrawal but not without conditions. In Korea - we have withdrawn 1/3 of our forces - total withdrawal should be accomplished with an armistice. Realize your disillusionment with Geneva Accord - maybe a new accord with new nations and those who did not sign before - U.S. has always looked west with depth of concern that at times has been low temperature, but always concerned - Europe is like peaks and valleys - sometimes we have been involved - sometimes not. In the west we are riding a wave toward agreement - the finest time that I have seen in my 71 years but we must do it together.

Premier - It seems then that both Senators agree that to relax tensions the primary question is Viet-Nam. To be more precise Indo-China and the withdrawal of foreign troops. Do you think the escalation by bombing North Viet-Nam can bring this about?

Mansfield - I made a statement in Honolulu that it would prolong the war - both sides should stop acting like little boys with chips on shoulders and sit down at Paris table (repeats Kissinger secret talks.) It appears to me we place too much emphasis on pride - we have lost in this war - through April 1st a total of 302,802 wounded - 45,000 dead, 10,123 dead from non-combat—total 55,802 dead, 358,622 total casualties. It includes 147,631 South Vietnamese dead and Allied forces 4,876 dead and the other side 805,395 casualties—this war in some fashion must be brought to an end - not on battlefield - must be by negotiation. Nobody wins a war anymore - I think the talks should be expanded to include Laos and Cambodia - I do not believe bombing is the way to shorten it but to lengthen it. As Senator Scott has pointed out the stumbling block is the POW question. President Nixon did make a proposal some months ago that if agreement could be reached for a time certain if all POWs were released, he would be willing to consider a proposal.

Scott - Radio Hanoi reports that renewed bombing has unified North Viet-Nam. It has also in my view unified America - I support the President's position. What other course is open to the U.S. pending withdrawal of our remaining forces? Expand talks - there is open invasion (from North) now. First time since Sparta moved against Athens that a country has moved its entire forces out of its country to invade another. The bombing has now been temporarily suspended but if I were Hanoi I would offer to release all POWs - this would have vast effect on public opinion and the President would be aware of it. Do not agree that bombing prolongs war - we may be entering last phase.

(Chou asks for list of POWs.)

Scott & Mansfield - U.S. thinks may be as high as 1,600, but Hanoi admits to 400 to 500.

Premier - Sorry to interrupt but heard from unofficial sources that President has temporarily suspended bombing but Secretary Laird in testimony said it was not correct.

Mansfield & Scott - Not aware of such testimony.

Premier - I heard that in the past the Senate has expressed opinion that a final date for withdrawal could be reached if all POWs were released on final date.

Mansfield - Passed Senate twice - a date certain depending upon release of prisoners.

Premier - By American Armed Forces - do you include Air Force and Navy?

Mansfield - Yes - all in Viet-Nam. No forces in Laos or Cambodia except advisors.

Premier - I have heard that Sen. Mansfield had urged the talks in Paris be expanded to include Prince Sihanouk.

Mansfield - Yes, plus King Sri Savang of Laos.

Premier - As far as betrayal by Lon Nol government, we regard him as not the true representative, whereas you deal with him as the government. Here we can only differ - we feel that Sihanouk speaks not only for persons outside Cambodia but for the large forces in Cambodia. Originally, mostly peasants but now large groups of city dwellers are leaving to support national forces of liberation in the country.

Mansfield - About half of Cambodia now so occupied - but in Laos, where U.S. forces left North Viet-Nam ignored “62” agreement and increased from 15,000 to 70,000 - am I correct?

Premier - Of course,you speak from your information but I would like to call your attention to the facts: China was a signatory to the “62” agreement - at the time the issue was never solved that within the area of the Pathet Lao there was a group of bandit meos who stubbornly and obstinately refused to move from the area assisted by the CIA, then and now, with Thai troops being furnished and supported by CIA.

Mansfield - CIA was not involved at time of “62” agreement CIA came later after N. Viet-Nam did not live up to agreement to withdraw troops.

Premier - This causes us to go back to agreements of 1954 we can go into that later - did CIA meddle in affair to install Lon Nol at the expense of Sihanouk?

Mansfield - No, as far as I can determine, CIA had no part.

Scott - If they had anything to do with it, Sen. Symington would have unearthed it.

Mansfield - When Nixon came into office he reduced forces in Viet-Nam from 549,000 to 85,000 and is continuing. I expect him to continue down to 69,000 May 1st— he will make another announcement prior to May 1st. It is my belief, it is his intention to announce further troop withdrawals - Nixon has reversed trend from in to out.

Premier - Shall we go? I affirm one point - we have noticed that Nixon has indeed made these withdrawals, only that in itself is not enough. Essential issue we must end the war - we must find a way out. We three are in charge of the talks - we are pledged not to interfere in the sovereignty of these countries. We can, of course, give our suggestions to them. The same that the two Senators can offer advice but final action is up to the government. We truly are waiting.

Mansfield - For what?

Premier - For the end of the war in Viet-Nam.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1038, Files for the President-China Material, Mansfield/Scott Trip to China [April-May 1972]. No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Jones. The meeting was held at the Great Hall of the People.

126. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, April 22, 1972, 4:30-8 p.m. 126. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, April 22, 1972, 4:30-8 p.m.1

Beijing, April 22, 1972, 4:30-8 p.m.

April 22, 1972

Premier - I hear you preferred “Red Detachment of Women” to “White-Haired Girl.”

Mansfield - Yes.

Scott - I have seen only “White-Haired Girl”. Mrs. Scott and I liked it and hope that the Premier will send the Shanghai bailet to the U.S. (referring to Premier's suggestion at his dinner that he might send them if Mansfield and Scott liked them.)

Premier - We have heard today from Paris that the two House leaders will visit China June 26th after President Nixon returns from Moscow.

Mansfield - Recognizing your policy of non-intervention in internal affairs of other nations, but is any agreement possible with Hanoi for release of POWs and MIAs on same day of final U.S. withdrawal with no other conditions or quibbles?

Premier - I have already said we cannot say anything on behalf of third party (cites 4th clause 2nd part of Shanghai Communique) - cannot give definite reply - can explain bit on two points of Madame Binh 7-point proposal. (1) U.S. set final date for complete withdrawal all U.S. forces from Indo-China and as gradually withdrawn, gradual release of all POWs - at final day of withdrawal, all POWs released. (2) U.S. withdraw support of Thieu government and establishment of a government of national concord. If any U.S. forces remain, war will continue these conditions are firm and we support them. We are friends of the Indo-Chinese people—we continue to assist them - we do not interfere - we offer advice. On April 16th I said to Charge d'Affaires of Provisional government of South Viet-Nam (Viet Cong) that bombing should cease and Paris talks should resume - they and North Viet-Nam also suggested talks resume on April 27th even if bombing not stopped - was rejected by U.S. We are most disappointed by turn of events. We can only continue to support North Viet-Nam.

Mansfield - Do you think it would help to enlarge talks to include Laos and Cambodia?

Premier - Time is not now - Viet-Nam is not resolved - how can we expand talks? Britain has written Russia to expand Geneva Conference - Russia has not replied - I think you know why we are signatories, too.

Scott - Premier has said what could be more fair than that the bombings cease. I would suggest the invasion also stop, that would be fair - then a cease-fire could result.

Premier - What do you mean by invasion?

Scott - Presence in South Viet-Nam of almost all armed forces of North Viet-Nam.

Premier - Ask if in your opinion invasion from air is not invasion? Would it by your definition not be an invasion to shell from sea? Only shelling by land to sea by your definition our opinion the invasion began with 1964 incident - deem all the various bombings to be invasion and aggression - invasion of U.S. troops in Cambodia also aggression. As for 9th route battle last year, that was a more massive intrusion. If the question is to be solved - stop all war in Indo-China. If we are not to discuss responsibility and just ending the war, then we could go less into history and more into what can be done (reverts to SEATO and also to 2 Geneva Accords) - not a single Chinese soldier in North Viet-Nam - not a single base in North Viet-Nam.

Scott - If we differ on terminology, let us call both of them invasions then, but let us talk about cease-fire and stop killing—what is wrong with that?

Premier - The question of cease-fire is a complicated one and brings us back to negotiations. When we discuss negotiations we discuss assistance to the Thieu government - and if that continues the war will not end. The U.S. turndown of peace talks on April 27th was very disappointing - the war will continue.

Mansfield - I was disappointed by U.S. reaction - I think talks should resume.

Premier - So we shall wait and see because this is already the 22nd. You may have noticed that only after our meeting of April 16th, we published an editorial on April 18th and have said nothing else since.

Mansfield - We are aware of your restraint in that regard. What does Premier think of chances of neutralization of all Indo-China?

Premier - Madame Binh has included this point in 7-point proposal and we support it. Even after U.S. massive bombardment we did not respond with soldiers as we did in Korea - not even in Cambodia, even though a part of their government is in Cambodia and a part in Peking Sihanouk has issued more than 30 appeals to his compatriots - although some of his views are not the same as ours, we do not change one word of his statements.

Mansfield - Are there any ways by which our two countries could bring about a peace settlement in Korea?

Premier - The relations here between our two countries are different from other issues. That is, during 1954 conference a meeting was convened to find a settlement - our efforts failed there - that was Dulles policy. During 1958 we withdrew our volunteers from Korea - at present the two sides meet once a week at the 38th parallel - in the north. The North Korean representative is principal but in the south the U.S. is principal and South Korean deputy - to bring about relaxation of tension Premier Kim Il Sung has proposed peace steps, beginning with Red Cross help in bringing about reunion of families.

Scott - Advances hope for journalistic exchanges (ASNE letter) cultural, athletic, political, scientific, and medical. Members of Congress generally after political conventions - all on a reciprocal basis to be much more meaningful.

Premier - This also covered in Shanghai Communique. Cites effective contacts between Embassies in Paris - U.S. would send important members of government, when necessary, for important discussions - after visit of Senate and House leaders the Congressmen of both houses will be able to come - should both parties come together or separately - we feel they should come together since this is an election year.

Scott - I fully agree and we are amazed at your understanding of the psychology of American politicians in an election year.

Mansfield - I agree - I would like to come alone sometime and spend more time.

Premier - Next year, yes, and Sen. Scott, too.

Scott - Yes, Mr. Premier, after we have shown our own discretion in the way we handle this visit, of course with 535 members, not all will be wise.

Premier - Of course not - one does not expect any overwhelming agreement even within a political party, or within the Communist Party, or for that matter, even within so-called Socialist Parties—we liked Nixon's Kansas speech - he put forward some new ideas, as did Prime Minister Heath in his latest speech - we do not fully agree with either speaker in describing China as a great power - we can potentially, with proper use of our resources, become a strong country but we do not want to become a super-power or exert hegemony over another region, nor should any other power.

Mansfield - I agree - would hope a degree of mutuality to work toward betterment of mankind. Is a nuisance to be a superpower.

Scott - And elements of guilt, I'm afraid.

Premier - Good if all had that awareness.

Scott - Cites conversation with Alf Landon. “Hugh, now you're on the right track.”

Premier - As for exchanges in the scientific field, they are now beginning. Also sports now beginning and cultural field such as your Philadelphia Orchestra or Pittsburg Symphony. As to journalists, somewhat more difficult - we are considering establishment of journalists abroad - perhaps they should: come by name and not agency - and they need not be sympathetic to us, if not that is good, too. As to ASNE, which you discussed, Chou Pei-yuan will look at the correspondence which I have not seen and it would be good to have them. (Scott hands Explorer Club and Mrs. Flynn's letter to Dr. Chou Pei-yuan at Premier's suggestion. Mrs. Flynn's letter later given to Minister CHIAO KUAN-HUA.) We will give consideration to all applications received but we still must do a lot of preparation to receive visitors, and expand our facilities for tourists so we cannot satisfy all requests by large numbers as now developing.

Mansfield - Of mutual interest to both our countries is Japan. The 1969 Nixon-Sato communique does refer to Taiwan as “of interest” to Japan, but that was '69. Our country not interested in any expanded Japan or a return to the old Japan. Would you discuss your relations with Japan and your views regarding the future of the three countries in the Pacific area?

Premier - Of course we must look at changes within a country. It was after “69” communique and drawing up of 4th defensive plan for Japan we saw military expansion to keep pace with economic expansion. Since liberation, contacts between our two peoples has never ceased - we also see that it would not be easy to lead Japanese people on road to militarism, since first victims would be Japanese people. So we are pointing out the dangers at the very beginning. Many facts and public opinion can show this trend - many films advocating revival of militarism and in suicide of Okiro.

Mansfield - He belonged to a tiny group.

Premier - Yes, but he could shake the country for a time. We see a reversion to concept of Emperor as supreme power when we point this out to our Japanese friends they agree-not only members of opposition but also of ruling party. Does this obstruct us from improving relations no difficulty on our side—Japan the problem—Japan government and Taiwan government are too close.

Mansfield - But Shanghai Communique recognized only one China.

Premier - That's precisely it - Japan government felt passed over - perhaps your visit, too, “passed over Japan” (a pun relating to our flying across Okinawa). Sato's Cabinet about to be reshuffled and we hope for more open-minded views. If U.S. and China can improve relations, why not China and Japan? On basis of 5 principles of peaceful co-existence.

Scott - Relates visit of Scott-Muskie delegation to Japan in January 1970 - Japanese fears that China and U.S. will have less trouble improving relations than will Japan and China. A sentiment found in all four parties.

Premier - Seems to me that perhaps because of their previous aggressions against China over half a century they lack self-confidence. During past 22 years major visitors to China have been Japanese - greatest amount of trade is with Japanese - all three parties of opposition have visited China and have urged restoration of diplomatic relations. So many former Prime Ministers and Foreign Ministers have come that I joke with them, “You come only after you are out of office. Why didn't you have the courage to come earlier?” There is Foreign Minister of “another country” that is most opposed to improved relations between Japan and China.

Mansfield - A neighbor?

Premier - A neighbor who has placed a million men along our borders - frontiers and territory are historical matters but historical matters that must be solved - that is why when Kosygin came here in 1969 we signed a statement that these problems should not be allowed to increase tensions. In spite of unequal and imposed treaties on China, we assert no territorial claims because at times of treaties neither Russian nor Chinese people were in control of their governments. We said we could go to old maps to solve disputes in spirit of mutual negotiations and mutual understandings. Our other border questions have all been settled on that basis Burma, Mongolia and others - so we propose conclusion of a provisional agreement conducive to settlement of the border question - three points—(1) maintain status quo of border; (2) avoid armed conflict, and (3) disengage military forces in disputed areas. Then negotiations could proceed on Vice Ministerial level at Peking. They have met and are continuing but still agreements on provisional agreement have not yet been made - and at same time Soviet is putting 8 divisions (300,000 men) along borders of Mongolia - what threat do we pose to Mongolia? At UN Mr. Chiao posed the question - Malek wouldn't answer, so the Mongolian delegate felt compelled to state that troops were there under a treaty - but we can wait. We waited through 16 years of negotiations with you until President Nixon came here.

Scott - Sen. Magnuson asked us to raise question regarding trade. Many persons interested in trade and would like Premier's reaction.

Premier - We have already invited 30 U.S. businessmen and we will await results of these visits.

Mansfield - Mentioned Magnuson and Inouye - can they visit China?

Scott - Also Cotton and Pearson.

Premier - If friends from Senate Commerce Committee would like to come, will you draw up a joint list when you get back so that we can consider their request - both for economic and comprehensive discussion. You could contact our Institute of Foreign Affairs or the Embassy in Paris. I am interested in what both of you have told us of them - would like to turn now to Cambodia. Since head of State in Cambodia is in Korea (Sihanouk) I regret that it is not advisable for you (Mansfield) to meet with the Prime Minister of Cambodia in the absence of the head of State. They believe (Sihanouk) that coup by Lan Nol was staged with foreign support believe present war against Lan Nol is a just war and that foreign forces that aid Lan Nol are committing aggression—U.S.-Viet-Nam-Thai. In the past, when S. Vietnamese were wounded in Cambodia, they were allowed time to recover. But now the war has merged the three countries into one battlefield - this can be seen from fact that puppet forces go in and out, U.S. troops have been there, air and naval forces have been used. So they think it a matter of course for the North Vietnamese troops to come to their assistance at this time. Once the war ends, all troops from any foreign countries should withdraw leaving integrity and original borders maintained. I am convinced, and believe, that this view of Prince Sihanouk is correct.

Mansfield - I have the highest respect for him - he knows it - the U.S. Government knows it - I understand Cambodian protocol - the message from you as to his position will be conveyed to the U.S. Government. I don't think Lan Nol represents the Cambodian people - I think Sihanouk does.

Premier - The position of Sihanouk is not to recognize the Lan Nol government.

Mansfield - Sihanouk will have to decide the future of his own country.

Premier - Very unfortunate that the U.S., U.S.S.R. and Britain also recognize Lan Nol, although we do not. This emotionally insults Sihanouk.

Mansfield - Would like to conclude on subject of U.N. but one question of central point of difference: Taiwan. What are your feelings as to a timetable of withdrawal and how do you expect to reclaim Taiwan? It is a difficult question but must be faced.

Premier - No question - we also discussed that with President Nixon. And on this point I can only stand by our agreement that we should not discuss any issue we talked about - I can only say two sentences: (1) In any case, Taiwan will eventually return to the embrace of its motherland, and (2) in any case, the U.S. will finally withdraw all its troops from Taiwan.

Mansfield - 8,000 of 10,000 troops tied into Viet-Nam—in many cases, fleet in Taiwan Straits does not include U.S. vessels - at other times, two U.S. destroyers. Both Chairman Mao and Chiang Kai-shek have always said there is only one China—Chiang Kai-shek also said Tibet was a part of China, also the rectification of the McMahon line with India.

Premier - Something else I would like to point out - with regard to relaxation of tensions, the key issue is still the war in Indo-China—all other issues—Japan-Taiwan-Korea would be easy to resolve if war was ended.

Mansfield - All questions regarding prisoners in China raised and referred to Mr. Chiao request consideration of their cases and assurances as to their health.

Scott - This is also my earnest request.

Premier - I agree to conveyance to our Institute of Foreign Affairs. These matters must be dealt with separately Downey's term has been cut to a remainder of 5 years - his Mother is quite old and would like to see him - Nixon mentioned it. We're considering it—other two pilots a different matter. Journalist (Salzberger) easier - we'll try. When you go back to report to your President, is your duty and you must report to the Senate - I hope you will not make it official - I would hope that you would stress informal nature of discussions and that you would make clear that these were not diplomatic discussions.

Scott - Yes, informal, but would like to report anecdotes and general nature of our talks and topics.

Premier - Yes, to add color, would hope you would not print report.

Mansfield - We may have to print - and we'd like to - it could only lead to better understanding and relationships between our two countries.

Premier - But we hope not to involve other countries.

Mansfield & Scott - Express great thanks for inviting us and for being so frank.

Premier - Although there is a question of Taiwan, and India occupies 90,000 square kilometers of Chinese territory, we are not an aggressive country and I'm glad both Senators noted that. We want to build up our own country - our country is big enough, our land is vast enough, our people are many so we have enough to do in our own country. I recommend you read Neville Maxwell's book, “India's China War”—very fair book. I want to thank you for the warm welcome given in your country to our table tennis team and please convey the friendship of the Chinese people to the American people.

Scott & Mansfield - We will be delighted to do so, and thank you.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 1038, Files for the President-China Material, Mansfield/Scott Trip to China [April-May 1972]. No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Jones. The meeting was held at the Great Hall of the People.

127. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, April 26, 1972, 5:50-6:30 p.m. 127. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, April 26, 1972, 5:50-6:30 p.m.1

New York, April 26, 1972, 5:50-6:30 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Ambassador Huang Hua, PRC Ambassador to UN

Miss Shih Yen-hua, PRC Interpreter

Major General Alexander M. Haig, Jr., Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Peter W. Rodman, NSC Staff

DATE & TIME: Wednesday, April 26, 1972, 5:50-6:30 p.m.

PLACE: New York City

The purpose of the meeting was to give the PRC an initial report of Dr. Kissinger's discussions in Moscow from April 20-24, as Dr. Kissinger had promised the Ambassador at their meeting on April 18. This meeting was also an occasion to reply to the PRC note of April 18 which complained of a new intrusion into PRC territorial waters near Hainan Island.

General Haig: There was not much traffic in the city today.

Ambassador Huang: We came here at a very fast speed.

General Haig: I have something for the Ambassador and I understand you have something for us. Why don't you begin and give us what you have. I'll be prepared to discuss at some length Dr. Kissinger's visit to Moscow.

Ambassador Huang: I have a very short message, so why don't we go first.

General Haig: Dr. Kissinger is very disappointed that he could not come here, but the President is giving a speech tonight and going to Florida, and he has to go with him. But he hopes to see you next week and give a more detailed report, but I can give you quite a bit this evening.

Ambassador Huang: He is very busy. We admire his energy. [laughter] My message is as follows [reads from note:] “The Chinese side has learned the content of Dr. Kissinger's talk of April 18 and thanks him for the information he has made available to the Chinese side. With regard to the time of Dr. Kissinger's visit to China in June, we would prefer June 21-25 as the tentative date.”

That is all.

General Haig: Very good. Dr. Kissinger wanted me to give you a preliminary and prompt, very prompt, report on his recent visit to Moscow.

Mr. Lord is also working on the President's speech, so I brought Mr. Rodman along, who sat in on the meetings, all the meetings, in Moscow.

Ambassador Huang: Good.

General Haig: Dr. Kissinger hopes to visit with you here, perhaps at the end of next week. This difficulty we had this week leads me to ask whether or not if something ever develops of an emergency nature and needed a meeting between you and Dr. Kissinger, would you perhaps be willing to travel sometimes to Washington - (we could provide transportation, etc.), if perhaps it was impossible for Dr. Kissinger to leave the President?

Ambassador Huang: I will have to get instructions from my Government on this point.

General Haig: We would do this in case of an emergency, if we needed a meeting promptly but for some reason Dr. Kissinger couldn't come. We would provide secure means for you to come, and so forth—if this is convenient for you.

As for the first order of business, I would like to reply to your message for Dr. Kissinger of April 18. You recall we said we would look into the incident of the intrusion over Hainan Island,

We have confirmed that there was an intrusion by a U.S. radio relay aircraft which inadvertently approached Hainan at the time you indicated. At the time of the incident, our radar picked up this fact as the aircraft was approaching 12 miles from the territorial boundary and we ordered it away immediately. We have forcefully reiterated our orders that U.S. aircraft must stay outside of Chinese territorial limits. We regret this accidental intrusion, and we are doing our very best to prevent any recurrence in the future.

Now, if I may, I would like to talk in some detail of Dr. Kissinger's visit to Moscow and some of the occurrences there.

You will recall, as he told you last time, he had been invited there to review preparations for the U.S.-Soviet Summit as well as the overall international situation. Despite our position and policy of turning down such invitations, on this occasion the President approved the visit because of the international situation, which had become somewhat more tense. Dr. Kissinger asked me to emphasize that the general principles that we have outlined to Premier Chou En-ial remained in full force during this visit. Nothing was discussed or agreed upon in any way which could harm the interests of the People's Republic of China.

The main emphasis was on preparations for the Summit and on bilateral matters. Dr. Kissinger outlined our position on Vietnam as he has outlined it to your Government.

First, on the Summit, the agenda for the May meeting was discussed, covering the topics which Dr. Kissinger has outlined to you earlier. Progress was made on certain items. One very definite impression was that the Soviet leaders are very anxious that the Summit go on and that it include as many bilateral agreements as can be negotiated. For our part, we intend to go forward with the Summit, assuming the international situation does not deteriorate between now and the scheduled date. We will ourselves conclude whatever bilateral agreements we determine to be in our national interest during this meeting.

This information is very sensitive. We would hope you would confine it to yourself and Premier Chou and his closest advisers. There were significant discussions on strategic arms limitation, what we call SALT. You recall that Dr. Kissinger mentioned there were two remaining issues in the formal negotiations: (1) anti-ballistic missile limitation, and (2) the question of a freeze on submarine-launched missiles. Regarding ABM, it was a question of the number of sites for each side, and on SLBMs, it was a question of whether there should be a freeze on submarinelaunched missiles.

[Miss Shih and the Ambassador then talked back and forth about the translation of some of the terms. The word “sites” (in English) was heard. General Haig volunteered the spelling of it and offered to be of help if Miss Shih didn't get it all clearly.]

On both these questions, there was significant progress, and we believe a sound SALT agreement is possible and could be concluded by or during the May trip. There are many details yet to be worked out, but it could be easily completed by the Summit.

I wish to emphasize again how sensitive this is. Because our own bureaucracy knows nothing of this either.

There were also generally inconclusive discussions on European issues. The local election in West Germany, the defection of a member of the ruling coalition, and the vote which comes tomorrow [the confidence vote in the Bundestag] were all discussed. It is obvious that the Soviets are concerned that these events in West Germany could jeopardize ratification of the Treaties and with them the overall Soviet policy in Europe.

The Soviets also expressed great interest in increased trade, with better long-term credit arrangements with the U.S. Government. Dr. Kissinger expressed interest in this and support for this, providing that the international climate was conducive to these kinds of events.

There was some discussion of other bilateral issues, which Dr. Kissinger mentioned to you in his last meeting, specifically space cooperation, cooperation on problems of the environment. Certainly there is a great prospect of progress in both these areas, and we would forsee the creation of joint commissions to carry forward the work in these areas.

Finally, there was some preliminary drafting of the joint communique for the visit. There was not enough time to finish everything.

On Vietnam, Dr. Kissinger had some very lengthy discussions with Soviet leaders. He presented the Presidents position to them—which he has also outlined to you. This presentation included the following major points: — The President is determined to bring the conflict to an honorable conclusion, hopefully by negotiations but if that is not possible by a very resolute pursuit of his unilateral course. This will be done at whatever the risk to other U.S. policies. [The Ambassador was impassive but somber through all of this.]

— The U.S. side did not seek an escalation to the fighting. Our every effort has been just to the contrary—to wind down the war, end our involvement, and seek a negotiated settlement.

— On the other hand, North Vietnam's response to these efforts was to refuse to negotiate, and ultimately to launch a massive attack across the Demilitarized Zone and elsewhere in South Vietnam.

— For our part, we have met this offensive with certain actions. We shall maintain this response—and perhaps other responses—until the North Vietnamese offensive is halted.

— Despite the continuation of the enemy's offensive, or Hanoi's offensive, we are resuming the plenary sessions of the Paris Conference this Thursday, because the North Vietnamese have been so insistent, and we are willing to hear what they have to say. We will not on this occasion just listen to the sterile propaganda which has characterized past plenary sessions. As far as we are concerned, the first order of business is the discussion of measures designed to stop the North Vietnamese invasion. This in turn would enable us to deescalate our operations. Then we could both get on to the business of negotiating a settlement.

— Specifically, our position is that North Vietnam must withdraw those divisions which it sent into South Vietnam since March 30, They should return to the situation as it existed then and restore the 1968 understandings. Then there should be a genuine negotiation for a peace settlement.

— The President remains ready to be generous in the terms for a negotiated settlement. The U.S. proposals are not made on a take-it-or-leave-it basis.

We seek a settlement fair to both sides, and therefore one that will last. But the President will not negotiate at the point of a gun. He will not allow North Vietnam to try to embarrass us. He views their offensive as a challenge not just to South Vietnam but to the institution of the American Presidency and to the conduct of U.S. foreign policy.

You will recall in discussions with Dr. Kissinger that he pointed out we had been going back and forth with Hanoi on the scheduling of private meetings. Our willingness to go to Thursday's Plenary on the 27th of April was on the condition that a private meeting between Dr. Kissinger and Mr. Le Duc Tho would take place no later than May 2. Now, the North Vietnamese have accepted this, and Dr. Kissinger will travel secretly to Paris on May 2. At that meeting, we will press for an end of the invasion, a return to the March 30 position, and for a reestablishment of the 1968 understanding with respect to the DMZ. If the North Vietnamese will not talk seriously at that private meeting, they certainly will not talk seriously at the Plenary session. Thus if the May 2 meeting does not show real progress, we will draw the appropriate conclusions, and act on them - at the conference table, and on the battlefield.

Dr. Kissinger added to me before I left that it was very interesting to note that the Soviet side did not share our view of who was responsible for the North Vietnamese offensive.

That in general is what was covered at the meetings, and it remains to be seen what will come from those discussions.

Now, if I may, I would like to comment on one or two other topics.

Ambassador Huang: Please.

General Haig: First, on the whole, we were very pleased with the visit of your table-tennis team, and on the whole they received a very warm welcome from the American people. The President asked me to convey to you that he was especially pleased to have the opportunity to meet them, and he was impressed with their demeanor and appearance in the White House. I know there must have been some things that didn't go as well as we both liked, but on the whole, it was a very successful visit.

We will keep you informed as we move towards the Soviet Summit. Dr. Kissinger very much looks forward to giving his personal report to the Premier on his visit in June. I will be back shortly with confirmation on the dates. We would like again to recall that we would still adhere to the general principle that we are prepared to conclude with the People's Republic of China similar agreements to any that we might work out with the Soviet Union.

I think that concludes all the business of the day, Mr. Ambassador,

If you have anything I can bring back to Dr, Kissinger, I will see him before he goes with the President to Florida tonight.

Ambassador Huang: I have nothing more to discuss with you and I have no other messages to convey. I will promptly report to Premier Chou En-lai what you have said just now. I will also appreciate thanking Dr. Kissinger for the ping-pong team's visit here.

General Haig: I hope spring in New York … the weather will be more suitable—much like the weather in Hangchow—and that you are comfortable in your new quarters.

Ambassador Huang: Thank you very much. Our new quarters are very comfortable. It is much quieter than the Roosevelt. [laughter]

General Haig: When the weather is good, the Ambassador should take a trip up the Hudson, it is very beautiful,

Ambassador Huang: We are very pleased to live in our new quarters. Because now we can change the food to suit our taste.

General Haig: You have your own kitchen now! I wish events would permit me to visit you for dinner, because I have never had better food than in China.

Ambassador Huang: Maybe next time when Dr. Kissinger goes to China you can go with him.

General Haig: No, when he goes, I have to stay.

Ambassador Huang: Ah. Well, thank you, General.

[The meeting was formally ended, and their car was summoned. The conversation started up again, however.]

Ambassador Huang: There will be a no-confidence vote tomorrow in Germany.

General Haig: They will not vote no-confidence, but there will be a vote on the question of no confidence.

Ambassador Huang: What will happen?

General Haig: It may affect his ability to deliver on the German-Soviet Treaties,

Ambassador Huang: What will the differences of the votes be?

General Haig: It is hard to speculate. One or two votes will decide. There have been shifts in loyalties in the coalition.

Ambassador Huang: It appears that the Soviet Union and other European countries are very concerned about it.

General Haig: Yes. The cause of the vote is economic policies, but the real cause is much more fundamental.

Is your trip here from your new quarters shorter than from the Hotel?

Ambassador Huang: Longer.

General Haig: We will rush back tonight and the President will give a speech at 10 o'clock on television. Then we send Henry to Florida to get some sun.

Ambassador Huang: There was an article by James Reston today.

General Haig: Yes! I don't know that that will make Dr. Kissinger too popular.

Ambassador Huang: James Reston has a very high appraisal of Dr. Kissinger.

General Haig: We consider James Reston the guardian angel of our opposition party. There are some Republicans who say that if you have him for a friend, you need no enemies. [laughter]

[Their car arrived, and after hand-shakes all around, the Ambassador and Miss Shih departed.]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The precise location of the conversation is not indicated. Brackets in the source text. Presumably drafted by Rodman. Shi Yen-hau was also present. See Document 122 for discussion of the April 18 Chinese note.

128. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, May 8, 1972, 8:45-9:10 p.m. 128. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, May 8, 1972, 8:45-9:10 p.m.1

New York, May 8, 1972, 8:45-9:10 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Ambassador Huang Hua, PRC Ambassador to United Nations

Miss Shih Yen-hua, Interpreter

Peter W. Rodman, NSC Staff

DATE & TIME: Monday, May 8, 1972 - 8:45-9:10 p.m.

PLACE: PRC Mission to the UN, New York City

When I arrived at 8:45 p.m., Miss Shih explained that the Ambassador could not make it back from his dinner and reception until 9:00 p.m. It was not completely under his control, she said (apparently he was a principal guest), and she apologized. She invited me to sit down for some tea. It was jasmine. She apologized for that too, since, as she recalled it, the Ambassador had promised me green tea this time.

I explained that I was carrying a letter from the President to Prime Minister Chou En-lai [attached] which we wanted to deliver in advance of the President's speech at 9:00 p.m. I handed over the letter to her, and agreed to wait for the Ambassador. She did not read it. We chatted pleasantly about where she had learned English (in Peking) and about the difference between British and American accents.

Ambassador Huang Hua arrived a little before 9:00 p.m. I told him I had a letter and that we had wanted to deliver it before the President's speech.

He sat down to read it and offered me a second cup of tea in the meantime. He read it slowly, almost laboriously, with a somber expression on his face. When he finished, he put it back in the envelopes and said he would see that it was conveyed to the Prime Minister. He asked if I had any additional message to convey, and I said I did not.

He then brought up the fact that on an earlier occasion we had asked him whether it would be possible for him to go to Washington to meet with Dr. Kissinger in case Dr. Kissinger would be unable to come to New York.

“At present,” the Ambassador said,”It is not convenient for us to go to Washington. We understand that Dr. Kissinger is very busy with his work. In case he is busy and cannot come here, he can send someone he trusts to convey the message.” This was not quite responsive to our proposal, which referred to emergencies when a meeting would be necessary. But I said simply that I would report it to Dr. Kissinger.

It was my impression that his reply was simply carrying out prior instructions, that it was the reason why Miss Shih had encouraged me to wait for him, and that it was not induced by the content of the President's letter.

There was additional pleasant small talk while we finished our tea. The pandas came up again, and he also asked how I was getting back. He asked, interestingly, how long Dr. Kissinger had been back from Paris. I explained that Dr. Kissinger had been in Paris on Tuesday, May 2. He asked when the President was speaking, and I said 9:00 o'clock. (It was already about 9:10.)

He offered me a third cup of tea. I thanked him, but politely declined because (as I had explained earlier) I had to catch the 10:00 plane. After handshakes and smiles all around, Miss Shih accompanied me downstairs.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Brackets in the source text. Attached but not published is Nixon's letter to Chou En-lai

129. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, May 16, 1972, 6:10-7:10 p.m. 129. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, May 16, 1972, 6:10-7:10 p.m.1

New York, May 16, 1972, 6:10-7:10 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord

Huang Hua, PRC Ambassador to the United Nations

Shih Yen-hua, Interpreter

DATE & TIME: Tuesday, May 16, 1972, 6:10-7:10 p.m.

PLACE: New York City

Dr. Kissinger : I am sorry we are late. There was good deal of traffic. I read about the Ambassador in cables all the time. I have brought along a red folder with me in your honor.

I wanted to see the Ambassador to tell him about our plans for the next few weeks, for the information of the Chinese Government. It now appears that the President's visit to Moscow is going forward, and in the spirit of previous exchanges I wanted to keep you informed about the present stage of these discussions.

First, a technical matter, I will be gone from May 20 to June 2. In my absence General Haig will have full authority to receive messages and you should get in touch with him. Mr. Lord will be with me.

Mr. Lord: (To Mrs. Shih) You can call Mr. Howe at the same extension numbers I gave you for me.

Dr. Kissinger : He (Mr. Howe) has been in China twice with us.

I have told you before that we understand the Soviet intention at this Summit meeting is to have the maximum number of agreements with us, and therefore they have delayed a number of negotiations so that they can be announced in Moscow. I have prepared a paper which lists the agreements that are likely to be concluded and the major content of these agreements. Perhaps rather than reading it to you, it would be simpler if I gave it to you. (He hands over a memorandum, attached at Tab A) This is for … this is, of course, very confidential. (The Ambassador and Mrs. Shih skimmed it quickly.)

These are the major provisions of the agreements. They can change slightly, but this is how it now looks.

In addition, the Soviet Union has proposed to us two other agreements which we are in the process of discussing and on which we therefore cannot give you the outline, but I can summarize them for you.

They would like us to state some common principles affecting the United States and the Soviet Union, somewhat similar to the principles which we signed affecting the People's Republic and the United States. These are still in the process of being discussed, but I want to summarize them for the Prime Minister. (He then reads from the document attached at Tab B.)

The first affirms the principle of peaceful coexistence.

The second deals with the need to exercise restraint on bilateral relations and to conduct negotiations on the basis of reciprocity.

The third will deal with the responsibility of both countries to prevent conflicts and tensions in the world generally and will state that no country should be subject to external influence or outside pressures.

The fourth will deal with the desirability of placing US-Soviet relations on a firmer juridical basis.

The fifth will express the need, the desire of continuing the exchange of views at all levels.

The sixth will affirm the interests of both sides to continue efforts to limiting armaments.

This is assuming we can find correct formulations, and I would rather deal with your Vice Foreign Minister. Also Mr. Chang is a master in English. He knows it better than we do. (The Chinese side then indicated that they thought there was some confusion between Mr. Chiao and Mr. Chang.) I mean the Mr. Chang who just now was promoted. In fact, I don't know whether it is appropriate but let me convey my best wishes to my friends from previous visits about their promotions which I read in the newspapers.

The seventh, eight, ninth, and tenth points will deal with these agreements that are announced here.

The eleventh, which we are insisting on very much, renounces any special rights for either side and says that neither recognizes special claims for the other. And it also stipulates that US-Soviet relations are not directed against any other country.

The twelfth point states that nothing agreed to here affects previous understandings, agreements or obligations.

Incidentally, I want to point out that the People's Republic is the only government we have informed of these matters. We have not informed any of our allies.

In addition, the Soviet Union has proposed to us that we sign an agreement that we have renounced the use of nuclear weapons against each other. We have responded that we cannot consider an agreement that implies the right to use nuclear weapons against other countries. And this will probably prove to be an insoluble problem. At any rate, if we do anything with respect to nuclear weapons, it will be a general formulation applying to all countries and not just the Soviet Union, a general attitude toward nuclear weapons rather than specific obligations.

The other subjects that are likely to be discussed concern European matters, specifically mutual force reductions, and the Soviet proposal of a European Security Conference.

Undoubtedly the issue of Indochina will be raised. On Indochina we will take the position which you know. It will be exactly as we told you.

Now we want to reaffirm the enormous importance we place in our relationship with the People's Republic. We will not knowingly sign agreements directed against your interests. And we are prepared to sign any agreement with you that we have signed or will sign with the Soviet Union, adapted of course to our special conditions. Also, if the People's Republic expressed any concern with respect to any aspect, that would be taken with extreme seriousness by us. There should be no reluctance on your part to do that.

One other matter, with respect to Indochina, which we simply want to inform you of. We have had proposals from various sources to resume plenary sessions. We see no sense in plenary sessions unless there is some prospect for a useful discussion. We have therefore proposed a private meeting next Sunday in Paris to see whether any basis exists for making rapid progress. And we are prepared to be forthcoming and flexible.

We understand your reluctance to become involved in this issue, but we wanted to express one general view. We have no interest in humiliating North Vietnam. If North Vietnam—I have often felt—dealt with us with 30 percent of the wisdom of your Prime Minister, we would settle matters very quickly. The basis of our discussions last July and afterwards were that we managed to make a distinction between what could be done immediately and what has to be left to history. If the Democratic Republic of Vietnam could ever bring itself to make that distinction we could settle this matter very quickly, and I believe satisfactorily to all sides.

I wanted to make one other comment which rose out of a statement I read in the newspaper today which may not be accurately reported, in which your Prime Minister seemed to think that our recent actions in Vietnam were not consistent with the Shanghai communique, and that there was some concern about whether we really keep our promises.

We feel that in our relationship with the People's Republic we have been very meticulous to keep every promise we have made, whether it is formal or informal, and my presence here is an indication of that. We have told you on at least six occasions since our visit to Peking that if military measures were used against us, we would have to respond strongly. Out of respect for the Prime Minister, we took no actions in March while the offensive was being prepared. And we were given no choice by an offensive that was continuing even while we were attempting to start negotiations.

But we have stated our point of view often, and I simply want to reiterate that every promise that we have made to the People's Republic will be kept strictly, both in letter and in the spirit of our understanding.

I have only two more matters if the Ambassador can be patient with me. First is to tell you that Senators Mansfield and Scott returned from China with all the enthusiasm that other visitors have shown. And they speak of their visit now with the slight nostalgia that we all feel that have been exposed to Chinese hospitality. They have submitted a very positive report to the President.

The other point I wanted to mention, since I will be gone for two weeks, I will contact you, of course, immediately upon our return from the Soviet Union to speak to you; it will be around June 3.

But as you know, we had a tentative plan for me to visit the People's Republic on June 21. And I wanted to suggest that we might announce that around June 13. There is a text which we are proposing, but the new assistant minister (Mr. Chang) will no doubt have a much more eloquent version. (He hands over the text at Tab C.) There is no need for you to reply now. (The Ambassador and Mrs. Shih read the text.) We propose to make this announcement on June 13 at 11 o'clock in the morning.

Miss Shih: Washington time?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes. We can do it at 4 in the afternoon if that is better for you. That would be about five days before I leave.

Mrs Shih: What is the time difference between Washington and Peking?

Dr. Kissinger : Twelve hours. You can pick any time between 11 and 4, or you can do it earlier in the day.

Ambassador Huang: That is all?

Dr. Kissinger : One other matter. You remember that I was planning twice already to go to Japan on a private visit. (Ambassador Huang chuckles.) I am now planning to go around June 5 for three days. But it is an unofficial visit and it has the same purpose that I have already described to you.

Ambassador Huang: Doctor, you have mentioned just now the situation in Vietnam. I think you have noticed the statement issued by the Government of the People's Republic of China recently.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

Ambassador Huang: In the view of the Chinese Government, President Nixon's announcement on May 8 involving the recent actions was not aimed at ending the war but escalating the war. In its statement the Chinese Government has expressed its views very clearly. No matter what form the war may assume, whether ground forces or air forces or naval forces, whether fought by the US Government troops or the puppet troops, no matter what happens, the Chinese Government will support the Vietnamese people in their resistance against the aggression of the United States and for national salvation, to final victory. This stand of the Chinese Government is firm and unshakeable.

Another matter is about the telephone call made by Mr. Lord to me (Mrs. Shih) about the incident in which two Chinese ships were attacked near the Hon Ngu Island on May 6, 7 and 8th. That caused some injuries among the Chinese crew and Vietnamese workers aboard the ships and also caused damage among the ships. Your side has promised to make an investigation regarding the incident and, depending upon that, make an apology and compensation. I wonder what the result is of your investigation.

Dr. Kissinger : The primary result up to now, which I just received before I came here, is as follows: First, no attacks on Chinese ships are ever authorized under any circumstances, and our airplanes are prohibited from approaching your territorial limits. Our investigation has shown that there were attacks on North Vietnamese small ships that were taking cargo from your ship and bringing it ashore. We can therefore - while we have no certain knowledge - it was very plausible that your ships were accidentally hit. Moreover, our experience is that you never protest frivolously. And we therefore consider it very likely and practically certain that what you say is correct.

Therefore, on behalf of the President, I would like to express our regret for this action. As for the question of compensation, we are in principle willing to do this, but we must discuss it with our legal people as to how to go about it.

With respect to your first point, we have always respected your principled stand. We only wonder whether some service could not be rendered to your heroic ally by giving them a somewhat longer vision. What possible interest could we have to have a permanent position in Southeast Asia? And any thoughtful observer must come to the conclusion - I can assure you that what we are trying to arrange is an honorable withdrawal.

We are not the country trying to seek a permanent position in Southeast Asia. Nor are we the country which has any intention of threatening the People's Republic of China. But we do not believe it is in anybody's interests to have this solution forced by military means. We will approach negotiations with an attitude of goodwill. But we recognize the big gulf of suspicion that separates us - not you and us, but us and the Vietnamese. I can only repeat that we seek no permanent bases, no permanent position in this area, Southeast Asia.

Ambassador Huang: Doctor, you probably know the history of the war in Indochina, and we know the history very well. The present military situation in the war developed by the U. S. in its aggression has been created by the acts of the US itself. There is an old Chinese saying: “Those who tie the ring, should undo it.”

In our view this is not a very complicated question. It is very simple, as stated in the statement of the Government of the People's Republic of China.

But I won't argue with you on this question. And I will surely report, convey the message you have just said to Premier Chou En-lai, the information you have made available to Premier Chou En-lai.

As to the date and timing of your visit to China, the announcement of your visit to China after your visit to the Soviet Union, when I have instructions, I will let you know.

Dr. Kissinger : Perhaps you can let me know the proposed time for the arrival of the airplane crew, etc., the usual technical information.

Ambassador Huang: Yes. Sure.

About the incident concerning the two Chinese ships that were attacked near Hon Ngu Island off of the shore of Vietnam. We have made a very solid investigation and there is no doubt about it.

Dr. Kissinger : We accept your facts. If you will give some estimates on the damage, I will take appropriate action. And we have given the strictest orders that we hope will prevent a repetition.

Ambassador Huang : I will let you know after making some inquiries.

Dr. Kissinger : Or you can do it through Ambassador Watson in Paris.

Ambassador Huang: I have no more to say.

Dr. Kissinger : It is always a pleasure to see you, Mr. Ambassador.

Ambassador Huang: I am not quite clear about the points 11 and 12 that you mentioned just now.

Dr. Kissinger : In the principles?

Ambassador Huang: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : Point 11 renounces any special rights or advantages which may be claimed. We have inserted this, for your information, because we do not recognize the Brezhnev Doctrine, and it affirms that all states, the relations of all states must be based on the principle of sovereign equality and that nothing in US-Soviet relations can be construed by either party as directed against a third country.

The 12th point. This is the point we are insisting on, and formulating it is a little bit complex. The 12th point is a positive formulation of the 11th. It says nothing agreed on can affect any obligation with respect to other countries or understandings with respect to other countries earlier assumed by the two parties. In other words, it does not supersede any other agreement.

Ambassador Huang: What would be the example for point 11 in specific instances?

Dr. Kissinger : In specific instances, in point 11, we interpret it to mean that the Brezhnev Doctrine is no longer valid, that is a claim by the Soviet Union that it has a special right to intervene in certain parts of the world. That is our intention.

I will see you as soon as I get back. Of course, in Peking we will have full discussions with the Prime Minister and anyone he may, designate, but I won't wait for that. I will see you first.

(The formal meeting then adjourned. There was some small talk while the Chinese were waiting for their car. Dr. Kissinger commented that the Chinese ping-pong team had made a good impression. Mr. Lord asked when the pool at the Chinese Mission would be open, and Mrs. Shih said this would be in June. Ambassador Huang confirmed that it was unheated and outdoors. He said that their new quarters were much more convenient and more quiet.

Dr. Kissinger said that he did not know whether personal feelings were allowed in his job, but he had developed them toward the Chinese.

He noted that the Ambassador had said that it was not convenient now for him to come to Washington. Ambassador Huang said that Dr. Kissinger could send Mr. Lord or someone else, if necessary. Dr. Kissinger said that at some point maybe the Ambassador could come up to Camp David which was secluded and serviced by a military airport.

(The car then arrived and the Chinese departed.)

[Tab A]

US-Soviet Bilateral Agreements That Might be Concluded During President Nixon's Visit to the USSR

Strategic Arms Limitation: An agreement in this field has been under negotiation since 1969. It is now expected that it will be completed in two parts: the first will be a treaty limiting ABMs, the second an interim agreement freezing certain strategic offensive systems.

As regards ABMs, each side would be limited to two deployment areas, one around its capital city, the other in an ICBM field. The Soviet Union already has in place an ABM defense of the Moscow area and the United States is constructing an ABM defense in its ICBM field at Grand Forks, Montana. There would also be radar limits to ensure that neither side could establish the radar base for subsequent deployment of a territorial ABM defense. There will also be other provisions limiting activities in the strategic defensive field, all of which are designed to hold the two sides to only two permitted deployments. Verification will be by the national means of each side.

The offensive agreement will place ceilings on ICBMs and submarine-based strategic launchers. Each side would be held to its present number of ICBMs, operational or under construction, and to submarines and launchers presently operational and under construction. Old ICBMs could be converted into submarines and submarine-based launchers. This arrangement would have a five-year duration, during which a more permanent offensive limitation would be negotiated.

In the interim five-year agreement there would be no qualitative limitations, and replacement and modernization would be permitted, provided the agreed ceilings are not exceeded. Verification would be by the national means of each side.

It is expected that negotiations for a more definitive offensive limitation agreement would take place, beginning in the near future.

Space Cooperation: The US and USSR will probably agree to enhance cooperation in outer space by utilizing the capabilities of both countries for joint projects of mutual benefit. The National Aeronautical and Space Agency and the Soviet Academy of Sciences would oversee implementation of the agreement. Under the agreement the rendezvous and docking systems of American and Soviet spacecraft would be made compatible so as to provide for joint missions and rescue operations. The US and USSR would agree to a joint, manned space flight in 1975 using Apollo type and Soyuz-type spacecraft. The two spacecraft would rendezvous and dock in space, and the cosmonauts and astronauts would visit the respective spacecraft.

Environmental Agreement: The US and USSR will probably agree to establish closer and longerterm cooperation between interested organizations in the environmental field. A new US-USSR Joint Committee on Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Protection is being established to approve bilateral measures and programs of cooperation and make recommendations to the two Governments. Each country would designate a principal coordinator—on the US side this would be the Chairman of the Council on Environment. This cooperation would be aimed at solving the most important aspects of the problems of the environment, including work in the following fields: air pollution; water pollution; environmental pollution associated with agricultural production; enhancement of the urban environment (this includes noise pollution); preservation of nature and organization of preserves; marine pollution; biological and genetic consequences of environmental pollution; influence of environmental changes on climate; earthquake prediction; arctic and subarctic ecological systems; and legal and administrative measures for protecting environmental quality.

Health Agreement: The US and USSR are undertaking to develop and deepen mutual cooperation in the field of medical science and public health. They will probably agree to do so through the Joint Committee for Health Cooperation which was established by the February 11, 1972 exchange of letters between Ministers of Health. As agreed in that exchange of letters, initial research efforts would be focused on cancer, heart diseases and the environmental health sciences.

Science and Technology Agreement: A US-Soviet Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation will probably be established to identify, explore and set up appropriate joint programs. The President's Science Adviser would chair the US side and negotiate the detailed arrangements for the establishment of the new commission. Cooperation in these fields could include the following: the exchange of scientists, specialists, and scientific and technical information and documentation; joint development and implementation of programs and projects in the fields of basic and applied sciences; joint research, development and testing and the exchange of research results and experience between scientific and research institutes and organizations; organization of joint courses, conferences and symposia; rendering of appropriate help on both sides in establishing contacts and arrangements between US firms and Soviet enterprises where a mutual interest develops.

Maritime Agreement: The US and USSR may agree to understandings on maritime and related matters which should facilitate an expansion of commerce between the two countries. The understandings would include provisions relating to port access, entry and treatment of ships of one country in the ports of the other, and equal participation in cargo carriage.

Incidents at Sea Agreement: The US and USSR may agree to understandings designed to prevent incidents at sea between units of the US and Soviet Navies operating on the high seas. Provisions of the understandings would deal with such issues as observation of the letter and spirit of the international rules of the road; avoidance of specified types of harassment and simulated attacks; measures to be taken so as not to hinder maneuvers such as carrier operations; general distances to be observed in aircraft-to-aircraft approaches and aircraft-to-ship approaches. The Defense Ministers would sign an agreement for the two countries.

Joint Commercial Commission: The US and USSR will probably agree to establish a Joint Commercial Commission to translate bilateral commercial objectives agreed to during the President's visit into specific agreements and actions. The Commission would negotiate a bilateral trade agreement, work to resolve outstanding commercial and financial issues, and monitor the US-Soviet trade relationship over time. The Secretary of Commerce would chair the US side.

[Tab B]

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF US-SOVIET RELATIONS

It is expected that a document containing certain principles which would guide US-Soviet relations will be agreed and published.

In addition to a preamble, there will be twelve points.

The first will say that in the nuclear age, there is no alternative to conducting relations on the basis of peaceful co-existence and that ideological and political differences are not obstacles to normal relations.

The second will deal with the need to prevent dangerous exacerbations in US-Soviet relations, to exercise restraint and to conduct negotiations on the basis of reciprocity. It will also state that each side should recognize the security interests of the other, based on the principle of equality and the renunciation of the threat or use of force.

The third will deal with the responsibility of both countries to do what they can to prevent conflicts and tensions in the world generally. It will state that no country should be subject to external interference.

The fourth will deal with the desirability of placing US-Soviet relations on a firmer juridical basis.

The fifth will express readiness to continue the practice of exchanging views, including at the highest level.

The sixth will affirm the intention of both sides to continue efforts toward limiting armaments, in accordance with the UN Charter.

The seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth deal with improvement of various kinds of concrete bilateral relations and cooperation.

The eleventh renounces any special rights or advantages for the two sides and states that claims by any other country on this score would not be recognized. It affirms the sovereign equality of all states. It also stipulates that the development of US-Soviet relations is not directed against third countries and their interests.

The twelfth point states that the principles agreed upon do not affect any obligations with respect to other countries earlier assumed by the two sides.

The principles thus cover the bilateral relationship of the United States and the USSR and express certain objectives and yardsticks concerning their respective conduct in international affairs.

[Tab C]

In the joint communique issued in Shanghai in February 1972 at the conclusion of President Nixonts visit, the United States and the People's Republic of China agreed to stay in contact through various channels. The two sides stated that this would include tithe sending of a senior U.S. representative to Peking from time to time for concrete consultations to further the normalization of relations between the two countries and continue to exchange views on issues of common interest.”

Accordingly Dr. Henry Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, will visit the People's Republic of China from June 21 to June 25, 1972 for discussions with Premier Chou En-lai and other Chinese leaders.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Attached at Tab A is the U.S.-Soviet Bilateral Agreements; attached at Tab B is the Basic Principles of U.S.-Soviet Relations; and attached at Tab C is the draft Sino-American announcement.

130. Memorandum From Winston Lord of the National Security Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 3, 1972 130. Memorandum From Winston Lord of the National Security Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 3, 19721

Washington, June 3, 1972

ACTION

June 3, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR:

HENRY A. KISSINGER

FROM: WINSTON LORD

SUBJECT:My New York Meeting this Morning

Following are brief highlights of my 45-minute session this morning with Ambassador Huang, which I already relayed to Dick Kennedy.

Your trip to the PRC

After I had finished my presentation on the Moscow summit, Ambassador Huang read the following message from a typed note:

“We agree to Dr. Kissinger's visit from June 21 to June 25, but there is another important visit to China beginning June 24 which cannot be put off. In order to avoid the two meetings affecting each other we suggest that Dr. Kissinger put his visit two days forward, to 19-23 June, and we hope he will agree to it.

As to the time of the announcement we have agreed to your proposal that the trip be announced June 13 at 11:00 a.m. Washington time, 11:00 p.m. Peking time.

As to the content of the announcement, we suggest that it would be better to be shorter, so we now make a proposal for your views.”

He handed over the text at Tab A. Our suggested text is at Tab B. In addition to date change and shortening of the reference to the Shanghai communique, the major change in the Chinese text is to say that you will talk with “Chinese leaders” without mentioning specifically Prime Minister Chou En-lai as we did in our text, (Note: Last October's announcement did not mention Chou, but rather “talks with the Chinese Government.”) I told the Ambassador that I would relay this information to you and that we would respond as soon as possible concerning the date and the text of the announcement. As for the day of the announcement, I pointed out that I had told Mrs. Shih the previous day that we now preferred June 14. I said that I would check this with you again in the context of the changed dates that they were proposing.

Moscow Summit

I read my talking points to Ambassador Huang who listened with impassive interest. The only question he asked was whether the U.S. and the Soviet Union were prepared to discuss further the problem of chemical weapons. I replied that, as the communique stated, we were prepared to do so, in the multilateral forum.

Miscellaneous

I noted that your Japan trip was being announced today and that it was a couple of days later than you had indicated to him. I also said that we were pleased that arrangements were going forward smoothly on the Boggs/Ford trip to the PRC; and I briefly explained and handed over Joe Alsop's letter to you (Tab C).

The Ambassador and Mrs. Shih were very cordial throughout. He had no other questions or subjects to raise. I started to leave on two occasions but he beckoned me to stay for more tea.

RECOMMENDATION

That I phone Mrs. Shih with information on your PRC trip.

1. New dates

June 19-23 Okay _____

We prefer original dates _____

Other _____

2. Text of the announcement

Their text Okay _____

Their text Okay with following changes _____

3. Date of announcement

We still prefer June 14 _____ June 13 is Okay _____ Other _____

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Sent for action. Attached but not published at Tab A is the Chinese text. Attached but not published at Tab B is the American version. Attached but not published at Tab C is the Alsop letter to Kissinger.

131. Memorandum From Winston Lord of the National Security Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 5, 1972 131. Memorandum From Winston Lord of the National Security Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 5, 19721

Washington, June 5, 1972

INFORMATION

June 5, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR:

HENRY A. KISSINGER

FROM:

WINSTON LORD

SUBJECT:

My June 5 Meeting in New York

Following are the brief highlights of my 25-minute meeting in New York today with Ambassador Huang, covering two subjects, a PRC protest note on intrusion into its airspace and the passing of information on your upcoming trip to the PRC.

PRC Protest

The Ambassador had requested this meeting sometime this afternoon or evening with me or whomever you designated. I thus let him make the first move and without elaboration he handed over the note attached at Tab A, suggesting that I read it. After doing so slowly, I made the comments that you had approved on a contingency basis for the previous meeting: I would report this immediately to you; we would make an immediate investigation; this would be either an accident or in violation of strict orders to stay clear of PRC airspace; the U.S. would have no interest in violating PRC airspace. The Ambassador's manner was pro forma, and the only comment that he made was that he hoped we would have a response the next time we met. I said that we would look into the matter immediately and give them a response as soon as possible. (Note: The Chinese protest is mild, with the only interesting aspect being the comment that “this intrusion was obviously not inadvertent.”)

HAK Trip to the PRC

After a brief pause the Ambassador then asked me whether we had answers to the proposed new dates for your visit and the revised text of the announcement. I pulled out our message, attached at Tab B, and gave him the highlights before handing it over: We accepted the June 19-23 dates; we had minor editorial changes in their proposed text; and we would like to make the announcement at noon Washington time on June 14.

In response to the Ambassador's request, I pointed out the precise changes in the text of the announcement which seemed to give him no problem. I said that, of course, in the Chinese announcement the PRC could come before the US. He then asked me if June 13 would be inconvenient for announcing the trip. I replied that it would be, and that we very much hoped to announce it on June 14. He then said that noon Washington time would be midnight Peking time and that this was inconvenient for them. I replied that I thought we might be able to agree to 11:00 o'clock, that I would check immediately upon my return to Washington, and that I would call them right back. (Note As soon as I returned, General Haig told me that 11:00 o'clock was satisfactory and I relayed this to Mrs. Shih at 8:00 p.m. today.)

The Ambassador then read through our entire message, and I pointed out that the technical information regarding the aircraft, etc. was similar to previous trips. I added that it would not be possible for you to arrive in Shanghai before 1700 on June 19.

We then engaged in about 10 minutes of small talk, during which the Ambassador and Mrs. Shih were extremely friendly and made me stay for an extra cup of tea.

cc: General Haig

[Tab A]

At 11:24-11:28 hours on June 4, 1972 (Peking time), a group of four U.S. military planes intruded into China's airspace over Pinghsiang area, Kwangsi Province from the direction of Viet Nam and penetrated 20 kilometers in width and 30 kilometers in depth. This intrusion was obviously not inadvertent. Against this, the Chinese side lodges a protest with the U.S. side and demands that the U.S. side take effective measures to stop the recurrence of similar intrusions.

[Tab B]

The U.S. side accepts the revised dates proposed by the Chinese side for Dr. Kissinger's visit to the People's Republic of China, i.e. June 19-23, 1972. It would like to make the joint public announcement of this visit on June 14, 1972 at noon Washington time. The U.S. side finds generally satisfactory the announcement handed over by the Chinese side on June 3, 1972 but suggests some minor editorial changes which are reflected in the attached text. The U.S. side would appreciate an early response to the proposed text and date for the joint announcement.

Schedule and Party

Dr. Kissinger plans to arrive in Shanghai from either Guam or Anchorage, Alaska at approximately 17:00 local time on June 19, 1972. He plans to depart from Peking at approximately 9:00 local time on June 23, 1972. Dr. Kissinger's party would include Alfred le S. Jenkins from the State Department, and John H. Holdridge, Winston Lord, Commander Jonathan T. Howe, and either Richard H. Solomon or Richard T. Campbell from Dr. Kissinger's staff. In addition, there would be three secret service personnel and two secretaries. The final composition of the party and their passport numbers, as well as the names and passport numbers of the aircraft crew, will be provided in the very near future.

Aircraft

The party will travel in a Presidential Boeing 707 aircraft (aircraft tail number 86972, call sign SAM 86972) similar to that used on trips in October, January and February. Fuel and other aircraft services needed will be the same as those provided during Dr. Kissinger's October visit. It is again desired that the aircraft be utilized for communications with Washington. Therefore, it is requested that an external power source (115 volts, 400 cycles, 3 phase alternating current) and transportation for couriers from the aircraft to the location of the party again be made available around-the-clock. As before the aircraft would plan to communicate on the following frequencies while in Peking:

Voice frequencies: 13215 kilos primary, 9015 kilos secondary, Upper sideband voice

Teletype frequencies: 8047 kilos primary, 6995 kilos secondary.

In accordance with the United States-People's Republic of China Joint Communique of February 1972, Dr. Henry Kissinger, Assistant to the U.S. President for National Security Affairs, will visit the People's Republic of China from June 19 to 23, 1972, for concrete consultations with Chinese leaders to further the normalization of relations between the People's Republic of China and the United States and continue to exchange views on issues of common interest.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A copy was sent to Haig. Attached at Tab A is the Chinese message, which bears the handwritten notation: “Amb H gave to WL 6/5/72.” Attached at Tab B is the American message.

132. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, June 10, 1972, 4-4:45 p.m. 132. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, June 10, 1972, 4-4:45 p.m.1

New York, June 10, 1972, 4-4:45 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Ambassador Ch'en Ch'u, Deputy Permanent Representative of the PRC to the UN

Mrs. Shih

Commander Jonathan T. Howe,NSC Staff

DATE & TIME: Saturday, June lO, 1972 - 4:00-4:45 p.m.

PLACE: New York City

The conversation began in a cordial atmosphere of relaxed conversation in which noncontroversial issues were discussed. Commander Howe had gotten to know Ambassador Ch'en fairly well in the technical meetings and banquets during the October 1971 trip when the Ambassador represented the Ministry of Information in discussing press plans for the President's trip.

Ambassador Ch'en asked when Dr. Kissinger would be returning from Japan and noted that Dr. Kissinger was certainly having a busy schedule. He commented that it must be difficult to adjust to all the time zone changes. Commander Howe replied that Dr. Kissinger certainly had a most demanding travelling schedule, but that he was a man of tremendous capacity and endurance and was looking forward to returning to the PRC. Ambassador Ch'en asked if Winston Lord was also in Japan and noted that Mr. Lord, Commander Howe and Mr. Jenkins would be returning to China. Tea was served and the Ambassador asked if Commander Howe liked it. Commander Howe indicated that he did and that the Chinese has most generously given some to those who visited in October and February. The Ambassador indicated that if Commander Howe ever wanted any there was always plenty available at the Delegation. He also commented that there would be many more travels to the PRC.

On a more serious note, Ambassador Ch'en stated that the reason for asking someone to come up that day was because U.S. military planes had repeatedly intruded into Chinese air space. Using type written notes he pointed out that there had been a violation on June 4 which had been mentioned to Mr. Lord. The Chinese had protested the intrusion and had asked the U.S. side to take effective measures to prevent recurrences. Subsequently, there were three intrusions on the 9th of June. The first had occurred in Kwangsi Province with the planes coming from the direction of North Vietnam. The first two planes had intruded between 11:25 and 11:28 Peking time. The intrusions had occurred over many areas of Kwangsi Province. He paused and asked if Commander Howe knew the place and pointed out that it was northeast of an important pass. He commented that the penetration had been eight kilometers in depth.

Referring to the second incident he alleged that four planes had intruded over the same area during the times 11:30 and 11:33 hours and penetrated in an area 12 kilometers in width to three kilometers in depth. The third violation occurred when the same batch of aircraft intruded over another area northeast of Haiphong, near the border of the DRV. This had occurred between 11:30 and 11:37 hours and the planes had penetrated 30 kilometers in width and ten kilometers in depth. He stated that the Chinese side was lodging a protest against the repeated intrusions of U.S. planes while carrying out wanton bombing raids against the DRV and that they strongly demanded that the U.S. side take effective measures to stop the recurrences of similar intrusions.

In reply, Commander Howe stated that the U.S. side had taken the allegations of June 4 most seriously and was conducting a very thorough investigation with great earnestness. The U.S. side hoped to have the results of this investigation within the next day or two. He then stated that if these reports were confirmed they would be a violation of the procedures and precautions which the U.S. side had established to guard against inadvertent intrusions. The U.S. side would investigate these allegations with similar earnestness and thoroughness.

The Ambassador responded that he took note of the fact that the U.S. side was conducting an investigation and that it was not U.S. policy to violate the border. He asked that the U.S. side take serious measures to prevent recurrences. On June 4 there had been an intrusion; five days later there were now four intrusions. He reiterated the “strong demand” that the U.S. side take measures to prevent a recurrence, and handed Commander Howe a note which contained most of the points made orally (Tab A). Commander Howe read the note and indicated that the U.S. side took these charges with the utmost seriousness and they would be investigated immediately.

The Ambassador then indicated that his business was completed. Commander Howe remarked that General Haig had told him a report had been received from Stockholm where the Environmental Conference was being held, indicating that the Chinese representatives had made a strong statement with regard to U.S. policy. Commander Howe noted that the response by the U.S. representative there would be non-polemic and reasonable and would be measured and calm in tone. Ambassador Ch'en commented that it was necessary for the Chinese delegation to express views with regard to the bombing and mining of North Vietnam at this conference. He supposed the U.S. delegation would make a response and wondered if it had done so. Commander Howe repeated that he thought some mild statement would be made but indicated he did not know when this would occur.

The conversation then turned to lighter subjects concerning the U.S. and China and Dr. Kissinger's forthcoming trip. Of interest was the very clear indication that the Chinese were looking forward to the visit. They referred to arrangements for the “honored guests” on several occasions. Commander Howe noted that we hoped to have in the next day or two a complete list of the party, including aircraft crew and passport numbers, and to provide certain other technical information.

In spite of the serious discussion of the aircraft intrusions, the atmosphere was very warm and friendly. The Chinese were obviously looking forward to Dr. Kissinger's trip. Ambassador Ch'en apologized for asking Commander Howe to come to New York on a Saturday and hoped that it had not been too difficult a trip. Commander Howe explained that his office, like that of the Chinese, worked seven days a week and that it was nice to get out in the sunshine and always a pleasure to see them. Indicative of the courteous and pleasant atmosphere, Ambassador Ch'en offered a car to take Commander Howe to the airport but this was politely declined.

[Tab A]

Following the U.S. military planes' intrusion of China's airspace over Pinghsiang area, Kwangsi Province on June 4, U.S. military planes again intruded into China's Kwangsi Province from the direction of Viet Nam three times in succession on June 9:

The first batch of two planes intruded into the airspace over Ningming area at 11:25 - 11:28 hours (Peking time, the same hereafter) and penetrated 20 kilometers in width and 8 kilometers in depth; the second batch of four planes intruded into the airspace over Ningming area at 11:32 - 11:33 hours and penetrated 12 kilometers in width and 3 kilometers in depth; the same batch of planes intruded into the airspace over Tunghsing area at 11:37 - 11:39 hours and penetrated 30 kilometers in width and 10 kilometers in depth. The Chinese side once again lodges a protest with the U.S. side against the repeated intrusions into China's airspace by U.S. military planes while they are carrying out wanton bombing raids against the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam and strongly demands that the U.S. side immediately take effective measures to stop the recurrence of similar intrusions.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The precise meeting location is not indicated. Drafted by Howe. Attached at Tab A is the Chinese note.

133. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, June 11, 1972, 4:30-5:15 p.m. 133. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, June 11, 1972, 4:30-5:15 p.m.1

New York, June 11, 1972, 4:30-5:15 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Ambassador Ch'en Ch'u, Deputy Permanent Representative of the PRC to the UN

Mrs. Shih

Commander Jonathan T. Howe

DATE & TIME: Sunday, June 11, 1972, 4:30 - 5:15 p.m.

PLACE: New York City

After serving tea and brief amenities, Ambassador Ch'en indicated that the reason for asking Commander Howe to come up was the same as on the previous day. U.S. aircraft had intruded again into Chinese air space and each time it was more serious. The Ambassador, using prepared talking points, then presented the latest Chinese note (Tab A).

In presenting the protest, the Ambassador said that on June 4 and 9 U.S. military aircraft had on many occasions intruded into the air space of Kwangsi Province. He said that the Chinese side had lodged protests with the U.S. side on these occasions. They had also asked the U.S. side to take effective measures to stop a recurrence of U.S. aircraft intruding into Chinese air space. Messages had been delivered through Mr. Lord and Commander Howe on the last two occasions.

He then said that yesterday, June 10, from 056 to 058 hours, two sorties of U.S. military aircraft had again intruded into Chinese air space. The second sortie of U.S. military aircraft had even dropped bombs on the Pinghsiang area of Kwangshi Province. Prior to that incident, on June 9, U.S. military aircraft bombed around a Chinese merchant ship near Hon La Island of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam at 2112 hours. The name of the ship was HONGQI 150. Bomb splinters had seriously menaced Chinese personnel there.

The Ambassador continued that while carrying out repeated bombing of the northern part of Vietnam the U.S. side has been pressing up toward China. In addition to intrusions into Chinese air space, U.S. planes had bombed civilian structures and Chinese merchant ships, menacing Chinese people.

Against this the Chinese side lodged a strong protest to the U.S. side. The U.S. side should understand that the Chinese side to date had exercised restraint. This restraint could not possibly be unlimited. If the U.S. side still failed to take effective measures it would inevitably affect measures for normalization of the relations between the U.S. and China. This was the message the Chinese side wished to convey to the U.S. Government.

The Ambassador then handed a note to Commander Howe (Tab A). After reading the note, Commander Howe first clarified that the merchant ship in the second paragraph of the note was the same merchant ship referred to in the first paragraph and then responded by making the following points: — On the previous day when Commander Howe returned to Washington the proper persons on the U.S. side, including Dr. Kissinger, had been informed of the Chinese note and an immediate and intensive investigation was instigated on an urgent basis into the allegations contained in the note. Naturally it took some time for the instigation of this investigation to have an effect but the U.S. side was investigating not only the actual incidents referred to in the note but the entire system of procedures used to guard against inadvertent violations of Chinese air space. In light of these new and serious allegations the U.S. side would intensify its investigation and would have a response within 48 hours.

— The U.S. side regretted any damage that might have occurred to a Chinese ship or Chinese personnel. As had been stressed on the previous day, it was certainly not the intention of the U.S. side to violate Chinese air space or cause damage to Chinese people or property. The U.S. side views the situation with the utmost seriousness and will certainly investigate these allegations thoroughly on a most urgent basis.

The Ambassador replied that the question was that U.S. military aircraft had repeatedly violated Chinese air space and now had dropped bombs on civilian structures and a merchant ship. This time it was more serious. They earnestly hoped the U.S. would take effective measures to prevent a recurrence so as not to affect the normalizing of relations between the two sides.

Commander Howe indicated that he recognized that these developments were much more serious although the U.S. side also viewed the charges of intrusions into PRC air space with great seriousness. He specifically regretted that there had been a report of damage to civilian structures and wanted to reiterate that such an occurrence would be a grave violation of established practices and procedures. He reiterated that these measures were being intensively reviewed and that these new allegations would also be taken into account. The Ambassador could expect a response within 48 hours.

Commander Howe then asked the Ambassador a question to clarify the time of the intrusions referred to in the note, pointing out that the note indicated they had occurred shortly after noon Washington time on June 9. This would be only a short period after the incidents referred to in the note given to Commander Howe on the previous day; the incidents referred to in the latest note would have occurred before the U.S. side had been made aware of the other allegations of intrusions on June 9. In any case, the U.S. side would examine all of these allegations in the intensive investigation which had begun. The Ambassador agreed that the incidents had occurred close to 1:00 p.m. Washington time on June 9 since there was now a 12 hour time difference between Washington and Peking. The Ambassador stated that he hoped the U.S. side would really take measures to stop recurrences and then indicated that that was all he wished to say on that subject.

The conversation then turned to a more cordial conversation on noncontroversial subjects such as differences and similarities in geography and the American reaction to the Pandas. During this exchange the Ambassador referred to the fact that Commander Howe would visit more of China and see many other places that he had not yet seen in China as relations normalized. During the discussion of geography, the Ambassador noted that the Chinese think of the U.S. and China as the two arms of the world because they are on opposite sides of the globe.

In answer to the Ambassador's question of the previous day concerning when the U.S. might make a statement at Stockholm, Commander Howe indicated that a mild U.S. statement would probably be made at the meeting on Monday. Mrs. Shih noted she had seen something to this effect in the New York Times.

Commander Howe then took his leave indicating he wanted to ensure that the proper persons on the U.S. side were immediately aware of what was in the Chinese note. The Ambassador apologized for the personal inconvenience to Commander Howe and that he could not have a rest on Sunday but remarked that these matters were serious. Commander Howe responded that the U.S. side regarded them with equal seriousness, wanted to deal with them immediately and it was not an inconvenience. These matters would be brought immediately to the attention of the proper persons. Although Commander Howe regretted the unhappy circumstances that necessitated this meeting, he was personally always glad to see the Ambassador and Mrs. Shih and he had enjoyed talking to them. The Ambassador thanked Commander Howe for the sentiment and escorted him to the elevator.

[Tab A]

On June 4 and 9, 1972, U.S. military aircraft successively intruded into China's airspace over the area of Kwangsi Province, against which the Chinese side has already lodged protests with the U.S. side. However, from 0056 to 0058 hours, June 10 (Peking time), U.S. military aircraft again flagrantly intruded into China's airspace on two occasions in two sorties, and in the second sortie, the area of Pinghsiang, Kwangsi Province, China, was bombed. Earlier at 2112 hours, June 9 (Peking time), U.S. military aircraft carried out bombing around a Chinese merchant ship “Hongqi No. 150” anchored near the Hon La Island of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam. The ship was harmed by bomb splinters, and the life and safety of our personnel seriously menaced.

Recently while successively bombing north Viet Nam, the U.S. side has been pressing up to China's borders, intruding into China's airspace, and even going to the extent of bombing Chinese civilian structures and a Chinese merchant ship. This has obviously menaced the security and freedom of navigation of our country. The Chinese side hereby lodges a strong protest with the U.S. side against this. The U.S. side should understand that the Chinese side has to date exercised restraint, but such restraint cannot possibly be unlimited. If the U.S. side does not take effective measures to stop such actions, efforts towards the normalization of relations between China and the United States will inevitably be affected.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held in New York. Attached at Tab A is the Chinese note.

134. Memorandum for the Record, Washington, June 11, 1972 134. Memorandum for the Record, Washington, June 11, 19721

Washington, June 11, 1972

June 11, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR

THE RECORD

FROM: ALEXANDER M. HAIG

SUBJECT:

Telephone Conversation with Mrs. Shih, Sunday, June 11, 1972

After my telephone discussion with Dr. Kissinger Sunday evening Washington time, I spoke to Mrs. Shih and conveyed to her the message Dr. Kissinger and I had discussed, emphasizing that we had just instituted the strictest disciplinary controls and were also revising our operating instructions to preclude any possibility of a repeat incident. I pointed out that both Dr. Kissinger and the President had directed this action in view of the seriousness of the reported incident and that the new restrictions and disciplinary controls were being instituted prior to completion of an urgent investigation of the matter so as to be sure that future incidents cannot occur. I pointed out that President Nixon was greatly distressed by their report and that he wished to express his sincerest regrets that an incident as that reported over Chinese territory could occur (I carefully avoided inferring that the action we had taken or our apologies were associated with the Chinese complaint about their merchant vessel.) Mrs. Shih appeared very relieved at the promptness and character of our response and I urged her to request that the Ambassador flash this oral response immediately to Peking so that her government would be completely aware of the seriousness with which our side viewed the reported incident and of our determination to preclude such incidents in the future. I informed her that we would provide a complete written explanation of all the incidents reported to us when the urgent and detailed investigations now underway were completed.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China, PRC Allegations of Hostile Acts [ca. 6/72]. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. The time of the telephone conversation is not indicated on the memorandum.

135. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, June 12, 1972, 9:50-10:30 p.m. 135. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, June 12, 1972, 9:50-10:30 p.m.1

New York, June 12, 1972, 9:50-10:30 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Mrs. Shih Yen-hua, PRC Mission to the UN

Peter W. Rodman, NSC Staff

DATE & TIME: Monday, 12 June 1972, 9:50-10:30 p.m.

PLACE: PRC Mission to the UN, New York City

The meeting took place at our initiative in order to convey two written messages, one (at Tab A) being a reply to several PRC notes on U.S. aircraft incidents, and the second (Tab B) conveying further details on Dr. Kissinger's forthcoming visit to Peking.

I was greeted in the usual friendly fashion by Mrs. Shih and escorted to an upstairs meeting room for several cups of green tea. After initial conversation I handed over the two notes and added that I had some comments to convey orally as well. She commented that she ought to read the messages, which she then did, and I then told her the following:

“On the subject of the first note, on the aircraft incidents, Dr. Kissinger has asked me to say that you will see a distinct change in the pattern of our operations in the immediate future.

“On the subject of Dr. Kissinger's forthcoming visit to Peking, he asked me to tell you that while in Tokyo he informed the Japanese Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, on a most confidential basis, that he would be visiting Peking. He felt he had no choice but to do this. Because after the announcement of the trip on Wednesday [June 14] it probably will become public in the press that Dr. Kissinger informed the Japanese leaders, he asked me to inform you now that he did so.”

Mrs. Shih took this all down in her little notebook, and told me she would convey this to the Ambassador.

She served several more cups of tea. In the ensuing conversation she asked a question or two about Tokyo (we stuck to personal impressions, Tokyo city life, etc.). When she commented that we would have only a few days to work on preparations for the China trip, I assured her that the work had begun before we went to Tokyo and that Dr. Kissinger would be fully prepared for, and was looking forward to, his forthcoming visit.

Attachments

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Brackets in the source text. Attached at Tab A is the U.S. response to the Chinese notes on the aircraft incidents; it is published as Document 136. Attached but not published at Tab B is the message outlining details of Kissinger's visit to Peking.

136. Message From the Government of the United States to the Government of the People's Republic of China, undated 136. Message From the Government of the United States to the Government of the People's Republic of China, undated1

undated

The U.S. side wishes to provide urgent comments on the three notes that it has recently received from the Chinese side concerning the activities of U.S. aircraft.

A thorough investigation has been completed concerning the Chinese note on possible intrusions of U.S. aircraft into the airspace of the People's Republic of China on June 4, 1972. The investigation covered aircraft flight paths, procedures followed, aircraft navigational equipment, flight monitoring systems and other means used to ensure against inadvertent intrusions. The investigation has been inconclusive. We confirm that U.S. aircraft were flying near the border of the People's Republic of China at the time. The inconclusive nature of the investigation may be due to differences in radar characteristics or related factors. In order to avoid the possibility of further accidental intrusions into Chinese airspace, the U.S. has instituted new procedures to keep U.S. aircraft further away from Chinese territory and thus eliminate the reoccurrence of these regrettable incidents.

A thorough investigation has been launched on an urgent basis concerning the alleged intrusion by U.S. aircraft into Chinese airspace on June 9, 1972.

With respect to the reported intrusion into Chinese airspace and the reported accidental bombing of Chinese territory on June 10, 1972, the U.S. side apologizes for this inexcusable incident. An urgent investigation of the circumstances surrounding the incident is underway. The U.S. side will take disciplinary action against the personnel responsible for this flagrant violation, however inadvertent, of strict standing orders.

The U.S. side is investigating the allegation that U.S. military aircraft caused damage to a Chinese merchant ship of June 9, 1972. While every precaution will continue to be taken to avoid such incidents, it must be pointed out that unloading operations within North Vietnamese territorial waters do entail the risks of accidents.

Dr. Kissinger looks forward to discussions of all important issues with Prime Minister Chou En-lai and other Chinese leaders. These discussions will be conducted on the U.S. side with every intention to pursue with energy and conviction the cause of normalizing Sino-U.S. relations.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 849, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, March 1, 1972-June 24, 1972. No classification indicated. Attached at Tab A of the June 12 memorandum of conversation.

137. Report Prepared in the Department of Defense, Washington, undated 137. Report Prepared in the Department of Defense, Washington, undated1

Washington, undated

10 JUNE ALLEGATIONS

(BOMBS ON PRC STRUCTURES)

IN THEIR SECOND MAJOR ALLEGATION, THE PRC CHARGE THAT TWO PLANES INTRUDED INTO PRC AIR SPACE AT 0056H AND 0058H (LOCAL TIME) ON 10[unclear] IN THE AREA OF PING HSIANGI KWANG SI PROVINCE. THEY FURTHER CHARGE THAT DURING THE SECOND ALLEGED INTRUSIONS BOMBS WERE DROPPED ON PRC STRUCTURES IN A SMALL VILLAGES

CINCPACAF HAS CONFIRMED THAT SEVENTH AIR FORCE HAD NO AIRCRAFT OPERATING ABOVE 21° NORTH LATITUDE IN NORTH VIETNAM WITHIN FOUR H[unclear] OF EITHER SIDE OF THE TIME PERIOD IN QUESTION. HOWEVER, US NAVY [unclear] WERE OPERATING ALONG THE NORTHEAST RAILROAD CLOSE TO THE CHICOM B[unclear] DURING THE PERIOD OF THE ALLEGED INTRUSION AND BOMBING.

SIX A-7 AIRCRAFT LAUNCHED FROM THE USS KITTY HAWK BETWEEN 100[unclear] AND lOOO2H WITH THE MISSION OF STRIKING THE NORTHEAST RAIL ROUTE HIGHWAY 1A IN THE AREA SHOWN ON THE MAP.

ALL AIRCRAFT RECEIVED A NAVIGATIONAL UPDATE AT POINT I WITH SYSTEMS INDICATING LESS THAN ONE-HALF MILE ERROR AT THE UPDATE PO[unclear] THE AIRCRAFT PROCEEDED TOWARD THEIR TARGET AREA CROSSING THE COAST BETWEEN 4500-5000 FEET ON INSTRUMENTS. THEY BROKE CLEAR OF THE WEATHER AFTER ABOUT 40 MILES, SHOWN BY THE BLACK ARC.

THE PILOTS REPORT THAT UPON BREAKING CLEAR, ROUTE 4 WAS VISIBLE AND THAT THEIR NEXT CHECK POINT, THE INTERSECTION OF ROUTES 4 AND 13, WAS EASILY RECOGNIZED, NAVIGATIONAL SYSTEMS WERE STILL GOOD WITH NO UPDATE REQUIRED, FURTHER, LANG SON BECAME CLEARLY VISIBLE FROM APPROXIMATELY 20 MILES.

FOUR AIRCRAFT ARRIVED IN THE TARGET AREA BETWEEN 100047H AND 100058H AND BEGAN ATTACKING MOVING VEHICLES WHICH INITIALLY HAD THEIR LIGHTS ON. THE REMAINING TWO AIRCRAFT ARRIVED AT 0116H AND 0118H, AFTER THE TIME OF THE ALLEGED VIOLATION. SUBSEQUENTLY, THE FLIGHT DREW AAA FIRE PROBABLY FROM MOBILE UNITS WITH THE CONVOYS FROM THE AREA INDICATED ON THE MAP. THROUGHOUT THE ATTACK THE PILOTS REPORTED THAT IT WAS POSSIBLE TO FOLLOW THE LINE OF THE HIGHWAY. THE NORTHERNMOST TARGET ATTACKED IS INDICATED ON THE MAP AND IS SOME 19 MILES SOUTH OF AREA OF THE ALLEGED INCIDENT.

ONE MIG WAS REPORTED IN THE AREA FOR ABOUT 10 MINUTES. ITS LIGHTS WERE SEEN BY TWO US PILOTS AT APPROXIMATELY 0110H. NSA CONFIRM THAT ONE MIG TOOK OFF FROM PHUOC YEN AT O100H HEADED NORTH AND RETURNED PRIOR TO 012011 WHEN A SECOND MIG TOOK OFF TO THE NORTH. THERE IS NO EVIDENCE OF MORE THAN ONE MIG AIRBORNE AT ANY ONE TIME IN THE AREA OF INTEREST.

THE INGRESS AND EGRESS OF ALL AIRCRAFT WAS MONITORED BY AN E-2 AIRCRAFT WHICH ALSO CONFIRMED THEIR POSITION PRIOR TO CROSSING THE COAST ON THEIR INGRESS ROUTES WHILE NOT HOLDING ALL AIRCRAFT CONTINUOUSLY, THE E-2 DID NOT OBSERVE ANY BORDER VIOLATIONS AND, UPON REQUEST FROM THE TACTICAL AIR CONTROL CENTER (RED CROWN) ABOARD THE USS LONG BEACH, RECALLED ALL AIRCRAFT FROM THE TARGET AREAS THE TWO LATE ARRIVING AIRCRAFT COMPLETED THEIR STRIKES BEFORE HEADING HOME.

SEVERAL OTHER FACTORS ARE OF NOTE IN THIS CASE. FIRST, THERE IS A MARKED GEOGRAPHIC SIMILARITY BETWEEN THE LANG SON AND PING HSIANG AREAS;(*) WHILE THIS COULD HAVE CAUSED A PROBLEM, IT COULD ALSO BE USED BY THE CHICOMs IN AN ATTEMPT TO DECEIVE US AND CAUSE US TO CEASE BOMBING IN THE LANG SON AREA. SECONDLY, THERE ARE NO CONFIRMED FIXED AAA OR SAM SITES IN THE IMMEDIATE AREA NOR WERE THERE ANY REPORTED SAM FIRINGS IN THE AREA AT THE TIME IN QUESTION, MAKING IT DOUBTFUL THAT A SAM IMPACTED NEAR PING HSIANG. AS MENTIONED, AT LEAST ONE MIG WAS ACTIVE IN THE AREA, BUT THERE IS NO TRACK AVAILABLE AND NO EVIDENCE THAT A MIG MAY HAVE JETTISONED FUEL TANKS NEAR PING HSIANG. THIRDLY, ALL WERE EXPERIENCED PILOTS, CAREFULLY SELECTED FOR THE MISSION, FLYING FULLY-SYSTEMS-CAPABLE AIRCRAFT UNDER EXCELLENT WEATHER AND VISIBILITY CONDITIONS. LASTLY, A REVIEW OF ALL NAVAL TACTICAL DAT SYSTEM TAPES DOES NOT REFLECT ANY TRACKS CROSSING THE BORDER.

(*) MOUNTAINS WOULD PRECLUDE AN ATTACK SOUTHWEST OF PING HSIANG

THE LAST RECONNAISSANCE MISSION WHICH MAY HAVE PROVIDED PHOTO COVERAGE OF THE AREA OF INTEREST WAS GIANT SCALE NUMBER 504 ON THE NIGHT OF 13 JUNE. RESULTS OF THIS PHOTOGRAPHY ARE BEING EXPLOITED AT THIS TIME.

AT THE PRESENT, THE POSSIBILITY OF US ORDNANCE BEING DROPPED IN CHINA IS CONSIDERED REMOTE AND ALL INDICATIONS ARE THAT THE A-7s DID IN FACT REMAIN IN NVN.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Visit, June 1972 Memcons (Originals). Top Secret; Sensitive. No drafting information appears on the report. A handwritten notation on page three of the report reads: “Mountains would preclude an attack southwest of Ping Hsiang.” For the Chinese note, see Document 133.

138. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Laird to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 16, 1972 138. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Laird to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 16, 19721

Washington, June 16, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR:

Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

SUBJECT:

PRC Allegations and Possible Airspace Intrusions

June 16, 1972

This memorandum is in response to the allegations that US aircraft intruded into PRC airspace during the period 9-10 June 1972 and that splinters hit the PRC merchant ship Hong Chi 150 (Hung Qu 150) in the vicinity of Hon La Island as a result of US combat action.

US operational commanders were directed to conduct a complete investigation of operations which could have generated the PRC complaint. Our findings are as follows: A. 9 June 1972. Alleged Penetration of PRC Airspace over the Ning Ming and Tunghsing areas. (1) There were no US Navy aircraft in the area of the alleged intrusion. A total of [text not declassified] Air Force aircraft (strike, escort, and reconnaissance) were operating southwest of the alleged PRC border violations.

(2) The strike and escort aircraft maintained their position visually and with [text not declassified]. Other support aircraft, including those involved in a MIG engagement were also under control of the USS LONG BEACH. The two RF-4C aircraft, escorted by F-4 aircraft, [text not declassified] but never approached closer than 3 nm to the border.

(3) We have no reason to believe US aircraft violated the PRC border. However, LONG BEACH did have two plots on an unidentified aircraft, ten minutes apart, in the Tunghsing area. There were no known US aircraft (including drones) in the area at the time of these plots. Additionally, none of the aircraft identified above are operated at a speed of 192 knots which is the speed indicated by the time and distance factors resulting from the unidentified LONG BEACH radar fixes.

B. 9 June 197.2 Allegation that US Bomb Splinters struck the PRC ship HONG CHI 150 (Hong Qu 150) in the vicinity of Hon La Island (2 1/2 nm off-shore). (1) The USS STODDERT engaged two waterborne logistic craft (WBLCS) near the PRC merchant ship HONG CHI with the closest shell impacting 1400 yards from the merchant ship.

(2) US Navy aircraft also struck a WBLC and barges approximately 1 nm from the merchant ship. Bomb hits were spotted by the USS STODDERT and all impacted at least 1600 yards from the ship.

(3) Neither bombs, gun projectiles nor flares, (US or NVN) were observed to impact near the Hung Chi. Therefore, it is considered unlikely that splinters were thrown on the ship as alleged.

C. 10 June 1972. Allegations of intrusions of PRC airspace in the area of Ping Hsiang and the bombing of PRC structures in a small village. (1) The US Air Force had no aircraft north of 21 degrees north four hours before or after the alleged incident.

(2) The US Navy did launch six A-7 aircraft for strikes along the northeast railroad and Route 1A near the border area in question. However: (a) All aircraft navigational systems were operational with less than one-half mile error at the update point. The weather was clear in the target area, Lang Son was visible from 20 miles, and the northernmost target which was attacked was some 19 nm south of the area of the alleged incident.

(b) The ingress and egress of all aircraft was monitored by an E-2 airborne early warning aircraft, and while not tracing all aircraft continuously, the E-2 did monitor their progress. No border violations were observed.

(c) All indications are that the A-7 aircraft did in fact remain in NVN and no ordnance was dropped by US aircraft in the PRC.

A thorough review of the reports submitted by the Air Force and Navy commanders concerned, regarding the alleged intrusions of PRC airspace and bombings, does not reveal evidence to support such allegations. Major considerations evolving from evaluation are: A. Adverse weather was not a factor.

B. Ingress and egress routes and target areas were verified visually by aircrews. Target operating areas were further verified, in part, by powt strike photography.

C. Aircraft navigation systems, control procedures exercised by LONG BEACH and the E-2 aircraft, and visual contact maintained between strike forces and escort aircraft all verify that the operations were conducted within NVN airspace and over international waters.

D. Only experienced aircrews are selected for these important missions, and the avoidance of border violations is stressed during aircrew briefings. These efforts are specifically directed towards prevention of PRC airspace incursions and strikes against unauthorized or misidentified targets.

The seriousness and sensitivity of these allegations and complaints are well recognized. Every effort has been and will continue to be made to avoid inadvertent intrusion into the PRC airspace and to insure that ordnance is only delivered upon authorized targets.

/s/Melvin Laird

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 851, President's File-China Trip, Memcons, HAK China Visit 19-23 June 1972 Staff. Top Secret; Sensitive; Codeword. Published from a copy that indicates Laird signed the original.

139. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, June 19, 1972, 10:25-11:20 p.m. 139. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, June 19, 1972, 10:25-11:20 p.m.1

Beijing, June 19, 1972, 10:25-11:20 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Chou En-lai

Ch'iao Kuan-hua, Vice Foreign Minister

Chi Chao-chu, Interpreter

Tang Wen-sheng, Interpreter

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Winston Lord, NSC Staff

DATE & TIME: Monday, June 19, 1972; 10:25 - 11:20 p.m.

PLACE: Guest House #5, Peking

Dr. Kissinger : This was where it all began.

Prime Minister Chou: With the same participants (Lord and Pineau, the stenographer).

Dr. Kissinger : No, Miss Pineau was not on the first trip. I had no idea what we would find here when I came.

Prime Minister Chou: You are probably familiar by now.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, now. And now I always look forward to it very much.

Prime Minister Chou: Yes, it's almost one year, I believe.

Dr. Kissinger : I was accused in a New York Times article of conducting a China-first policy two days ago.

Prime Minister Chou: Oh, is that true? We haven't seen that editorial.

Dr. Kissinger : I will give it to you. I have a copy.

Prime Minister Chou: They say you practice China First?

Dr. Kissinger : China first, at the expense of Japan.

Prime Minister Chou: That might not be so because you also said some very nice things in Japan. For instance, you told them you could now tell them you were coming to China this time and therefore Sato and Fukuda were very happy because they could say they had knowledge of that beforehand.

Vice Foreign Minister Ch'iao: There would be no more Nixon “shocks.”

Dr. Kissinger : There was no way I could avoid telling them, being in Japan 48 hours before the announcement was made. But we told all three—we told both Fukuda and Tanaka, so nobody could claim any preference.

Prime Minister Chou: So which items would you like to be discussed in the restricted meetings?

Dr. Kissinger : Well, we can discuss in the restricted meeting, if you want to, Vietnam or Indochina, Soviet affairs, or a general assessment of the Soviet situation. Let me just see. If you want to discuss anything about Taiwan, I would like to discuss it in a restricted session, and one item about South Asia.

Prime Minister Chou: Japan?

Dr. Kissinger : Japan. We can do it in one of two ways. Either in a restricted session or a slightly enlarged session. I don't need to have every member of my group present at every meeting, and I can control this. I won't ask you to arrange meetings unless it is absolutely necessary. Would this be your format for a restricted session, just this group?

Prime Minister Chou: That will depend upon the specific conditions. The comparatively small scope would be those present. For certain issues that might be related to larger scope, then we would include more, not very many.

Dr. Kissinger : Right. I feel the same way. And we can discuss that from case to case.

Prime Minister Chou: So how do you think we should begin? You informed us beforehand you would like to talk to us about your visit to the Soviet Union and your talks there. But that could be long, do you think?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, that could be.

Prime Minister Chou: What do you think would be rather short? Japan?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, Japan would be rather short. Probably. Probably Japan would be short. And probably I can make one point about the Soviet aspect, because that would relate to what I would like to have Mr. Jenkins discuss with his colleagues. We will have a long discussion about the Soviet Union, but I want to make one point.

It was clear to us one of the objective consequences of the Moscow summit was to free Soviet policy for a greater role in Asia by producing relaxation in Europe. We recognize that this is the Soviet strategy, but we cannot deal with it in Europe.

Prime Minister Chou: You cannot deal with the Soviet Union you mean?

Dr. Kissinger : No, with what the Soviet Union might do in Asia by maintaining tension in Europe, because our allies would not agree to that. But as we decided last December, and in fact proved, we will not support, in fact we will strongly and, if necessary, violently, oppose Soviet adventures in Asia, and in particular pressures that might be directed against the People's Republic. We do this in our self-interest, not for any other reasons.

Now, this, however, makes it desirable that the links that are beginning to develop gradually become somewhat more visible in the area that is being discussed in Paris. And therefore we have asked ourselves how this could be done.

Let me say right at the beginning in the field of trade, for example, we are not interested in this for commercial reasons. The maximum trade we can foresee is almost meaningless in terms of our gross national product. So our interest in this respect is quite different from say, the Japanese interest. We don't look at China as a big market. But we are prepared to use it as a symbol of the equality vis-a-vis the other countries with which we are prepared to trade of the People's Republic, and for whatever use it can be in establishing such links. The same is true in science, agriculture, technology, medicine, etc.

But in this respect I have one particular problem. The problem as I have looked at the Paris channel is that at least in our government very many projects have come up one at a time, and from our point of view become unmanageable in relationship to any political objective. I don't know how it is with you, but that's how it is with us. So we thought that if we could create some commissions in various fields—some joint commissions say in agriculture, economics and science—then we could give directives to our members of these commissions in a general political sense rather than have fifty projects a month that come to us and are very difficult to relate one to another. And then the commission could sort out the individual problems.

If this idea commends itself to you, then Mr. Jenkins, Mr. Solomon and Mr. Holdridge can discuss the details with whomever you designate. But we are also prepared to continue on this present basis. It seemed to us a more efficient way of proceeding.

Prime Minister Chou: Of course, that is a bilateral matter.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

Prime Minister Chou: That belongs to the bilateral field.

Dr. Kissinger : Exactly, but I wanted to explain to you what our general strategy is, and why I am raising it with you rather than leaving it entirely to the bilateral field. We are in no particular hurry. It is simply growing out of our understanding of what the strategy of some other countries may be.

Prime Minister Chou: The second point I would like to ask is, has there been any progress made in the Paris talks with the Vietnamese?

Dr. Kissinger : No, at this moment the Paris talks are suspended and there is no fixed date for the resumption. We have proposed, and this is confidential, we have proposed to the North Vietnamese that there be a private meeting between Le Duc Tho and me on June 28 and have stated that if there is such a meeting its purpose would be to prepare for the resumption of plenary sessions. We have not yet received a reply.

But the real problem, Mr. Prime Minister, is not whether the talks resume but what we are going to talk about when they do resume. The tragedy is—as I have told you before and I know we don't agree, but I have to be honest—the North Vietnamese are very heroic but they are not wise. They are acting as if Dulles were still alive and as if they had to protect themselves against Dulles. There is no solution to this problem if they insist that everything must be settled at once. If they could do what you have done—to separate those issues which must be taken care of immediately from those which should be settled by history, the war would be over in a month. Because we have no permanent objectives in Indochina.

Prime Minister Chou: I also mentioned Dulles to Fairbank. I admitted that I had made a mistake when I met with the five American families that evening. I didn't have time to meet them individually, so I had to put them together.

Dr. Kissinger : Which families?

Prime Minister Chou: Fairbank, Cohen, Stone, Salisbury and Dudman.

Dr. Kissinger : I will hear from them, Mr. Prime Minister, without any question when I come back to America.

Prime Minister Chou: You also mentioned you would like to see Mr. Fairbank.

Dr. Kissinger : Oh, for 15 minutes some time.

Vice Foreign Minister Ch'iao: He is now in Peking. He is going to leave for other places, but he is now in Peking.

Dr. Kissinger : If there's a free half-hour.

Prime Minister Chou: On the first day Mr. Fairbank came he told Mr. Ch'iao he had met you before he came to China. The core of his point was to get Chinese students to go to his research center in Harvard.

Dr. Kissinger : He is a very single-minded man. But, of course, he is also an old friend.

Prime Minister Chou: This time I would like to discuss this issue more with you, the issue of Vietnam. Because you are always trying to compare them with us. This is a different thing. You are a very practical statesman so you know the situation is different.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, we will discuss it any time the Prime Minister wishes.

Prime Minister Chou: But Podgorny on his return to the Soviet Union from the Democratic Republic of Vietnam said he had suggested if the hostilities could stop…if a cease-fire could be entered, together with the bombing and the blockade stopped…we don't know whether that was something you discussed with the Soviet Union. Because he said that openly.

Dr. Kissinger : I have not seen the text of his statement. I can tell you what was discussed with the Soviet Union. I cannot comment on what he said. If you have a text, I will be glad to comment on it.

Prime Minister Chou: We also saw a few press releases. Le Duc Tho passed through China the day before yesterday; I also met him yesterday. I hadn't met Podgorny either. He might have met him…Podgorny might have left after Mr. Le Duc Tho went back. But we don't know. At that time Le Duc Tho hadn't gotten news of Podgorny' s statement. And, of course, I had neither the responsibility nor right to discuss how they were going to proceed. But we assessed the situation together.

So in the future when we have this specific topic of Vietnam I can say more about that. Because if what Podgorny said had already been accepted by the Democratic Republic of Vietnam then it seemed close to what you said. He mentioned a ceasefire in place on the one hand, and on the other hand there will also be a simultaneous cessation of bombing. But we will get the English text.

Dr. Kissinger : What we discussed with the Soviet leaders was an explanation of our May 8 proposal. And we secondly discussed how, if the North Vietnamese insist that there also be a political solution, how the May 8 proposal could be combined with the January 27 proposal, the eight points. We didn't discuss with the Soviet leaders a separate ceasefire that did not involve prisoners. But a ceasefire that included some arrangement for the prisoners we would be extremely interested in discussing, and we would be very flexible in… we would not at all exclude a ceasefire-in-place. (Prime Minister Chou nods.)

But we have not received any official information either from the Democratic Republic of Vietnam or from the Soviet Union as to what was discussed in Hanoi.

Interpreter: In Vietnam?

Dr. Kissinger : In Hanoi.

Prime Minister Chou: We haven't received any either.

Dr. Kissinger : But when we do discuss Vietnam we should discuss it from the aspect that we are not looking for excuses to extend the war and are not looking to inflict a military defeat on the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.

Prime Minister Chou: And beside the question of Japan we would also like to discuss the issue of Korea.

Dr. Kissinger : All right.

Prime Minister Chou: I would only like to ask you one thing. Do you not oppose China discussing with Japan the normalization of Sino-Japanese relations?

Dr. Kissinger : I favor it.

Prime Minister Chou: Yes, I saw from the Japanese reports something to that effect. I would like to confirm them.

Dr. Kissinger : And I encouraged every Japanese leader in that direction.

Prime Minister Chou: And also you, of course, know we haven't had discussions with the Japanese government, but with members of the ruling party, four Prime Ministers and ex-Foreign Ministers. You met four ex- Foreign Ministers and I met three of them. During each meeting we discussed the fact that normalization of relations with Japan would not exclude any other power. And I also quoted the Sino-U.S. communique that neither of us should seek hegemony in the Pacific region and were opposed to any country or group of countries seeking hegemony in that region.

Dr. Kissinger : We both have to show restraint in dealing with Japan. If we were to compete in the short term I think we would win politically, but that's not important. In the long term it would lead to a new nationalistic trend in Japan. So we are encouraging you in your normalizing relations with Japan. And you may have noted Secretary Richardson's comments in Japan. He was there at the same time I was and I overshadowed his speech. But he made a very good speech which said essentially the same thing. I will send you a copy of his speech.

Prime Minister Chou: We only saw some salient points. We haven't seen the text.

Dr. Kissinger : I will send it to you.

Prime Minister Chou: What was the main theme?

Dr. Kissinger : That the U.S. has no objection, and in fact welcomes, better relations between Japan and the PRC.

Prime Minister Chou: Is Mr. Reischauer still opposed to you?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, but that will end after the election.

Vice Foreign Minister Ch'iao: And he's still quarreling with Mr. Fairbank.

Mr. Kissinger: Yes, much of this intellectual community has suddenly discovered a great affection for Japan which they believe we have neglected.

Prime Minister Chou: So you now have made up for that.

Dr. Kissinger : No, I think if you… Well, I cannot follow the Japanese press and what the Japanese press says bears very little relationship to what actually went on. In my conversations I stuck to the basic themes of our understanding which is (1) that we have no objection to normalization of relations between Japan and the PRC, (2) that we are opposed to the nuclear rearmament of Japan.

Prime Minister Chou: I read that, Dr. Kissinger!

Dr. Kissinger : Three, that we are opposed to an overseas role for Japanese military forces.

Prime Minister Chou: I saw that also.

Dr. Kissinger : Four, that the Japanese military should confine themselves to the conventional defense of their home islands.

Prime Minister Chou: I believe you first mentioned that the U.S.-Japan Treaty was necessary.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, I said that, but we have always said this to you.

Prime Minister Chou: But we have noticed that there are some sections of the ruling party that do not agree to that and their opinions are different from other sections of the ruling party, and they wish to make some amendments to that treaty.

Dr. Kissinger : Particularly with regard to Taiwan.

Prime Minister Chou: As to the case about Taiwan, that long ago shouldn't have existed.

Dr. Kissinger : No, there are two issues. One with regard to the language in the communique of 1969, and the other, if we wanted to defend Taiwan whether we could do so from Japanese bases. What I said in Japan about the Security Treaty was that we will not ask for its revision, but Japan is a big country now and it has every right to ask for a revision if they want to, but they have to take the initiative.

Prime Minister Chou: I heard that among the mainstream sector of the Japanese ruling party there are some who would like some amendment of the treaty at a certain time, not necessarily at the present.

Dr. Kissinger : That could be, and when that happens we will consider it. It is my belief that a Japan without the Security Treaty will sooner or later rearm on a nationalist basis, maybe not right away but eventually. It may rearm even with a Security Treaty so I don't want to… because we are dealing here with a very volatile country (Chou nods). It seems to me that the Japanese are torn by four different motives: — an attraction toward the United States produced in part by their defeat, and since they had never been defeated before they have to exalt the country that defeated them; and financial considerations;

— Second, a sentimental historical attachment to China—a combination of love and hatred;

— Thirdly, the Greater Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere toward Southeast Asia; and

— Fourth, an attention toward Siberia now being encouraged by the Soviet Union.

And it is quite conceivable that when you meet them—not you because you're too far-seeing—but China may hear only the pro-China side, and it may be that we hear only the pro-America side, but I think all four exist simultaneously.

Prime Minister Chou: It seems that there's a great difference between your balance of trade still.

Dr. Kissinger : That's right, about 3. 5 billion dollars, and that presents a problem. And the commercial practices of the Japanese present another problem.

Prime Minister Chou: It's a very complicated world.

Dr. Kissinger : But I think it's important not to…I think that Japan has to be kept in some sort of emotional balance, and anyone who is trying to push it too far in one direction may easily bring about the opposite of what he wants.

Prime Minister Chou: I still say that Japan is at a crossroads, and it hasn't yet decided itself.

Dr. Kissinger : I agree with the Prime Minister.

Prime Minister Chou: It's now in a process of change.

So do you think we should end here today? We covered the general range today. Tomorrow afternoon do you think we could try to discuss two topics—Vietnam, the question of Indochina, and second, the question of U.S.-Soviet relations? I would like first to hear your opinion of U.S.-Soviet relations.

Dr. Kissinger : All right. Could I add one member to my group?

Prime Minister Chou: Perhaps we might add Mr. Chang Wen-chin, maybe others depending on your side.

Dr. Kissinger : I will let you know in the morning. I will certainly have Mr. Negroponte for Vietnam.

Prime Minister Chou: I think it is best to begin with you on the question of U.S.-Soviet talks.

Dr. Kissinger : Okay, it will just be the two of us. And then I will turn over the bilateral matters to Mr. Jenkins, Mr. Solomon and Mr. Holdridge, and you might let me know whom they should talk to.

Prime Minister Chou: In the morning perhaps you will all go out to visit… sight-see. We will try to arrange it. So tonight you can get some early rest.

Dr. Kissinger : Actually it's 6:00 in the morning or later for us because of the time change.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Visit, June 1972 Memcons (Originals). Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Presumably drafted by Lord. Ellipses and brackets are in the source text. The meeting was held at Guest House #5.

140. Backchannel Message HAKTO 7 From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Beijing, June 19, 1972, 1801Z 140. Backchannel Message HAKTO 7 From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Beijing, June 19, 1972, 1801Z1

Beijing, June 19, 1972, 1801Z

TO:

GENERAL HAIG

FROM:HWENMJIJ Kissinger

VFE DE WTE10

191810Z JUN 72

HAKTO 7

1. OUR INITIAL RECEPTION HAS BEEN THE WARMEST OF ANY VISIT YET IN PERSONAL TERMS. ALL OUR OLD ACQUAINTANCES HAVE GONE OUT OF THEIR WAY TO BE FRIENDLY.

2. CHOU CAME TO GUEST HOUSE AFTER DINNER FOR A GENERAL WELCOMING SESSION FOLLOWED BY A PRIVATE MEETING WITH ONLY CHOU AND CHIAO KUAN-HUA ON THEIR SIDE. WE DISCUSSED AGENDA DURING WHICH I SUGGESTED THAT EXPANDED BILATERAL EXCHANGES WERE IN OUR MUTUAL INTEREST. CHOU QUERIED ME ON JAPAN TRIP, AND I REVIEWED MAJOR THEMES I SOUNDED THERE WHICH WERE CONSISTENT WITH WHAT PRESIDENT TOLD CHOU WE WOULD TELL JAPANESE.

3. MOST INTERESTING ASPECT OF MEETING WAS CHOU'S OBVIOUS EAGERNESS TO TALK ABOUT VIETNAM. HE NOTED PODGORNY VISIT AND STATEMENT WONDERED WHAT TRANSPIRED AT MOSCOW SUMMIT AND NOTED Le Duc Tho HAD JUST BEEN IN PEKING. CHOU RAN BY US THE IDEA OF A CEASEFIRE-IN-PLACE WHICH I EVADED PENDING HIS RUNDOWN OF HIS DISCUSSIONS WITH Le Duc Tho WHICH HE PROMISED TO GIVE ME TOMORROW.

4. THE SESSION WAS INCONCLUSIVE, LASTING LESS THAN AN HOUR DUE TO FATIGUE. TONIGHTS INITIAL IMPRESSION, HOWEVER, WAS ONE OF CHINESE READINESS TO TALK FRANKLY AND CONSTRUCTIVELY.

5. PLEASE WIRE IMMEDIATELY TEXT OF ELIOT RICHARDSON'S SPEECH IN JAPAN WHICH I PROMISED TO GIVE TO CHOU.

WARM REGARDS

[Covering memorandum]

June 19, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT

FROM: GENERAL A.M. HAIG

SUBJECT: Initial Report from Mr. Kissinger's Peking Trip

Henry has flashed the following initial impressions from Peking: — Initial reception has been the warmest of any visit yet in personal terms.

— Immediately after arrival, Chou En-lai visited Mr. Kissinger at the Guest House. During the meeting, agenda was discussed with Kissinger suggesting expanded bilateral exchanges. Chou queried Kissinger on the Japan trip and Kissinger emphasized that he had remained totally consistent with what you told Chou would be given to the Japanese.

— Kissinger describes the most interesting aspect of the meeting as Chou's obvious eagerness to talk about Vietnam. He speculated with Kissinger about the Podgorny visit and expressed interest in what had happened at the Moscow Summit, referring also to Le Duc Tho's recently completed visit in Peking. Chou mentioned the idea of a cease-fire in place which Kissinger evaded, pending Chou's rundown of the Chinese discussions with Le Duc Tho which were promised for the meeting the following day.

— Kissinger described the initial session as inconclusive, lasting less than an hour due to fatigue. However, first impressions suggest that the Chinese are ready to talk frankly and conclusively.

I will keep you apprised of all Henry's reports as they arrive here.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China-Dr. Kissinger's June 1972 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A copy was also sent to Rodman. Haig transmitted the message to Nixon under an attached June 19 covering memorandum summarizing Kissinger's points. A notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. An additional notation reads: Haig, Rodman.”

141. Backchannel Message HAKTO 9 From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Beijing, June 20, 1972, 1713Z 141. Backchannel Message HAKTO 9 From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Beijing, June 20, 1972, 1713Z1

Beijing, June 20, 1972, 1713Z

FROM: HENRY A KISSINGER

TO:

GENERAL HAIG

WTE DE WTE 10

P 201713Z JUN 772

HAKTO 9

1. WE HAD FOUR PRIVATE MEETINGS WITH CHOU THIS AFTERNOON ON THE SUBJECT OF THE SOVIET UNION AND VIET NAM. I DID ALMOST ALL THE TALKING AS CHOU EXPRESSEDLY INVITED MY PRESENTATIONS AND CONFINED HIMSELF TO CONSTRUCTIVE, NON-POLEMICAL QUESTIONS.

2. ON SOVIET UNION, I BRIEFED CHOU ALONG FAMILIAR LINES ON OUR PURPOSES, ATTITUDES, AND POLICY DEVELOPMENTS SINCE LAST JULY. HE ASKED SERIES OF QUESTIONS WHICH REFLECTED SOME CONCERN ABOUT SOVIET INTENTIONS. HE SAID IT WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE FOR MCGOVERN TO CUT DEFENSE BUDGET BY ONE-THIRD AND LATER MADE A SCATHING REFERENCE TO PEOPLE WHO PROCEED OUT OF NAIVE ILLUSIONS.

3. ON VIETNAM, I REVIEWED OUR POLICY, SLOWING OF NORTH VIETNAMESE OFFENSIVE SOLIDARITY OF OUR DOMESTIC SUPPORT, PRESIDENT'S DETERMINATION AND IMPOSSIBILITY OF OUR BETRAYING AN ALLY. CHOU WAS MODERATE AND SHOWED MORE DIRECT INTEREST IN NEGOTIATIONS THAN BEFORE. HE ONCE AGAIN FLOATED IDEA OF CEASE-FIRE-IN-PLACE. HE SAID THAT IT WOULD PROBABLY BE IMPOSSIBLE FOR MCGOVERN OR ANYONE ELSE TO OVERTHROW Thieu, IMPLYING THAT NORTH VIETNAMESE WOULD HAVE TO ACCEPT THIS FACT. CHOU MADE NO STATEMENT, PERHAPS WISHING TO PONDER MY REMARKS BEFORE OFFERING HIS OWN.

WARM REGARDS.

[Covering memorandum]

June 20, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT

FROM: AL Haig

SUBJECT: Second Situation Report from Dr. Kissinger in Peking

Henry has just reported that he completed four private meetings with Chou on the afternoon of June 20. Kissinger did most of the talking as Chou expressly invited his presentations and confined himself to constructive, non-polemical questions.

— On Soviet Union, Kissinger briefed Chou along familiar lines on U.S. purposes, attitudes and policy developments since last July. Chou asked questions which reflected some concern about Soviet intentions.

— Chou made the point that it would be impossible for McGovern to cut the U.S. Defense budget by one-third and later made a scathing reference to people who proceed out of naive illusions.

— On Vietnam, Henry reviewed our policy designed to slow the North Vietnamese offensive, the fact of solidarity of our domestic support, your determination and the impossibility of betraying an ally. Chou was moderate and showed more interest in negotiations than ever before. He once again floated the idea of a cease-fire in place. Most importantly, Chou said that it would probably be impossible for McGovern or anyone else to overthrow Thieu, implying that North Vietnamese would have to accept this fact (this coincides with the intelligence report we had yesterday).

During the meetings, Chou made no statements; Kissinger surmises he wished to ponder the U.S. position before offering his own.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China-Dr. Kissinger's June 1972 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. A copy was also sent to Rodman. Handwritten notations on the memorandum read: “To HAK file” and “Haig, Rodman.” Haig transmitted the message to Nixon under an attached June 20 covering memorandum summarizing Kissinger's meeting. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Nixon saw it. Nixon bracketed the section on McGovern.

142. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, June 21, 1972, 10:05 a.m.-12:30 p.m. 142. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, June 21, 1972, 10:05 a.m.-12:30 p.m.1

Beijing, June 21, 1972, 10:05 a.m.-12:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS:

Chang Wen-chin, Assistant to the PRC Foreign Minister

Tsien Ta-yung, Deputy Director, Western European, North American and Australian Affairs, PRC Foreign Ministry

Chao Ch'i-hua, American Desk, PRC Foreign Ministry

SHEN JO-YUN, Interpreter

Alfred LeS. Jenkins, Director, People's Republic of China and Mongolian Affairs, Department of State

John H. Holdridge, Senior Staff Member, National Security Council

Richard H. Solomon, Staff Member, National Security Council

SUBJECT:

Bilateral Issues: Exchanges and Trade

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

DATE, TIME, AND PLACE: Wednesday, June 21, 1972; 10:05 a.m.-12:30 p.m.

Guest House, Peking, People's Republic of China

After an initial exchange of pleasantries, Mr. Jenkins opened by expressing gratification at the progress achieved since February in the spirit of the Shanghai Communique, mentioning the U.S. tour by the PRC table tennis team, the visit to China by U.S. Senators Mansfield and Scott, and the imminent Congressional visit. We thanked the Chinese for the hospitality shown American representatives at the Canton Trade Fair.

Mr. Jenkins said that Mr. Kissinger had already given Premier Chou our rationale as to why we believed visible evidence of sustained momentum in exchanges and trade was in our mutual interest. Hence he touched only lightly on the theme that we were interested in this for international and domestic political reasons, not for the intrinsic value of the trade. While we welcomed the latter, it would be small relative to total U.S. foreign trade. President Nixon's chief interest was in the political and psychological significance of exchanges and trade. We recognized that political and psychological factors in turn were germane to the question of timing and pace. For our part, we were prepared now for further forward motion.

Mr. Jenkins said that we were flexible on mechanisms which would advance exchanges and trade. This could entail formal agreements, exchanges of letters, public announcements, or simply implementation without announcement, inasmuch as developments would become public. Visibility, however was important, because the American people had to become accustomed to our new relationship if we were to be able to take more fundamental steps in our relationship at some future time. Furthermore, it was important before such time to have developed a mechanism whereby these matters could be controlled via White House channels.

Mr. Jenkins developed the rationale for movement in such areas as medicine and public health, scientific and technological cooperation, cultural exchanges, and agricultural research. He spoke of the possible utility of some form of bilateral commercial commission. He also referred to the observation made by Secretary of State Rogers in February, 1972 that claims and blocked assets were practical matters affecting the development of trade and probably should be faced soon. These were complicated issues requiring specialists; hence some mechanism to pursue these matters was needed, whether in Paris, Peking, or partly in each city. Chang Wen-chin said the PRC first needed to study the claims/assets problem, but promised to give it early attention.

Charig expressed appreciation for both the substance and spirit of Mr. Jenkins' presentation, which he found most interesting and helpful. He assured Mr. Jenkins that the Chinese side wanted gradual but steady movement. The PRC was actively considering how to further implement the Shanghai Communique. He said remaining political problems prevented the use of certain types of mechanisms during our present stage of transition. He touched politely, and once only, on America's “two Chinas” problem. The Chinese were frankly groping for appropriate mechanisms during the present transitional stage. Referring to the illustrative exchange suggestions the U.S. side presented to the PRC in October, 1971, Chang said that some could be adopted in the near future; others would take longer. Exchanges in physical culture and sports were easy. The Chinese were also actively considering sending medical specialists and other scientists to the U.S. Chang displayed particular interest in cancer research.

Mr. Jenkins said all of these plans were welcome. He concurred in the concept of “gradual and steady” progress, but reitereated the importance of visibility. Referring to the transitional nature of our relations, Mr. Jenkins said that continued momentum could in turn be helpful in easing the political problems of that stage. Development of appropriate mechanisms was also important, so that matters would not “get off the track” as we proceeded down the course we had mutually agreed upon. It was much better to prevent accidents than to have to pick up the pieces after one had occurred.

Chang said their “private organizations” for facilitating exchanges were “unified” and gave them no trouble. He invited elaboration of our concern that problems could arise. Mr. Jenkins said we saw no particular problems on the horizon now, but the nature of our diverse society was such that all sorts of organizations and individuals wanted to get into the act. Some would not have the experience or resources to follow through properly, and we could not vouch for them. Broadly based institutions with experience and resources could “prevent accidents” and more effectively accustom the American public to dealing with the PRC.

Chang Wen-chin said that while formal bilateral commissions or governmental agreements were not appropriate at this stage, perhaps we could experiment with bilateral groups dealing with specific problems or areas of mutual concern. Mr. Jenkins expressed interest, but reminded him of the problem of the ad hoc approach which we had discussed.

Chang Wen-chin said that the PRC was interested in an exchange of scientific information and materials, but Chinese publications were limited just now which would limit reciprocity. PRC publications would be increasing, but he hoped that in the meanwhile the U.S. could provide some information of this sort “out of good will.” We asked for an expression of specific areas of Chinese interest, which Chang promised to supply.

The meeting concluded on this point.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 87, Country Files, Far East, China, PRC Counterpart Talks, 1971-73. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Richard Solomon. The meeting was held at the Guest House.

143. Backchannel Message HAKTO 12 From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Beijing, June 21, 1972, 1615Z 143. Backchannel Message HAKTO 12 From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Beijing, June 21, 1972, 1615Z1

Beijing, June 21, 1972, 1615Z

WE DE WTE1Ø

O 211615Z

JUNE 21, 1972

TO GENERAL HAIG, THE WHITE HOUSE

FROM HENRY A KISSINGER

HAKTO

1. THREE AND A HALF HOUR SESSION WITH CHOU WAS DEVOTED PRIMARILY TO VIETNAM WITH SOME DISCUSSION OF SOVIET UNION AT OUTSET.

2. THEIR DISTRUST OF RUSSIANS WAS ONCE AGAIN CLEAR. CHOU EMPHASIZED THAT DISARMAMENT IMPOSSIBLE, WITH LIMITATIONS IN SOME FIELDS BUT INCREASES IN OTHERS. HE STRONGLY INTIMATED NEED FOR U.S. TO KEEP ITS DEFENSES UP, MAKING FAVORABLE REFERENCES TO Laird TESTIMONY BEFORE SFRC (PLEASE PROTECT). HE ALSO DISPLAYED CONCERN OVER OUR EXTENDING CREDITS TO SOVIETS SINCE THIS MIGHT BE THE ONLY WAY THAT STRAINED SOVIET ECONOMY COULD FUEL THEIR ARMS BUILD UP.

3. CHOU REVIEWED VIETNAM AND MADE RATHER DESULTORY DEFENSE OF NORTH VIETNAMESE POSITION. AT THE END HE SAID THAT CONTINUATION OF THE WAS WOULD NOT REPEAT NOT INTERFERE IN RELAXATION OF RELATIONS BETWEEN US AND PRC.

4. IN SEPERATE COUNTERPART MEETING THERE WAS FULL EXCHANGE OF VIEWS ON HOW TO PROMOTE EXCHANGES BETWEEN OUR COUNTRIES.

5. THEY ARE GOING TO EXTRAORDINARY LENGTHS TO SHOW HOSPITALITY TO US.

WARM REGARDS

[Covering memorandum]

June 21, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT

FROM: AL HAIG

SUBJECT: Report from Dr. Kissinger

I received a third progress report from Dr. Kissinger covering his June 21 activities in Peking. It contained the following highlights: — He had just concluded a 3 1/2 hour session with Chou which was devoted primarily to Vietnam, with some discussion of the Soviet Union at the outset.

— Chou's distrust of the Russians was again emphasized. Chou made the point that disarmament was impossible with limitations in some fields but increases in others the likely outcome.

— Chou again strongly intimated the need for the U.S. to keep its defenses up, even making favorable references to Secretary Laird's testimny before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

— Chou displayed concern over our extending credits to the Soviets since this might be the only way that the strained Soviet economy could continue to fuel their arms buildup.

— Chou reviewed Vietnam and made a rather desultory defense of the North Vietnamese position. At the end, he made the point that ontinuation of the war would not interfere in the relaxation of relations between the U.S and the Peoples Republic of China.

Kissinger also noted that there had been a separate counterpart meeting during which there was a full exchange of views on how to promote exchanges between our countries. Henry again commented on the extraordinary lengths to which the Chinese are going to demonstrate hospitality.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China-Dr. Kissinger's June 1972 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. A copy was sent to Rodman. Haig transmitted the message to Nixon under an attached June 21 covering memorandum summarizing Kissinger's third meeting with the Chinese. A notation on the memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

144. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, June 22, 1972, 2:38-4:28 p.m. 144. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, June 22, 1972, 2:38-4:28 p.m.1

Beijing, June 22, 1972, 2:38-4:28 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS:

Chang Wen-chin, Assistant to the PRC Foreign Minister

Tsien Ta-yung, Deputy Director, Western European, North American and Australian Affairs, PRC Foreign Ministry

Chao Ch'i-hua, American Desk, PRC Foreign Ministry

SHEN JO-YUN, Interpreter

Alfred LeS. Jenkins, Director, People's Republic of China and Mongolian Affairs, Department of State

John H. Holdridge, Senior Staff Member, National Security Council

Richard H. Solomon, Staff Member, National Security Council

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

DATE AND TIME: Thursday, June 22, 1972; 2:38 - 4:28p.m.

PLACE: Government Guest House #3 Peking, People's Republic of China

SUBJECT: Exchanges

Mr. Jenkins: Mr. Chang, you certainly gave us another treat this morning in the athletic event. Both the physical layout of the plant and the performance were very impressive and enjoyable.

Mr. Chang: What was most fascinating was the friendship match between the Chinese and the Americans.

Mr. Solomon: [in Chinese] We really lost face! (Laughter)

Mr. Jenkins: I am not sure it made table tennis history, but it was a good show.

Mr. Chang: But it will be a chapter in Sino-American relations.

Mr. Jenkins: Exactly.

Mr. Holdridge: From now on all people who join Henry Kissinger's staff will have to learn to play ping pong.

Mr. Solomon: Yes; I will soon be fired.

Mr. Holdridge: Starting with Mr. Solomon.

Mr. Chang: Do you have something to say?

Mr. Jenkins: Well, we led off yesterday; I wondered if you care to start today.

Mr. Chang: Yesterday Mr. Jenkins gave us a copy of a draft agreement and we have studied it, and read it in detail. You have set forth many good ideas in agricultural research. As I said yesterday, we think that at the present stage of our relations the conditions are not yet right for the signing of such an agreement. The main reason is that we are now working toward the direction [of fully normalized relations], our two countries; we are just now doing that. So in view of the present circumstances, and in view of what is provided in the Shanghai Communique, the exchanges between our two countries in science and technology and in other fields will be conducted on a non-governmental basis with the governments providing assistance from the sideline. And in addition to that, since the contacts between our two sides in science and technology have just begun, we are still gaining experience in this area. So the signing of a systematic agreement is premature. Our present attitude is that we should leave your proposal for the time being. It would be best to create the conditions for such an agreement.

As for your ideas set forth in the draft agreements in science, culture and technology, we can work toward this direction. We can keep this in mind and work at it constantly. At the present stage, according to the direction provided by the Shanghai Communique, we can exchange delegations and information and other materials and also increase our contacts.

During President Nixon's visit to China both President Nixon and Prime Minister Chou En-lai mentioned some items on which we can have exchanges. And the United States Senate leaders also mentioned some, and other visiting friends mentioned some items on which we can have exchanges. The Chinese Medical Society and other scientific institutions are considering some of the items on which both sides can have exchanges. So we are ready to receive more United States delegations or institutions or friends who would like to visit our country.

Just take, for example, the Congressional leaders who will soon come. The Institute for Foreign Affairs is preparing for their visit. As for the doctors, we have mentioned this to the Society of Medicine. We would like to welcome some cancer specialists from the U.S. Some of our nongovernmental organizations are preparing to send delegations to the United States. Some Chinese scientists are considering going to the United States. Of course not to the United States alone—also to Europe at the same time. And it is going to be a comprehensive delegation from several areas of science. To start with, we think the delegation is not going to be very big.

Regarding the medical science delegation, we are going to send a delegation to introduce Chinese experience in these fields and also learn from your achievements. As for time and composition, we would like to hear your opinions and what you have to say and comment on this.

And thirdly, about the journalists: we have heard that the American Society of Newspaper Editors is going to send delegates to China; and we are also considering sending a delegation to the U.S., but a time has not been fixed yet.

Fourthly, there is going to be an acrobatics delegation going to the U.S. As for the places they might perform, we hope that will be easy to arrange. Since the number of members of the acrobatics troupe will not be as large as the organized theatrical troupe, we think it might be easier to arrange for theaters and so forth because the demands of the staging are not so great.

Mr. Jenkins: Excuse me, I didn't understand. This applies to acrobatics?

Mr. Chang: We think that for the acrobatics troupe the requirements are not as high as for theater or opera. It will be easier to arrange. As for the time for them to go, we haven't decided. We would like your comments.

Fifth, as for exchanges of information and data, we haven't anything to say on this. If you have something to say we would like to hear your views on this. And during the October visit Mr. Jenkins also set forth many specific items in specific areas and we think all these areas are very detailed and perhaps it would be better if during our visits the scientists of the two sides were to exchange general views on these things. See how many of their ideas can be materialized in such areas as environmental research or in chemistry, things like that.

In principle we think exchanges in these areas can be conducted.

Mr. Jenkins: Well, that's a very helpful presentation or so it strikes me. Our handing over the illustrative agriculture paper was primarily for its suggestive content; and as I indicated, we are very flexible on the framework or mechanism involved, and we understand the types of mechanisms which you consider appropriate for the near future. We are very glad to hear, and we have understood, and this was our mutual thinking, that these exchanges will go on and will be increased gradually. We understand that they will not start in very large numbers or frequency, but the areas which you have outlined as of more immediate interest sound very agreeable to me at first view. We will want to talk further as to the possibilities in some of these areas, but I think you are quite right in saying that our specialists will at some point have to explore these fields further. We will certainly welcome the people that you mentioned who are considering coming to the United States. I don't know that we can give a very definite reaction as to a suggested time. I think that can only really be firmed up in correspondence through whatever means with the groups involved. If you wish us to be of any help in that regard we, of course, stand ready to be, but also it will be important for the institutions involved to keep in touch.

Mr. Chang mentioned yesterday the added assurance given by a double track approach to this, emphasizing the non-governmental approach but in line with the Shanghai Communique, but recognizing a certain degree of government help and facilitation would be desirable. I would like to suggest that there be a non-governmental point of contact or two for exchanges which can be of general help, that is covering a fairly broad field. I am thinking about a means of regularizing the management and implementation of exchange progress which you have touched upon; and in the facilitation of that suggestion there are at least two organizations with the experience and resources to be helpful perhaps primarily behind the scenes. They would not be in the forefront, but they can extend help on this sort of thing. First is the Committee on Scholarly Communication of the National Academy of Science, the Social Science Research Council, and the American Council of Learned Societies. This group is qualified to facilitate exchanges in the sciences and also quite a number of other scholarly fields.

Secondly, you have already had experience in connection with some help from the National Committee on U.S.-Chinese relations. It is well qualified to facilitate exchanges in the areas of cultural affairs and education. We could simply maintain a degree of contact with these organizations through the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs in the Department of State, to try to help make sure that things stay on the track.

Mr. Chang: Are these groups both in the National Academy of Sciences?

Mr. Jenkins: No.

Mr. Chang: So all these three organizations are under the Committee for Scholarly Communications?

Mr. Jenkins: Well, not formally as I understand it, but they have joined together to form this committee. It isn't so much that they are under it.

I don't want to slur over your comment on timing and composition. To the extent we can we will be helpful here; but it occurs to us with regard to American contacts of yours in the educational field they may wish to wait until school reopens after the vacation period. On the other hand, they may feel that would be a busier time and would prefer coming before school opens. I think it would vary from school to school. So if you want us to be helpful on this we will be, but direct communications would be fine too.

Likewise, with regard to the composition of the visiting groups, I am certain that the American hosts would wish to be as accommodating as possible and would be interested in your proposals and suggestions along that line. Again, if you want us to be helpful in any way in that respect we will certainly try to be. In any event, in view of our mutual concern that things go right in this, the White House will want to maintain a very keen interest in these matters and would like to follow them closely. But I am sure you can rely, as in the past, on their discretion as to the manner in which that is done. We all certainly believe that your suggestion on the acrobatics visit would be extremely well-received by the American public, and I am certain that insofar as facilities are concerned there would be no problem with larger groups such as operas and things of that sort if you would like to consider that also.

As to exchange of information and data, this is something which we will definitely promise to look into further. It would perhaps be helpful if you could indicate certain areas of particular interest, because if the matter is left that general I think it might leave us a little confused as to where to start.

Finally, with respect to the five areas which you mentioned, Mr. Chang, which in principle are areas that you believe we can move on earlier rather than later—that is the environmental question, agricultural matters, meteorology, marine science and chemistry—we welcome this indication of your views as to which of the two main categories this might fall into. It is helpful to us in our own planning if we know the areas we should next look toward having mutual discussions and planning on. As you know, we gave ideas on these lines in the package we left last October. So if you have any ideas in turn on these questions it would help us to be prepared for movement in these areas when we find a suitable time.

I believe there will be no problem in finding several sponsors for activities in these areas and I assume that in our double-track approach that we can also exchange views on this subject through Paris; or if you have any other mechanism to suggest we are certainly ready to consider that.

Mr. Chang: Thank you very much, Mr. Jenkins, for your setting forth quite comprehensively your ideas, and also your reaction on our position. We understand that the United States side has adopted a flexible attitude toward the problem of mechanisms. What you are concerned about is that such exchanges will be going on smoothly and without any accidents. This is also our desire. As for the specific mechanisms, we will also adopt a flexible attitude and take a flexible form. So we think on this point both our sides are agreed.

Anyway, in line with the Shanghai Communique, the exchange will be done on a nongovernmental basis with the governments providing the conveniences to assure that the exchanges will be carried out well. Of course in the case of such contacts and exchanges the governments of our two sides can keep each other well informed and exchange views for them to refer to so they can consider their problems more carefully to assure that such exchanges will go on well.

As for these private non-governmental institutions which are going to send delegates to the United States, we think we can keep each other well informed either through Paris or the other forums. We will inform the White House of our plans so we can coordinate well.

As for the U.S. delegates, for these more important ones we will also inform the United States side and on such basis we can exchange views and let each other know our suggestions. And these suggestions will also be for the reference of the institutions concerned. As for the organizations we have mentioned—some organizations in science and technology and also the National Committee on U.S.-China Relations that you mentioned—they may play some role from behind the scenes.

We have taken note of such organizations; and actually, when the Chinese table tennis team visited the United States, we got help from the National Committee on U.S.-China Relations so we think they did play a helpful role in our visit. So we will surely tell the related organizations that the two organizations you have mentioned can grant assistance from the sideline, and as for the specific items and organizations we will see when it comes to concrete areas so we will know whether we can have direct or indirect contacts with these organizations you have mentioned.

As for the Cultural and Educational Bureau of the State Department which you mentioned, it will also grant assistance from the sideline. We welcome this because we think the two governments really should give encouragement and assistance to the non-governmental institutions; and actually our discussion here is being carried on with this purpose.

Some specific points that just now we mentioned regarding sending some delegates to visit the United States. Of course this has not yet been finalized; it is not yet finally decided. We have told you about this just to let you know, and we would like to listen to your views on this. We know it is difficult for you to make a comment as to composition, timing and so forth. So we think as long as we are following a two-track approach these related organizations will contact your private groups, but we will also maintain contact through our Paris channel. And we know the U.S. organizations will give a warm welcome and such visits will be successful. But as we are in a period of exploration to start with our delegations will be quite small; but we just want to establish contacts. And besides, you don't have to throw in a large number of people for reception. Afterward we can send more people to your country. We think this might be more effective.

We've also looked at and listened to your views as to how to make the visits more effective and successful. Certainly we have no doubts that you are ready to receive such delegations and will give them a warm reception. At any rate, we will let you know through the Paris channel of the plans for this. The same applies to the other artistic troupes. To start with we will send smaller delegations. In this way it is more convenient to make arrangements. We think it is the same in Europe, and it is rather difficult to make last minute changes in such things. Besides, our actors and actresses haven't had much experience in traveling abroad and may find it difficult to adjust at first. So we will first of all send smaller groups and then bigger ones later. We think this is better and we have no doubt you will also give them very good receptions.

As for the exchanges of information and data, you have just now put forward a very good suggestion and it is true we should let you know more specifics. You have a great amount of information and data and we have very little. So if you send us all your information [at one time] we can't digest it all. So it is better if we let you know what our interests are in more detail.

As for the five areas I mentioned, I am just raising them to illustrate my point. It doesn't mean that our exchanges will be limited to these five areas or that exchanges in these five areas will begin right away. But we think we can have exchanges in these areas. But these are just the principles we need to make further study in these areas. We have contacted the related institutions and they think it is all right to have contact on these items. And it is true that as early as last October you put forward your proposals in these areas, but at that time we were concentrating our efforts on other issues and on preparing for President Nixon, so we were still waiting. But now we are ready to consider these exchanges. We will let you know our concrete proposals later on after consulting with the related institutions.

So generally speaking, we think that we have had very good discussions and fruitful ones; but as to how to concretize this subject, it is necessary for us to hold discussions with the related organizations on how to implement and carry them out. So we will let you know later through the Paris channel. And after learning what we have in mind, perhaps you would like to make other suggestions and if afterward you have a thought about this or you want to make suggestions, please let us know through the Paris channel.

There is another specific problem we would like to put forward to see if the United States Government will help us. Around the time when the President came to China for a visit we built and established a ground satellite station in Shanghai from the RCA Corporation. In the course of that we had contacts with the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium. We hired from them the satellite channels, and General Thompson also came to China. He was of great assistance on this process. He is the Vice President of Operations of that Consortium. The Peking Telecommunications Bureau hired that channel and the channel proves to be very effective for communications between China and the United States. It has been rather highly effective.

And we learned that Taiwan had also established contacts with that Consortium. They also set up a ground satellite station in Taipei. As for this point, we think it is hardly avoidable. But here is a specific problem. The International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium has published a guide to the operation of the satellite system and satellite working plan. In these plans and guide - in the appendix—is published all the names of countries which have set up stations. It is entered in the listing this way: For the Shanghai station, they put “People's Republic of China (Shanghai)”; and for the Taipei station they put “Republic of China (Taipei). So we think such a list is not acceptable to us. In the same list there appear both the “People's Republic of China” and the “Republic of China” and naturally the situation of the two Chinas appears. So we are sure that the United States side is very clear about our position on this subject; we don't have to go into details on that. Since we didn't want to embarrass the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, the Peking Telecommunications Bureau put forward a suggestion to them—they suggested the listing appear this way: “China (Shanghai) “ and “China (Taipei),” so as to avoid the problem of two Chinas. It will mean no loss to the Consortium and it will avoid the difficulties. So the Peking Telecommunications Bureau cabled to General Thompson and asked him to ask the Consortium to change the list. We should say that General Thompson has been very enthusiastic in helping to set up the Chinese ground station and cooperative in this field. He expressed his desire to come again and we will welcome him to come to China again so we can explore this field together. Since we contacted General Thompson on the change of lists by cable, it was impossible to make the point very clear; and since General Thompson is a technical expert, political problems seem not to be in his line. From his return cable it seems he doesn't quite understand the significance of this problem and doesn't follow our concern on this problem. So we will cable General Thompson again urging him to make further efforts. We would like to take this opportunity to raise this question with the United States Government of whether the United States Government can use its influence to settle this question. We think this is a minor problem, but politically it is of great significance. So we think the United States Government might help us to overcome this difficulty. So I think it is not so necessary to make further explanation, and the United States Government will understand this point because this is politically of great significance for keeping this channel free of any barriers between us. Will you please consider this problem?

Mr. Holdridge: Let me ask one question. When you say this is of great importance and significance in conducting our relations—keeping this channel without any barriers—do you mean this physical channel?

Mr. Chang: Yes, the physical channel.

Mr. Holdridge: Using Intelsat to communicate?

Mr. Chang: Yes.

Mr. Jenkins: We certainly understand your position on the problem, and I appreciate the manner in which you have presented it. We will give it consideration and we would like to avoid embarrassment where possible. But we will have to be in touch with you on this.

Mr. Chang: Thank you.

Mr. Jenkins: I understand that these five areas were illustrative, but that they seem to bear perhaps more promise for the near future than some of the other areas and that is helpful for us to know. I do not know whether you find it possible to give us any better idea now as to the time when you are thinking of moving on any of this. If not, then perhaps we will be hearing on that from the Paris channel.

Mr. Chang: It is difficult for us to give you a time on these specific items now, but after our study perhaps we can let you know some time later.

Mr. Jenkins: Certainly. Now, likewise, we would welcome any indication from you as to any problems or ideas you have with regard to either the timing or composition of prospective groups from the United States. More than one of our symphony orchestras have expressed an interest in coming to China. I think that would actually be a nice presentation. They can make an interesting and brilliant performance, but it does involve a large number of people. So if you want to get any ideas across to us on timing or composition, I hope you will feel free to do that, and if we can help you in any way you can contact us through the Paris channel.

Mr. Chang: As for the timing of the visit to China of the U.S. science and technology delegation, we think whatever time they want to come is all right. But as for our scientific delegation which is going to visit the United States, we will try to send them as early as possible, but the earliest time will be summer vacation. Perhaps it won't do even in July or August because they have to do some preparatory work. We would like to know whether it is better for them to go after summer vacation. As for the acrobatics troupe, we are thinking of sending them later. Our tentative idea is to send them in the winter. As for a U.S. symphony orchestra, it would be better for them to come later, for it is more complicated than the scientific delegation. As for the journalist visit, the timing is not important; but some of our [American]journalists friends suggested they could come during your election period to learn more about political life. But I doubt whether this is the best time for them to go because our American friends will be kept busy. And others might speculate about the reason for them to go then. So I doubt this.

Mr. Jenkins: Well, that's very considerate of you to bear that in mind. I think there are mixed considerations involved there, and I think we can have further communication on it.

Mr. Holdridge: We can go into the scientific and technical delegation visit through the Paris channel very quickly.

Mr. Jenkins: As to vacations, I don't think you have to assume that is a hurdle in any specific instance. We are not like the French; we don't all go away in August. In fact many universities are on the quarter system and their summer program is comparable to the other quarters; and the professors take their vacations in the other three quarters, not in the summer. So I think this is something you would want to look into in this specific instance.

Mr. Chang: Any other point to make? If not, shall we stop here? I think our discussion has been helpful today.

Mr. Jenkins: I certainly agree; very helpful. We can take comfort that we seem to be thinking as nearly parallel as we are in the next step to be taken. I would like to ask if you think it might be wise for us to agree to look into, fairly soon, this matter of claims and blocked accounts. It could produce problems as our trade grows. It could throw some commodities into question; someone who has a claim could take it into the courts. I think this is something our experts ought to get together on because it does offer the possibility of an embarrassing incident which we as a government would be unable to manage because of the courts. You know the structure of our courts; there is nothing we can do there. We would like to avoid embarrassment at this early stage in our trade relations. We would like to reach agreement, however informally, as to the possibility of our experts getting together in Paris or Peking, or anywhere, just to explore the issue to be sure our experts understand the pitfalls and explore the possibilities of getting it cleared up. This is not unrelated to our considering Most Favored Nation treatment in principle. Here I am speaking of the private claims as related to the blocked Chinese accounts, because it is this that could cause trouble with something being thrown into the courts involving commodities and claims. The government claims get us into difficult private questions, and we might mutually want to postpone this aspect of the problem for a while; but the most immediate pitfalls involve these private claims and blocked accounts. But the blocked Chinese accounts are linked to the private claims aspect, so that we would envision as a part of this more immediate problem a joint solution if you are agreeable to it.

Mr. Chang: I quite understand why you put forward this question, because when we discuss the trade problem this claim problem might crop up and it might create an embarrassing situation. But this is quite a specific question, and I haven't had any detailed study on this question because this is quite a complicated one. And as you know, there is the question of the different systems of our countries against a certain historical background which involves the different laws. We think the American claims question is related to the Taiwan problem. It is very difficult to distinguish which claim belongs to our country and which belongs to Taiwan. There might be a claim for something which you think belongs to Taiwan, but actually it belongs to us. It is difficult to sort them out. At least we must ourselves make clear where the problem lies. Only after studying can we say whether there are conditions for the experts to meet and discuss this question. And if there is going to be a meeting between the experts then there is a problem of how—on a governmental basis or on a private basis. So all these questions need to be discussed. We will further study this question and let you know our tentative idea afterward.

Mr. Jenkins: Fine. We would appreciate your giving early attention to it at your convenience, because we want to avoid possible embarrassment here. We are all laymen in these matters, but I am told by our experts they believe the particular problem which could affect our trade can be dealt with short of getting into the more troubling political aspects concerning, for instance, government property and that sort of thing which doubtless we will have to wait on a little while. But I think we might find it helpful and worthwhile to solve the private claims issue in view of our beginning trade.

Mr. Jenkins: This has been, I think, very helpful indeed; and we appreciate the opportunity to go into these matters. And we will look forward to the use of the channels we have.

Mr. Chang: Thank you very much for spending so much time discussing these matters.

Mr. Jenkins: We certainly appreciate it.

Mr. Chang: So shall we stop here since we have been told we are going to have a picnic at the lake?

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 87, Country Files, Far East, China, PRC Counterpart Talks, 1971-73. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by Solomon. Brackets in the source text. The meeting was held in Government Guest House #3.

145. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, June 22, 1972, 7:10-7:45 p.m. 145. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, June 22, 1972, 7:10-7:45 p.m.1

Beijing, June 22, 1972, 7:10-7:45 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Chou En-lai

Ch'iao Kuan-hua, Vice Foreign Minister

Chang Wen-chin, Assistant Foreign Minister

Tang Wen-sheng, Interpreter

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Jonathan T. Howe, NSC Staff

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

DATE & TIME: Thursday, June 22, 1972; 7:10-7:45 p.m.

PLACE: Boat on Lake at Summer Palace, Peking

(The talks on the boat consisted of small talk about the surrounding scene, etc. interlaced with substantive and semi-substantive conversation. Points of substantive interest follow, with the small talk omitted.)

* * *

Dr. Kissinger : It's [Camp David] much simpler than the dacha of the Soviet leaders.

Prime Minister Chou: And it's not possible for correspondents to go there.

Dr. Kissinger : Impossible. It's the one place they cannot follow the President. That's why if your Vice Foreign Minister ever wants to get away from New York we can take him up there and no one can follow him. That is, only if he doesn't concentrate his torment on us.

Prime Minister Chou: How far is it—Camp David—from New York?

Dr. Kissinger : By helicopter—we usually go by helicopter—half an hour. About 80 kilometers.

* * *

Prime Minister Chou: (pointing to hillside) This was the earth that came out of the lake.

Dr. Kissinger : The mountain?

Prime Minister Chou: They dug the lake and piled the dirt into a hill. The Dowager Empress had that done. And she used more than half of the navy budget to build this summer palace.

Dr. Kissinger : It's a good way to get disarmament.

Prime Minister Chou: And finally in 1894 she was defeated in war and in that way Taiwan and China were divided for the first time. But there also was a good point because that defeat also gave rise to the Chinese peoples' awakening. Otherwise, the Chinese empire was so proud and arrogant that it thought it could do anything and no one could do anything to her. Even the Chinese people at that time were not thoroughly awakened, so that proves the point you just now mentioned that one cannot be tempered without being defeated in battle.

Dr. Kissinger : No, without suffering in battle. Suffering is enough—not defeat. I just wanted to be sure the Prime Minister in his usual thoughtfulness didn't overarrange this for us.

Prime Minister Chou: But it was true that China was defeated in that war.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

Prime Minister Chou: During the second war we suffered, that was during the Russo-Japanese war. The two foreign countries were fighting on Chinese land and that time we suffered.

Dr. Kissinger : In Port Arthur, yes.

Prime Minister Chou: Yes, and in between was the invasion of the eight powers, including the United States, of course, but it was led by a German general.

Dr. Kissinger : And I was just going to say the German empire was particularly expansionist. (laughter)

Prime Minister Chou: All the colonial countries joined in that invasion actually. Even Portugal gained a morsel and Spain, Holland, and Belgium, Austria…

Dr. Kissinger : Austria too?

Prime Minister Chou: Yes, and they had a concession in Tientsin.

Dr. Kissinger : But it was amazing that China, weakened as it was, pursued its independence.

Prime Minister Chou: Of course, on the one hand it was because of the strong desire for unity. On the other, so many countries were trying to get something out of China, other countries couldn't control it.

Dr. Kissinger : But they might have divided it up. Your diplomats very skillfully played them off against each other.

Prime Minister Chou: There were contradictions among them. But on the other hand, China was not like the former Africa that was carved up like a melon. What happened in China was the division of spheres of influence. That's why we have an Anti-Imperialist Road in China. It used to be called Legation Street. That was a funny name. Just south of Trinamen Square. It used to be a very privileged area, with embassies and foreigners who had privileges; and the Chinese there were submitted to everything. There is a hospital now called the Peking Hospital that used to be a German hospital. But it was not a place people would go for treatment. It was a place where foreign officials went to play cards and smoke opium.

Dr. Kissinger : When did it become a hospital?

Prime Minister Chou: It was always called a hospital.

Dr. Kissinger : But it wasn't used, was it?

Prime Minister Chou: They used it to cover up their nefarious deeds. And the street that leads to the Soviet Embassy, during the Cultural Revolution the name of the street was changed into Anti-Revisionist Road. And there was a ceremony to celebrate the changing of the name, a ceremony that lasted ten days and a lot of people participated.

Dr. Kissinger : Like what—two million?

Prime Minister Chou: Maybe. (Laughter) But it was very orderly. Something might have happened, but nothing happened. At the beginning of the Cultural Revolution it was very orderly. All the students and youths were very orderly. Later on, because of the bad elements, there was a period of confusion. So you know…if things get out of hand…

Dr. Kissinger : It's very difficult to keep a revolution in balance.

Prime Minister Chou: And you have to go through many twists and turns, but the good thing is the bad elements get exposed or drop out of their own accord.

Dr. Kissinger : I was always very interested in the study of revolution, and tried to study it, but I don't know of any other revolution that was led by the government against its bureaucracy.

Prime Minister Chou: Against its bureaucracy, and the people in authority taking the capitalist road, and revisionists. You don't have time now, but maybe after the election you can get a vacation from your job and come here, and we will talk about these things and you can bring two stenographers.

Dr. Kissinger : After the election actually would be a good time to have more talks.

Prime Minister Chou: Yes, that will depend on your efforts.

Dr. Kissinger : In the election?

Prime Minister Chou: Including that…I had a double meaning. One is that you should make your efforts to get your President re-elected. The second is your efforts to normalize relations between China and the United States. Because if you consistently refuse to normalize relations and then if I follow you at the Palace, the masses will be cursing me—they won't applaud me when I come if that happens. You understand, of course, the sentiments of the people.

Dr. Kissinger : Oh, yes, but I think we are making major efforts to normalize relations.

Prime Minister Chou: Yes, but they haven't been enough yet.

[Prime Minister Chou then switched the discussion to the scenery there and in Hangchow.]

* * *

Dr. Kissinger : They [newsmen] have one story that I went straight to the Great Hall of the People and spent three hours with you.

Prime Minister Chou: And also that there were quite a number of Red Flag limousines.

Dr. Kissinger : I know the Soviet Ambassador is probably sitting in my waiting room now.

Prime Minister Chou: He will probably pay a call on you when you return.

Dr. Kissinger : The only question is whether he will be in my office when I return. And if I tell him that there weren't that many meetings, and no meetings in the middle of the night, he will know there is some devilish plot.

Prime Minister Chou: Yes, probably so, and if you tell him you got a good chance to get some sound sleep, he probably won't believe you.

Dr. Kissinger : He'd never believe it. I had better confirm everything he's heard.

* * *

Dr. Kissinger : I don't envy anybody in China who is trying to get information you don't want him to have, and this applies to ambassadors also. Sometimes we see reports that ambassadors stationed here write, and they are fantastic.

Prime Minister Chou: They probably can only do some guesswork and then talk to each other about things that might only exist in their minds.

Dr. Kissinger : Exactly.

Prime Minister Chou: And they take in each other's information.

Dr. Kissinger : If I don't appear for a few days they start guessing.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Visit, June 1972 Memcons (Originals). Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Brackets in the source text. The meeting was held on a boat on a lake at the Summer Palace. No drafting information appears on the memorandum; presumably drafted by either Lord or Howe.

146. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, June 22-23 1972, 11:03 p.m.-12:55 a.m. 146. Memorandum of Conversation, Beijing, June 22-23 1972, 11:03 p.m.-12:55 a.m.1

Beijing, June 22-23 1972, 11:03 p.m.-12:55 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Chou En-lai

Chiao Kuan-Hua, Assistant Foreign Minister

Chang Wen-chin, Assistant Foreign Minister

Tang Wen-sheng, Interpreter

Chi Chao Chu, Interpreter

Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Jonathan T. Howe, NSC Staff

June 22, 1972

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

DATE & TIME: Thursday, June 22, 1972, 11:03 p.m.-12:55 a.m.

PLACE: Government Guest House #5, Peking

Prime Minister Chou: We will not stay up all night like October.

All this time we have had a discussion on various aspects of various matters. On some of the questions we discussed our views approximate. But a relatively important question is still the question of Vietnam and Indochina. I would first like to discuss some other matters before going back to the Vietnam problem.

Your President made an estimate of the Sino-U.S. summit talks as well as the U.S.-Soviet summit talks. That is in the article written by your President which I mentioned this afternoon. And I hope that when you go back to Washington you will report to your President that point on which I showed concern today.

Dr. Kissinger : You can be certain.

PM Chou: At the same time I can inform you that as for the Sino-Soviet talks, they are also up to some maneuvers. There is a question of a triangle. We don't look at it that way, but the Japanese like to look at things that way. The Soviet Union makes out there have been Sino-U.S. talks and there have been U.S.-Soviet talks being dragged out. But the Sino-Soviet talks arise out of a different set of circumstances, a different set of provocations. If we say the Soviet Union first created tension over the Berlin question in the West and the Czechoslovakia question; and the Romania and Yugoslav questions, they have not succeeded in that yet, then in the East it was the question of the Chempao Island incident. That I discussed with your President in the Villa 18.

Dr. Kissinger : I remember that.

PM Chou: Three years and more have passed now, and on the 11th of September of that year (1969) the Prime Ministers of the two countries agreed on a provisional arrangement. But even now these provisional arrangements have not formally turned into an agreement. Kuznetsov negotiated with us for eight months in Peking—then he went back and another Deputy Foreign Minister came in his place. But when Kuznetsov went to India, he solved the problems with India in one week. So we can see the difference in nature between the Sino-Soviet and Soviet-Indian questions.

Since the Soviet side changed their Vice Foreign Ministers, we too changed ours. We didn't have as many but we changed too, and we liberated Mr. Chiao. And the new head of our delegation is Mr. Yu Chang. But this change of the heads of the delegation may also have led to some miscalculations on their part. Mr. Chang in 1963 was also a member of our delegation discussing the boundary with them. And the Soviet Union has been putting out feelers several times saying the two Prime Ministers may meet once again. And the General Secretary will meet with us anytime and any place. But we say when the two sides cannot arrange an agreement or even a temporary agreement, how can there be talk between the two leaders?

We said let us first all agree on provisional agreements. That should be easy according to your experience. But for us it is exactly the opposite. We don't know when we will be able to reach an agreement with more of these provisional arrangements. If you don't come this year, but come next year, even then there will be no agreement. There's a saying in China that a fair price on the market differs from morning to the night. So there is not much to their feelers.

And so with respect to the U.S.-Soviet talks we had estimated long ago, and have told you estimated, you will be able to have results quickly. Negotiations would be coming quickly, and would achieve results. And on the other hand, after the reaching of various agreements between the United States and the Soviet Union, the Soviet Union wants to indicate it wants to speed up their talks with us in form, but in substance it will be slow. Because there is no question. It is only a question of the boundary, and as for the boundary question they are well aware we have no territorial ambitions. Yet they keep on saying we do and no matter what we say they say we do.

Just like the Indians. As I told you this afternoon, India too is putting out feelers for contacts with us. As for the question of contact, it is not something we cannot do. But until Pakistan is firm, and because of its problems, it would not be advantageous to Pakistan if we were to contact the Indians. Because our situation with India is not the same as yours because you have a certain position with India and there is the question of Bangla Desh. As for our recognition of the so-called Bangla Desh, it can take place only after all Indian forces have withdrawn from Bangla Desh and the Pakistani territory they occupy, and only after a peace agreement has been reached, and after Pakistan herself has recognized Bangla Desh. And even then we will see. We need to be in no hurry.

Dr. Kissinger : I don't look for it then under these conditions.

PM Chou: No, it won't happen this year. But there is an advantage in your recognition. So in this sense the reaching of an agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union. They too can discuss borders. It is advantageous to have some relaxation in the situation and can make the Europeans feel more at ease. But there is still the question of the Middle East which it will be difficult until the situation is relaxed there. We can only just leave it there. Isn't that so? I know you aren't looking after Middle Eastern affairs,

Dr. Kissinger : Well, the Soviet Union has at one time indicated some interest to discuss the Middle East with us at the Presidential level, but then the matter has not progressed.

PM Chou: Yes. And as we saw it from your joint communique and your visit to the Soviet Union this time, you are just putting it on the sidelines for the time being.

Dr. Kissinger : I think this is essentially correct. There may be some discussions later this year, and if there are we will keep you informed. Our impression is the Soviet Union would like to have the situation quieted down in the Middle East.

PM Chou: Hmmmm. But is it possible to have the situation quieted down?

Dr. Kissinger : It hasn't proved to be possible in the last three years.

PM Chou: At least it is different from Indochina because there is a war going on in Indochina whereas there [Middle East] there are just small clashes now and again. So the question remaining is still the Vietnamese question. And on this question we have also long been of the opinion that we differ even with regard to various concepts. If we proceed from our concept, you would leave and let the Vietnamese people solve their own problem themselves and no one will interfere with any outside forces that would be, as Ho Chi Minh had said, that you would be given a sendoff on a red carpet. Otherwise, what will happen will still be war. But in these circumstances, without outside interference, they will be fighting with their doors closed. That is our thinking.

That's like what I said to you this evening about the Chinese Civil War. How can we impose our thinking upon them? So we could only admit that we were mistaken in signing the 1954 Geneva Agreements, that we were taken in by Dulles at that time. And what is more, Vietnam being such a small country, how can we want them to copy from us? That would be imposing upon them.

You know, after the Japanese surrender, on the surface we did have a period of ceasefire with Chiang Kai-shek; after we signed the peace agreement with them there was a ceasefire on the surface for half a year. At that time Chiang Kai-shek was the representative of all China. We were only a region of China. But we had the courage to sign the ceasefire agreement and when we signed we were confident Chiang Kai-shek would break up the agreement and we were aware when he did tear up the agreement he had been wrong. So, as you see, in the White Paper of Acheson they too expressed disagreement with it, so it also crossed Chiang Kaishek. And then it seemed that later your Department of State published papers about our discussion with Marshall. I didn't take the trouble to read them.

Dr. Kissinger : I haven't read them either.

PM Chou: I don't think you should. Since you have direct discussions with me why do you bother to read these papers? I don't think you would write such memoirs.

Dr. Kissinger : No.

PM Chou: (To Lord) And you?

Mr. Lord: I have no intention; I am illiterate anyway.

PM Chou: So we cannot impose our thinking on a small country. If one were only proceeding from our thinking, our thinking would be like yours. That is, you go your way and as for Vietnam affairs, you cannot meddle in them anymore. As you said, one month would be too short for the fighting to break out again. It could be a bit longer. But we cannot impose this thinking on them. We cannot fight on their behalf either. Because we already have our joint communique; we have our agreements. It is not like the case in Korea when we said we could not stand by and President Truman didn't believe in us. Because we said that—we cannot stand by. At that time India was still our friend and we issued this warning through the Indian Ambassador to China -if the forces approached the Yalu River we could not stand by.

Dr. Kissinger : May I ask you a question, as a historian? If we had not gone up to the Yalu River, if we had stopped, say at the narrow neck of the peninsula, would you have come in?

PM Chou: A little north of the 38th parallel?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

PM Chou: Once you occupied Pyonyang, you could not stop the momentum of your advance. If you had stopped just a bit north of the 38th parallel, we would not have gone in, because Kim still at that time had his strength and his forces. But after you landed in Inchon and thrust into Pyonyang you couldn't stop your momentum. You couldn't put a stop to your forces, nor could Sygman Rhee put a stop to his. Once a war breaks out, then the development of that war is often independent of its will—it has its own development. When we told Ambassador Pannikar to inform this to President Truman, Chairman Mao had already put his forces in place, but we had not made the final decision to cross. If the American forces had just crossed the 38th parallel and fought in that region we wouldn't have done it.

But that can only be the thinking of a philosopher. War has it's own laws of development, and we were of the opinion that once you made your landing and took Pyonyang then you would continue your advance. It was easy to shatter their armed forces. Under these circumstances one needs foresight.

So the Vietnam question before us also has the same question. For the Vietnamese, from the point of view of their experience, they think it best to solve the political and military questions together. Because the war started out in South Vietnam, so it is their view that a tripartite government should be set up in the south. And if you were to put yourself in the Vietnamese shoes you could understand that is a matter they want to have put forward for consideration if the present regime is not changed and the Saigon regime is a pro-American regime. But if one is to say that should a tripartite government be formed in Vietnam it will surely be a government led by the communists, I don't think one can be so quick. Because there is no question that in such a government the United States would have its share, and France would have its share, and the Soviet Union would have its share too.

Dr. Kissinger : France is great at getting shares when it costs and risks nothing. (PM Chou laughs).

PM Chou: But you shouldn't blame too much on them. In a certain sense, let us say, in the colonial sense, Mendes-France did something favorable for you. In the sense of the people it wasn't good because it dragged you into a war. Because the war you involved yourself in recently, the war in Vietnam, is the biggest with the greatest losses and expenditures. If you didn't go into Vietnam there would have been no such costs.

So as I see it, if you can work out in a good way the setting up of a tripartite government, it couldn't be immediately turned into a communist government. You can say you have been too subjective. When I say communist I mean a genuinely communist government cannot be set up. It would be a government of complex composition. Of course, that government wouldn't completely listen to your behest, nor to the behest of North Vietnam. As for China, we have no interest in interfering. As for you, you will still have the possibility of investment.

Dr. Kissinger : Vietnam is costing us an enormous amount of money. I am not aware of any significant American investments in Vietnam.

PM Chou: Japan wants investments there.

Dr. Kissinger : Japan wants investments everywhere, from Siberia to Thailand.

PM Chou: Not only to Thailand. To the Indian Ocean. You know, $10 billion of reserves are all American dollars. Your economic policy cannot be a benefit to that so they must invest.

Dr. Kissinger : They will buy the East-Asia co-prosperity sphere with dollars. It's an interesting historical period.

PM Chou: That is true. Indeed they do have these ambitions.

Dr. Kissinger : No, I agree with the Prime Minister that the purpose of these dollars is to make investments in underdeveloped areas, not back into the United States.

PM Chou: Because otherwise what do they do with that money? It would be useless to just keep it. What else do they do with it? For instance, talking about ants or termites, if you go to Canton or Hainan Island those termites holes are like a mountain. In fact, a termite hole might be as big as this room. So the ants too might be quite formidable. That is their $10 billion.

So if you are to give very careful thought to this matter, to have a political solution in Vietnam, now would not necessarily be to your disadvantage, nor to the disadvantage of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. That is why we do not meddle into your negotiations with them because we are not so sure of ourselves or clear about the situation in South Vietnam. If we give specific suggestions and are wrong we will be responsible. So we can only say we approve of your solving the questions through negotiations. We can only tell them that if you continue the fighting we will support you to the end. Secondly, we support you to bring about a solution through negotiations. As to how the negotiations proceed we do not meddle in it at all. As fort you, comparatively speaking, a more advantageous way would be through negotiations.

In solving the Indochina question it is not Vietnam alone—it is still a question of Cambodia and Laos, but they are comparatively easier. Because no matter what happens we can say for certain that elements of the national bourgeoisie will take part in such a government, and we can be sure in Cambodia Prince Sihanouk will be the head of state, and in Laos the King will be the head of state. So if it can be solved through negotiations such an outcome would be a matter of certainty.

But with this determination of your President—he said it was his decision to engage in bombings and blockade—you have heard the propaganda in the outside world creating various rumors about you?

Dr. Kissinger : I don't know what the Prime Minister… .

PM Chou: Saying members of your Administration are opposed to your moves. I don't believe these rumors.

Dr. Kissinger : Mr, Prime Minister, there are members of this Administration who oppose every move we have made, including the move toward China.

PM Chou: Surely. But as I see it, if this policy of yours continues without change it is disadvantageous to you and disadvantageous to the relaxation of world tension. Because as I said, the other day, if you force the Vietnamese into a corner then they will go desperate.

Dr. Kissinger : Were you finished?

PM Chou: Just up to now. You have declared you do not want to destroy them militarily and what is more you admit the Democratic Republic of Vietnam is a strong factor in Indochina.

Dr. Kissinger : And a permanent factor.

PM Chou: And what is more you said that when you withdraw all your forces including advisors, Army, Navy and Air Force, the Vietnamese will be able to solve their problems themselves. And I particularly make it a point, to make it clear now we would approve this course of action. But we are China—we understand this logic of this course of action and you used this course of action to achieve victory.

At the time the Soviet Union had a treaty with Chiang Kai-shek. Their treaty was called the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance, whereas in the treaty we had we added other wording, “Mutual Assistance.” Outer Mongolia was lost to them by Chiang Kai-shek, not by us. It was written in the treaty of alliance between Chiang Kai-shek and the Soviet Union. When Gromyko went to Japan, Japan recognized the People's Republic of Mongolia and Gromyko cursed them. When I saw them I laughed. Why is Chiang Kai-shek trying to play the hero?

So we Chinese are able to understand this policy. But for the Vietnamese, they cannot rely on such a policy. Since the war in the north and south has become one, and the war in Indochina as a whole has become one, they would like to see a final solution to the question before they can find themselves at ease.

As to the composition of a tripartite government we don't want to meddle in that. We only hope negotiations between you and North Vietnam will find a way out. We can only express our support for that. We cannot say anything more.

And as we just now mentioned in the car, each side has its fear. You have the same fear of the seven points that the Democratic Republic of Vietnam has of the eight points. So the problem is only for you to thrash the problem out with the Vietnamese at your secret conference table. Otherwise, the consequence will be continued fighting and the result will be highly disadvantageous. Before you had correct ideas—maybe now you have some mistaken notions.

Dr. Kissinger : When did I have correct ideas?

PM Chou: You said if the war continues, the Soviet Union will be most happy.

Dr. Kissinger : I still believe that.

PM Chou: And India, Because if the war continues it will be a constant burden on you and also on us, though we are not taking part directly in the war. But at least an obstacle will be placed between our two countries with the continuation of the war.

Dr. Kissinger : No question. This is not so from our side, and maybe not from your side completely, but that is the hope of the countries who do not want an improvement in our relations.

PM Chou: That is so, and that is a more principled way. We shouldn't look at things in a static way. Sometimes a specific country may change its views on certain matters.

Dr. Kissinger : Mr. Prime Minister, I think this is a very fair and just view of the situation. I think you have explained the dilemma extremely well, and you are telling us, in effect, you can understand our point of view, you might even accept it if we were dealing with you, but you can also understand Hanoi's difficulty. As I told you in the car, first, your views are always taken extremely seriously by us, more seriously than of almost any other leader, and as some of my contacts have pointed out, too seriously by me.

PM Chou: But these views of mine are Chairman Mao's views.

Dr. Kissinger : Of course. I understand. So you can be certain we will examine what you have said with the greatest care.

PM Chou: Because when we consider any question we always proceed from a very serious manner and in a calm way, not trying to convince the other through some maneuver or sleight of hand.

Dr. Kissinger : And you have proved this by what you just said, which was a principled way of putting the problem. We will make, as I told you in the car, a major effort this summer to solve the situation, and if we make any headway at all we will reduce the scale of our military assistance drastically. We have not yet settled the precise time of the resumption with the North Vietnamese, but it can only be a question of a week in the second half of July.

PM Chou: Indeed to wait for some time might help to consider things in a more calm way.

Dr. Kissinger : Of course, I don't want to mislead the Prime Minister, Until the talks start, the military actions, with the restrictions I mentioned this afternoon, will continue.

PM Chou: But I can only draw your attention to the fact that if such military operations are too excessive it can only anger our people more.

Dr. Kissinger : I have your view on this very much in mind.

Now we, of course, believe that the view you too think is the best, is the way one should proceed, and it is a view we will put forward in the negotiation. But we will not reject in advance any propositions which the Democratic Republic of Vietnam will make to us, and we will examine them very carefully.

PM Chou: And you too may put forward your propositions.

Dr. Kissinger : I, of course, greatly respect the Prime Minister's reluctance to discuss with a neighboring country on substance, but I don't know whether the same restriction applies to advising with respect to style, and at least the minimum amount of confidence required for conducting a negotiation.

PM Chou: So long as you proceed from a position of sincerity they should also reciprocate with sincerity. But you should understand that after such a long period of tempering in such wars, their attitudes and style are likely to be what they are.

Dr. Kissinger : We will proceed from a position of sincerity, or at least do our best, but it is extremely difficult if one must conduct a negotiation with Le Duc Tho and the New York Times which has been given information by Le Duc Tho. The Vice Foreign Minister conducted a negotiation with the New York Times this fall, so he knows what this is like.

So if they can deal with us seriously, and if they will use the opportunity of talking to me in a sensible way, that is to say they are dealing with someone who can make rapid decisions on a big scale, I think we have a good chance of ending the war this summer, which would be advantageous to everybody.

PM Chou: But you should realize that strictly speaking the war is taking place on Vietnamese soil.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand, and I also understand we are the larger country so we have a particular obligation.

PM Chou: As I said yesterday about Taiwan, with a population of 15 million it is a matter for the Chinese to say it. But for Japan with respect to Okinawa, they couldn't do that even though they are a defeated island. Because even the Senkaku Islands, they are still quarreling over that with us with no population at all.

Dr. Kissinger : But when the Prime Minister read that one line from the poem about being farsighted, I believe if we are far-sighted in Southeast Asia, both the United States and the People's Republic of China have an interest in keeping the region free from big countries. And if we are far-sighted, we can see the day when the United States will help Hanoi rather than fight Hanoi.

PM Chou: That is right.

Dr. Kissinger : I do want to assure, above all, the Prime Minister that we will approach these negotiations with a sincere intention of bringing about an end to the war and with every attempt to end it this summer.

PM Chou: Speaking openly, we declared openly that we demand a cessation of your bombing and blockade of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, but here in these private talks in a friendly way, I would say that if your President would stop the bombing and blockade it would be advantageous to us. I believe Professor Fairbank has already told you about what I asked those other Americans about McGovern. That is, I asked them could McGovern, if he were elected, cut one-third of the military budget, and no one could reply.

Dr. Kissinger : I talked to Fairbank only about comparing the China he knew with China now.

PM Chou: He didn't tell you about this?

Dr. Kissinger : No, but you had told me, Mr. Prime Minister.

PM Chou: I said it, but the correspondents didn't report it, which shows partiality. Miss Tang can bear witness because she was interpreter at the time. I was very sharp in raising the question at the time.

Dr. Kissinger : I had seen your criticism, or what they reported as your criticism of the Vietnam policy.

PM Chou: It will indeed be the best thing if you are able to succeed in your negotiations with them. But if the war has to continue, then as I said it would be best if you can still stop your bombing of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and stop the blockade because that would help to promote negotiations.

Secondly, about the material we gave you about the US aircraft intrusions and bombings, there is specific evidence showing we were the victims of these intrusions and bombings. And also about the damage to our merchant ships on May 6, 7, and 8, on which you said you would inform us through the Paris channel.

Dr. Kissinger : You received a note through the Paris channel.

PM Chou: Yes, we have already received your notification saying it was unauthorized. And with respect to these incidents, Chairman Mao instructed us not to make it public, but to tell it to you through these secret channels, and so this may also be considered one of the ways of making efforts to normalize relations between our two countries.

Dr. Kissinger : We view it that way, too.

PM Chou: But in your replies to this you always say that first, it is possible that your military units concerned do not want to admit their errors. So because of that the reply is the investigation is inconclusive, so our military units are dissatisfied. If it is merely a question of our units being dissatisfied we can deal with that. The main thing is such incidents shouldn't occur again because if they do then it will turn into a political matter, something we can no longer keep secret.

Dr. Kissinger : We have changed the operating procedures, and it is therefore extremely unlikely that another intrusion will occur. You said nothing has happened since June 12, the day the new instructions were given, so I believe the problem is solved. We will re-investigate based on your chart, and if we can find any additional evidence that is conclusive we will punish the people involved. But based on our experience, you have never in the past complained about violations that were unjustified.

PM Chou: Chiang Kai-shek's Air Force sometimes still makes intrusions into airspace over the mainland in planes which you give them, but we can distinguish between theirs and yours. You have given them U-2 reconnaissance planes.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes. But we have moved every activity in which we are engaged farther away from your coast, as you know.

PM Chou: Air reconnaissance.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes. And on the Paracel Islands, when you protested we accepted your protest and instituted a limit on March 12.

PM Chou: Any other suggestions?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, as always when I am here I feel obliged to say a word about Mr. Downey. And I can only say again we don't contest the justice of the sentence, but we would appreciate an act of clemency, particularly in view of the age of his mother.

PM Chou: We have taken note of this. Your President mentioned this, too.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, but I will be asked by the family of Downey when I return, and I wanted to be able to say I had raised the issue.

PM Chou: So far as I know Downey is in good health. I just asked Mrs. Ma to check up on it.

Dr. Kissinger : When I return to Washington, there will be a question how to handle this visit vis-a-vis the press.

PM Chou: With respect to the announcement which you suggested, we approve of your idea of issuing an announcement. We will give you a specific answer in the morning. Maybe we will just delete a few words from your draft. For instance, with respect to the discussions, we have held you used three adjectives, and we suggest using only two—that is just “earnest and frank.” Because to say “constructive”—there have been not too many constructive exchanges. But we agree to what is later on, the continuation of these discussions is useful and desirable. But these ideas must first be approved by Chairman Mao before that can be finalized. He has not yet seen it. We have just sent him a draft.

Dr. Kissinger : That is fine. Then when I am asked I think it will help to have this. Would 11:00 Saturday morning American time be a good time to release it?

PM Chou: All right. No question about that.

Dr. Kissinger : I don't want to have it released before I am back so that I can handle the press. Tomorrow is Friday, and then we do it Saturday. I will be back in Washington the late afternoon of Friday, which is too late to release it to the press, so we will do it at 11:00 Saturday morning.

PM Chou: That's all right.

Dr. Kissinger : I want to be very correct in making sure we agree what I can say to the press. Can I tell the press who participated in the discussions? I want to give Ambassador Malik something to worry about.

PM Chou: You will surely mention Mr. Chiao and Mr. Chang.

Dr. Kissinger : There is no need to mention the Vice Chairman, but I will be glad to mention him. Should I mention the Vice Chairman?

PM Chou: Maybe not.

Miss Tang: We have reported that he attended the banquet.

Dr. Kissinger : That's fine. So I will mention that the discussions were primarily with this group.

PM Chou: That's right.

Dr. Kissinger : May I also say that some members of my group held parallel discussions with appropriate members of the Chinese Government headed by Mr. Chang?

PM Chou: Yes, you may do that.

Dr. Kissinger : If they asked me what was discussed I will say we reviewed bilateral matters and the general international situation.

PM Chou: That's all right.

Dr. Kissinger : If they asked me whether Vietnam was discussed, I will say yes, but give no details.

PM Chou: Will you say discussed or exchanged views?

Dr. Kissinger : I will say we exchanged views—do you prefer that? And I will even make clear our views didn't coincide.

PM Chou: You may do that.

Dr. Kissinger : At any rate, I will not leave any wrong implications.

PM Chou: With regard to those who took part in the discussion, you might add Miss Wang Haijung, who is also an Assistant Minister. Otherwise you will again be omitting a lady. Anything more?

Dr. Kissinger : On any other topic if I am asked I will say I won't go into the details of the discussion, except to say it was a general review.

PM Chou: Good.

Dr. Kissinger : I do want to thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for the extraordinary hospitality that has been shown to us. And I want to assure you of what I hope has become clear by some of our actions, that the normalization of relations between our two countries is one of the key aspects of our foreign policy which we will pursue with great energy and which we hope to develop even further.

PM Chou: The normalization itself will have to wait until after the elections.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, but progress toward it.

PM Chou: Under the present circumstances, before your Presidential elections I don't believe that there will be anything urgent which would require our [Ambassador Huang] going to Washington. The New York channel is sufficient for now. If you yourself are too busy, you can send some of your colleagues—General Haig, having been promoted, may not be able to do it, but maybe Mr. Lord or Commander Howe.

Dr. Kissinger : It would have to be an emergency beyond anything we can foresee. Then let us leave it in New York; no need to come to Washington. And it has worked very well up to now. I will call on your Ambassador next week before I go to California, to give him some of this additional information.

PM Chou: Thank you.

Four more months before the election, so you will be getting very busy.

Dr. Kissinger : I can only hope that you will be patient with any aberrations that occur in that hectic period.

PM Chou: When I receive the two leaders of the House of Representatives I will meet them together. Perhaps their understanding of the international situation is not as good as leaders of the Senate.

Dr. Kissinger : No. Mr. Boggs is a very elemental type, very intelligent, a skilled maneuverer of the parliamentary situation, and a southerner. He is more effective in the morning than after dinner. Mr. Ford is on the more conservative side of the Republican Party, not extraordinarily intelligent, but very steady and a useful bridge to the people who would normally oppose our China policy. If a Democrat had done what we did, he would have accused him of treason. Since we did it, he is supporting us against his better judgment.

PM Chou: Mr. Ford is from the north?

Dr. Kissinger : Michigan, but from the countryside in Michigan.

PM Chou: He is an old Congressman?

Dr. Kissinger : He has been in the Congress for a long time.

PM Chou: Both have been.

Dr. Kissinger : Both have been. Boggs is on the more conservative side of the Democratic Party, and would be, on domestic policy, more on the conservative side.

PM Chou: I suppose that will be enough for the representatives of the two parties to come here this year.

Dr. Kissinger : I think that should exhaust the visits of political figures.

PM Chou: Suppose the Presidential candidates of both parties want to visit China. What should we do?

Dr. Kissinger : The one of the Republican party has just visited China.

PM Chou: But what about his Vice Presidential candidate, because the Democratic party may put this forward as a challenge to you?

Dr. Kissinger : The President didn't come as a candidate. He came as the President of the United States, and you didn't invite him as a candidate.

PM Chou: Of course, it's not a question of your President coming again. But if the Democrats were to say, suppose the Vice Presidential candidate of the Republican and Democratic parties came to visit China together. Is that possible?

Dr. Kissinger : Highly unlikely. It is not impossible that they put forward the visit of the Democratic candidate.

PM Chou: Individually?

Dr. Kissinger : That is not impossible. I am giving you my judgment. I don't know.

PM Chou: Before these political leaders have requested but we didn't reply: Fuibright, Muskie, McGovern and Kennedy. You have also suggested that one of your justices visit, Justice Douglas, through the Paris channel.

Dr. Kissinger : May I make one thing clear. When we transmit a request through the Paris channel, that doesn't mean we endorse it. It just means a senior American has asked us to transmit his request. We leave it up to you. Our view about Douglas is he is politically opposed to the President, but he is in a non-political position, so we leave the decision entirely up to you, and we do not oppose it on our side.

PM Chou: Cyrus Eaton, that old industrialist?

Dr. Kissinger : In my personal candid opinion, I think he's a fool (laughter). If you would like to invite him we have no objection. He is not nearly as important as he thinks he is. He is very rich and can therefore finance study groups and can hold conferences (laughter).

PM Chou: He is a doctor, PhD?

Dr. Kissinger : No, he's an industrialist who was a ruthless financier and who in his late years has suddenly decided that he would bring about universal peace because he is more intelligent than all the statesmen of the world.

PM Chou: He has been engaged in such activities for twenty years.

Dr. Kissinger : The Soviet Union used him for a long time, but gave up on him because he is so inadequate. We have no objection to his coming here, but there is a better use of senior peoples' time than Cyrus Eaton.

PM Chou: So there are such people in your society?

Dr. Kissinger : Oh yes. He organized these international conferences called Pugwash Conferences and financed them, and even though he paid for them he became such an embarrassment to the people who ran them that he was barred from his own conferences (laughter).

So if you can take him off our hands for a month it would be not unwelcome. I would get much fewer letters for a while.

PM Chou: What party does he favor?

Dr. Kissinger : I would think maybe the Democrats, but no candidate will accept his public support. They all accept his money, but not his public support (laughter). He is not a political figure, and if you invite him we will not suspect that you are intervening in our political life.

I don't remember that a Presidential candidate, as a candidate, has ever visited a foreign country, and that would be very unusual; and he would then bring a very large press corps and that would make China inevitably an issue in the campaign.

PM Chou: Is the China lobby still very active?

Dr. Kissinger : It is active, but it has to attach itself now with some other dissatisfied group to be effective. But they are a vocal minority now, not a majority.

PM Chou: Mcintyre doesn't have much influence now?

Dr. Kissinger : No, but it would not be difficult. Not Mcintyre, because he's a little unbalanced, but if somebody wanted to put together the people who were for Wallace with the right-wing of the Republican Party and appeal on the basis of general anti-Communism, not the People's Republic but general anti-Communism, he could be a very potent factor.

PM Chou: When you say anti-Communism, you say also anti-Soviet?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, both.

PM Chou: Still the old ideas?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

PM Chou: Does Wallace belong to such a faction?

Dr. Kissinger : Many of his supporters do, and what is interesting is that before he was shot he had received more votes in Democratic primaries than McGovern. So if you put that together with the conservatives in the Republican Party, that can become a very major force.

PM Cho: He's a southerner, Wallace?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, he's a southerner. But he had a number of handicaps. He's a small man. He speaks effectively, but doesn't have a snob appeal. If someone with Kennedy's manners had expressed Wallace's views he would have even greater impact.

PM Chou: What do you think about Robert Williams?

Dr. Kissinger : I don't know him.

PM Chou: Robert Williams is undergoing trial. He had lived in China for some time in the past.

Miss Tang: He is now on trial in a certain state and is not allowed to leave the state.

Dr. Kissinger : Do you know the state?

PM Chou: We can find out. We don't want to say much more—just to let you know we received tens of thousands of letters from Japan asking us to support Robert Williams. They may have been written by ultra-leftists, or people taken in by them.

Dr. Kissinger : I am not familiar with the case. If it were someone like Angela Davis or a well-known case in America, we would have heard about it. I will look into it. I won't inform you about it, because I don't think I should inform you about domestic American matters at this time, but I will inform myself.

PM Chou: That was just prior to the arrival of your President. We researched these letters.

Dr. Kissinger : To me it looks like a provocation, but I don't want to say it because I don't know about it.

PM Chou: He called himself the President of the new African Republic in the United States. I had some discussions with him; how is it possible for him to set himself as the President of a country in a country? So he was displeased with us and left.

Dr. Kissinger : Oh, he was here?

PM Chou: Yes he was here when he was elected.

Dr. Kissinger : I can't imagine what group he represented. Maybe the Black Panthers.

[After the meeting, outside the meeting room Mr. Chang reported to Dr. Kissinger on Mr. Downey's condition, reading from a paper: “Mr. Downey is in good health and good spirits. He has no chronic illness.”]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China, Dr. Kissinger's Visit, June 1972 Memcons (Originals). Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Brackets in the source text. The meeting was held at the Government Guest House #5.

147. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, June 27, 1972 147. Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, June 27, 19721

Washington, June 27, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR:

THE PRESIDENT

FROM: Henry A. Kissinger

SUBJECT:

My Trip to Peking, June 19-21

INFORMATION

June 27, 1972

The Sequence

At a time when we are blockading and bombing China's socialist ally, and ten days after several transgressions of the PRC's borders, I had in many respects my most extensive talks ever with Chou En-lai, and our party had in most respects the most cordial reception.

In three working days I held seventeen hours of formal meetings with the Chinese, almost fourteen with Chou and one special two and a half hour session with the next most powerful leader and the top military man, Vice Chairman Yeh Chien-ying. In addition, Chou and I had about six hours of informal, but generally substantive, conversations at two banquets, car rides, and on a boat cruise at the Summer Palace. Others in my party spent four and a half hours with Chinese officials on bilateral matters, such as exchanges and trade.

Briefly our scenario ran as follows: — After dinner on the first night—within an hour of our arrival—Chou came to the Guest House for a general plenary session followed by almost an hour's private meeting on Vietnam, Japan, US-PRC bilateral contacts, and the agenda for the visit.

— On June 20, we toured the Forbidden City in the morning; I spent four hours with Chou at the Great Hall of the People on the Soviet Union and Vietnam; and attended a banquet hosted by Chou where Chou, in front of the top leadership, proposed a toast affirming that normalization of relations would continue.

— On June 21, I had almost three hours with Marshal Yeh; talked for three and a half hours with Chou on the Soviet Union and Vietnam again; and attended a performance of the Peking opera with the Foreign Minister.

— On June 22, the Minister of Sports guided us through an Athletic Academy; Chou and I discussed the global situation and individual Asian and European problems on a wide scale from mid-afternoon at the Guest House through a cruise and dinner at the Summer Palace; and we held a final two-hour session late in the evening at the Guest House, including Vietnam, miscellaneous other topics and the final announcement.

Both in the variety of subjects covered and the fact that for once Chou stated rather fully Chinese intentions, these talks were broader in scope than on my two previous visits. As indicated above, essentially they fell under three headings: — Vietnam, the only issue that significantly hinders our bilateral relations;

— The Soviet Union, China's main preoccupation and principal motive for moving ahead with us; and

— A general assessment of global events, on which it was striking how far the Chinese had moved in the past year from an adversary posture to one which can only be described as tacit ally.

Following are the highlights of our substantive discussion. I am sending you a separate memorandum on the atmospherics of the visit.

Vietnam

This was the predominant issue and was treated in almost all of our discussions. There were three strands that were consistently woven into Chou's presentations: — The personal sympathy of Chou and other Chinese leaders for the North Vietnamese on revolutionary and historical grounds. The struggle of Ho Chi Minh and his followers obviously strikes a strong emotional response in those who have been fifty years on their Long March.

— The political and ideological obligations of the People's Republic of China to support Hanoi and to make a clear record on, and for, their behalf.

— The practical requirements of Chinese national policy which are often inconsistent with the first two elements.

Chou spoke often and with warmth of his kinship with the suffering North Vietnamese. And he made an extensive record of official support. But the essential fact of his presentations was a hands-off attitude on both military and negotiating questions: China will not intervene directly and will be happy with whatever we and Hanoi can work out at the conference table. And the essential tenor of his verbal support for their allies was unemotional, desultory, almost apologetic at times. Thus the imperatives of PRC national policy so far have kept the personal and ideological impulses in bounds.

Our conversation constituted the first really detailed discussion of Vietnam that we have had with the Chinese. We moved beyond historical recitation and formal positions to rather precise exchanges on a solution to the war and its aftermath.

Chou's approach provided an interesting contrast with the Soviet technique: — He was more interested in the general outcome and evolution of events in Indochina whereas Brezhnev, and especially Gromyko, concentrated on the tactical questions at the conference table. Chou showed interest in U.S. intentions and regional role after a settlement, while the Russians zeroed in on specific elements of a deal.

— Chou's support of Hanoi and criticism of our military actions was much less harsh than the Dacha attacks, although one senses a much greater emotional affinity to the Struggling North Vietnamese on the part of the Chinese revolutionary leaders than the second generation, more “bourgeois” Soviet leadership.

— Chou showed more understanding of—and asked more questions about—a military solution only, while the Soviets probed hard on political elements.

— While both Peking and Moscow are not letting Vietnam block our bilateral relations, I believe the more “principled” Chinese approach means that they will be less willing than the Russians to exert actual pressure on Hanoi to be reasonable.

At the outset of our discussions Chou pursued a discussion of a possible ceasefire. He posed a series of detailed questions concerning the duration of a ceasefire before fighting might resume among the Vietnamese themselves. He was interested in what the US role would be if the conflict erupted again after we had completed our withdrawal.

Chou went on officially to support the North Vietnamese position that a settlement include political as well as military issues, but he made clear this was their position. He pointedly noted that not even McGovern would be able to replace Thieu. His comments reflected a recognition of the difficult straits in which Hanoi finds itself. He cautioned us not to “corner” the North Vietnamese or try to defeat them. And he somewhat mildly called for an ending of bombing and blockading of the North, saying this would have a beneficial impact on negotiations.

His only real warmth, however, came in his protesting of our alleged recent air intrusions of their territory, i.e., when the PRC is directly challenged. He had charts and photographs to bolster their case that our planes had violated their territory on several occasions and had actually dropped two bombs inside their border on June 10. He went over the detailed plots of our alleged intrusions with us and displayed the navy bomb cannisters that he said were dropped by our planes.

I rejoined by saying that we obviously had no interest in challenging the PRC directly and that any intrusions were unauthorized or accidental. I recounted the various investigations and responses we had made to their delegation and went over the most recent report by Secretary Laird which cited several instances where our findings did not confirm their allegations. In any event, we had instituted new procedures which would create a larger buffer zone from PRC territory for our aircraft and which should have ended these incidents once and for all. Chou confirmed that there had been no intrusions since these procedures took effect on June 12.

In laying out Chinese positions, Chou made clear that he was not issuing any threats. For example, when I asked him whether his reference to the PRC's “gritting its teeth” implied direct military support, and I warned him about it, he emphasized that the Chinese would not intervene unless directly attacked; he was referring only to making sure supplies reached North Vietnam. At the end of one session, he stressed that if the war persists our two countries must nevertheless continue to attempt to relax tensions. And at another session, he said that there was an impasse and asked what we should do about the Indochina situation. He even agreed with my suggestion that at some point in the future the US might be aiding Hanoi against outside pressures.

Furthermore, at times Chou was somewhat defensive about the Chinese role. He strenuously denied the Chinese had anything to do with the North Vietnamese offensive, or indeed would have advised if it asked, a change I told him we had heard from the Soviets and East Europeans. Marshal Yeh volunteered these points emphatically as well. Chou pointed out that our aid to the GVN greatly exceeded theirs to the DRV. He also indicated that after a settlement, China would reduce military aid to the DRV, e.g., no more provision of MIG-19's.

Throughout I maintained our general themes that we have been playing with the Chinese: It is the Soviets and the Indians, not the US, that have longterm designs on Southeast Asia; our policies are not those of the 1950's; you will resolutely pursue your course; we will never make peace by betraying an ally; and a military solution (ceasefire, withdrawal, prisoner release) is the quickest way to end the conflict, leaving the political process to the Vietnamese.

All this culminated in Chou's closing presentation on Vietnam the last evening, which went as follows: — The US should leave Vietnam and let the Vietnamese solve their problems without outside interference, fighting behind “closed doors.”

— The Chinese communists had the courage to live with a ceasefire with Chiang Kai-shek after Japan's defeat, knowing they would eventually prevail. If China were fighting it would accept your May 8 proposal but China could not impose it on North Vietnam.

— A ceasefire that lasted only a month after our withdrawal would be too short. This period could be extended, but the Chinese could not dictate this to their ally, any more than they would fight for them.

— The North Vietnamese think a political solution should be part of a settlement; and a tripartite government would have many forces and would not necessarily be communist-controlled or hostile to us.

— The PRC would approve the course of action your May 8 speech suggests, i.e., ceasefire, withdrawal, prisoner release and leaving the political solution to the Vietnamese alone. The Chinese understand this policy but Vietnam is reluctant to rely upon it.

— The PRC hopes we will solve Vietnam through negotiations, but won't meddle. It is up to us and Hanoi.

Thus Chou admitted that our approach to a settlement is reasonable and underlined this by his comments that neither McGovern nor anyone else could actually proceed to overthrow the Thieu Government. But one of his major themes was that North Vietnam could not be expected to have China's perspective. It is a much smaller country: the two zones of Vietnam have only 30 million people and the twenty-seven year old struggle is their only issue while China, with 750 million people, can wait on the question of Taiwan.

In short, we cannot expect to solve the Vietnam issue in Peking, anymore than we can solve it in Moscow. But our dealings with both capitals are strengthening our hand. For we have two objectives with the Chinese and Russians concerning Vietnam: — As a minimum, their acquiescence in what we are doing, i.e., their willingness to put their other concerns with us above the local concern of their ally.

— If possible, their exercise of pressure on Hanoi to come to a reasonable settlement of the war.

We can be reasonably sure that the Chinese will continue to practice the first of these two, though they will remain very sensitive to direct challenges such as border violations or embarrassing them in our public statements. And the visible record of their dealings with us—my visit, the announcements pertaining to it, our front page treatment in the People's Daily—must deepen the North Vietnamese sense of isolation.

As for the second objective, if Chou talks to North Vietnamese leaders along lines even remotely akin to his presentation to us, this cannot help but add to the cumulative pressures on Hanoi.

The Soviet Union

One cannot exaggerate the Chinese disquiet over the Soviet Union. Chou's preoccupation with the “new Czars” was a constant theme throughout our conversations, and became increasingly explicit. He punctuated this concern with biting historical references to past Soviet misdeeds, critical descriptions of Soviet intentions and policies, sardonic references to Soviet style. As seen once again from Peking, as from Moscow, the Sino-Soviet rift is deep and almost certainly won't be mended by the present leaderships.

Chou's analysis of Moscow's motivations was strikingly similar to that of the Shah of Iran. The Soviets are trying to free their rear in Europe so as to outflank us in the Middle East, using the radical Arab states on one side and India on the other. They are spreading into Southeast Asia, not only through their support of Hanoi, but also through Indian policies. All the while they are maintaining their pressures on China's northern borders. As Marshal Yeh put it, the Soviets are “fanatic expansionists.”

In this context their major potential ally is the United States and both Chou and Marshal Yeh made obvious their desire for the U.S. to maintain unimpaired strength. They asked a series of leading questions on our military posture designed to reassure themselves of our power vis-a-vis the Soviet Union. Thus Chou stressed on a couple of occasions that disarmament is is impossible, that the SALT or other agreements might limit arms in certain fields, but there would be increases in others. He noted that the MIG-21s were of poor quality and that our F-4s were superior. He and the Marshal asked about our nuclear technology, our strategic posture versus Moscow in various categories as a result of SALT, our future deployments in Europe, etc. They wanted to make sure that our nuclear weapons technology remained ahead of that of the Soviets, that our overall defense position would counter the Russians, that MBFR would not go too far, etc. Chou openly admired Laird's outspokenness on the need for a strong defense, making that point several times.

Chou's presentations were sprinkled with cynical comments on the Soviet Union: — The Soviets had made certain feelers toward Peking for better relations, but Peking was rejecting them. The Sino-Soviet border talks were getting nowhere; after three years the Russians wouldn't even agree to codify agreed-upon working principles.

— The Chinese would never borrow from Moscow again.

— When dealing with the Soviets, one should have documents carefully prepared ahead of time.

— In contrast to Peking's restraint, Moscow was heaping abuse on the PRC for dealing with the U.S. while the Vietnam war continued. It was clear that the Soviets wouldn't attempt to get supplies to the DRV (i.e., through our blockade).

— The Soviet Union always wants to exceed the U.S. in military terms. Under the present leadership they would never agree to cut back armaments.

— Chou was content to hear (from me) that the Soviets disliked him and were fast moving him up in their pantheon of enemies.

— There was no question of the existence of Soviet global ambitions. The question was whether and how these would be manifested. The PRC would continue to watch developments closely.

My basic approach was to play the ominous Soviet themes and emphasize that a strong U.S. and developing U.S.-PRC ties were the best antidotes. At the same time I left no doubt that we would continue to make agreements with Moscow that served our national interests.

I described at length our moves with Moscow since last July, with particular emphasis on my April trip, your Summit, and the various bilateral agreements we have signed. I emphasized our constant themes with the PRC, such as not joining in any agreements that might be directed against them, keeping them fully informed, and being willing to conclude any agreements with them that we do with Moscow. The Soviet strategy had been to accelerate agreements with us since last July in order, to put pressure on the PRC; in this regard I emphasized the value to the PRC of increasing its bilateral contacts in trade and exchanges with us. We will conclude agreements with Moscow in the hope of influencing them towards a peaceful route; if they turned aggressive, we would not let our agreements stop us from countering them.

Above all, I made clear your determination to maintain a strong defense and our willingness to use it if necessary to deflect pressures brought to bear on the PRC. I recalled your tough, risky moves against Moscow in last December's South Asian crisis. As for nuclear weapons, we could not rule out first use, because there were at least two situations where they might be needed. Chou pointedly asked what these were, and I replied that I was referring to an attack on Europe or one in Asia that threatened basic forces there (i.e. the PRC). My elliptic comment was not lost upon him.

Chou repeated that they favored a relaxation of tensions between the USSR and us. I suspect this is for the record and for his pride, because in practice he is doubtful about every concrete manifestation. He indicated doubts about the European detente and concern about our credits being the one way the strained Soviet economy could fuel their arms buildup. He was repeatedly critical of McGovern, his obvious displeasure being keyed to the Senator's intention to cut the defense budget by one-third; I carefully infomed him that while such a course would be disastrous, the Senator was nevertheless likely to try and carry it out. Chou Made clear that such weakening of our defense was not only impossible to implement but dangerous in its implications for the world and the PRC.

In short, Chou made no attempt to hide the Chinese preoccupation with Moscow. In this respect too, his statements have strikingly evolved since last July when this theme was generally kept below the surface. The Chinese will continue to maintain that they can take care of themselves. But their dealings with us and their obvious recognition that only a strong United States is of use to them, make clear that they welcome, indeed seek, the balance we provide.

Global Survey

For whatever reasons, the Chinese stands on various countries and regions around the world have become similar to ours in many respects. They show a much greater comprehension of the complexity of the global situation. They have come to accept our rationale and many of our assessments, and they recognize the need for joint efforts to stabilize such areas as Japan, Korea and Southeast Asia.

The overriding Chinese concern with the Soviet Union clearly colors their world outlook. They are tyring to build walls around the Soviet Union. They seek major leverage with Moscow by dealing with us. On the Soviet's western flank they will encourage a united Europe as a counterweight to the Soviet Union and are trying to increase their own influence in Europe as well. They will probably move with Japan in the east. To the south they are trying to contain India by supporting an independent Pakistan.

In this regard Chou brought up European questions on several occasions. He believed that collectively Europe represented great potential power, but it would need strong leadership. Thus he confirmed that the PRC has changed its tack and will support the EEC and other forms of European unity.

Chou placed great stress on our maintaining our forces in Europe. He agreed with my judgment that, under your Administration, we would not substantially withdraw forces from Europe over the next five years. Again returning to the opposition, he said that the Democrats wouldn't be able to withdraw our troops from Europe if they gained power. He expressed concern that mutual and balanced force reductions might go too far—I told him that I doubted they would exceed 10%-15% in the near term.

The PRC is also engaged in a deliberate strategy of giving Western European leaders the option of another communist country to deal with other than the Soviet Union. Thus Schroeder, Schuman, and Home are all coming to the PRC this year. He asked my advice at some length on how to deal with these men and requested that I tell Schroeder to speak candidly to him. Chou was especially interested in Germany and obviously hooped it would provide an effective balance to the USSR in the future. He did not want to entertain the prospect (which I held out as a possibility of West Germany's becoming “Finlandized,” i.e. beholden to Moscow on international and even internal policies. He thought (and wished) that the basic German drive would make that nation a force to be reckoned with. As for East Germany, however, he briskly dismissed it as already being a dependency of Moscow. Chou also was skeptical (and unhappy) with my view that there were no strong leaders on the horizon in Germany. He shared my admiration for Adenauer, and recalled that Chairman Mao had once noted Adenauer's prescient prediction of better U.S.-PRC relations.

From these talks it is obvious that we will have to treat the PRC carefully with regard to our European policy. Progress toward detente on Moscow's western front cannot please the PRC; our task in Peking is to make sure the Chinese do not suspect our motives as we contribute to this detente.

With respect to Japan, Chinese views have greatly changed from what I heard last summer and fall and you heard, to a lesser extent, in February. I believe our presentations on this area have had their impact.

Chou used to lecture us on the dangers of Japanese militarism and the undesirability of our Mutual Security Treaty. We have pointed out that the latter was the best check on the former. This time Chou did not question this perspective and did not challenge the treaty. He confined himself to inquiring whether the post-Sato leadership might want to amend the treaty; and he specifically attacked any U.S.-Japanese responsibilities for the defense of Taiwan. (Incidentally, this was one of very few references to the Taiwan issue.)

Chou acknowledged my view that Japan was moving out in four ways: with the USSR, through Siberian development; in Southeast Asia, through its economic aggressiveness; with us, through our traditional ties; and with the PRC. He agreed that the Japanese are volatile and that neither the PRC nor we should try to inflame the situation in our dealings with Tokyo. I believe Chou appreciated the themes I struck in Japan, i.e. that we favor Sino-Japanese normalization and that we are not encouraging a Japanese military role. But I was careful not to give him too much reassurance about Tokyo's future intentions.

In saying that we did not object to better relations between Tokyo and Peking, I emphasized that both the U.S. and PRC must show restraint vis-a-vis the Japanese. If we were to compete in Japan, the U.S. would win out in the short-term, but the eventual result would be increased nationalism. We had to keep that country in emotional balance. Chou did not demur; he stated that Japan is at a crossroads and has not decided on its future course.

Chou's views have evolved on Korea as well. Although he maintained the principle of U.S. withdrawal, he indicated that we should keep our troops there for some time in order to keep out Japanese forces. I said that Korea was one area where Japan felt clear security implications; an aggressive North Korea was likely to stir Japanese involvement in the peninsula.

Chou and I agreed that increasing contacts between the two Koreas was a positive development and that we both should restrain our partners. He said that unification of the two Koreas should be peaceful and would take time. Despite my suggestion that we avoid public debate so as not to poison the atmosphere, between the Koreas and between the PRC and ourselves, Chou made it clear that they would push the Korean issue and the abolition of UNCURK in the UN this fall. Accordingly, I think we can expect some “cannons of rhetoric” in New York on this question.

Even in Southeast Asia, our greatest present friction point, Chou painted the possibility of converging U.S.-PRC interests. He indicated the need for tacit cooperation to counter Moscow's and New Delhi's pressures. Chou saw some encouraging longer-run signs such as the recent ASPAC meeting in Korea which welcomed your moves toward the PRC and suggested a willingness to break out of a narrow ideological posture. Chou urged a buffer zone of neutrality and relaxed tensions in the region; if the U.S. and PRC showed restraint and opposed outside intervention it would be difficult for other powers to intrude with outside influence. His basic pitch was that the Vietnam war remains the “single knot” in the region. It affects many other issues - the turmoil in Southeast Asia itself, Taiwan, Korean tensions, the future of Japan. If we could just untie this knot, he implied our two countries could play a constructive role in encouraging and safeguading a Southeast Asian zone of neutrality and independence.

I replied that we were not opposed to the concept of neutrality over the long run but the reality of this concept was crucial. There must be safeguards against hegemonial designs.

South Asia is the area where U.S. and PRC interests have been parallel since last July. The Chinese dislike for India ranks only behind the Soviet Union. While Peking cannot fear New Delhi per se, it is apprehensive about its being used as a tool of Soviet encirclement. This accounts for its consistent support of conservative military regimes in Islamabad and its opposition to Bangladesh independence where one might have expected a Chinese ideological affinity.

The U.S.-PRC convergence of interests in the subcontinent was reconfirmed in our conversations. I pointedly recalled your strong actions versus Moscow last fall when you risked a major confrontation to save West Pakistan. When I mentioned that we had expected military moves by the PRC, Chou was somewhat defensive, pointing out that poor Pakistani military strategy had crumpled East Pakistan before any outside help would have done any good. He noted that Yahya had dispersed his forces too thinly; and he revealed that two divisions of Chinese military equipment had been lost without a fight.

Against this background, Chou agreed with our view that an independent Pakistan should be supported against Indian pressures, absorbing New Delhi's energy in the subcontinent so it couldn't expand into Southeast Asia. New Delhi was meddling in such areas as Nepal and Ceylon, Chou said. He said that the Indians were putting out feelers for better relations which the PRC would ignore. The PRC will maintain its military aid to Islamabad; he said they could give more once the Indochina was was over. They will go very slowly on Bangladesh recognition, but saw advantages in our diplomatic relations so as not to leave the field free to Moscow and New Delhi.

I reiterated the theme of the extension of Soviet influence through New Delhi. We had and would continue to supply economic aid but because of Congressional problems looked to the PRC for military aid. I noted our efforts with Iran and Turkey to the same end, which Chou approved. Under your Administration, I said, our policy toward Pakistan would continue. In addition we would honor our commitments to Iran and Turkey and would welcome better relations with Ceylon (Mrs. Bandaranaike was due in Peking June 24).

In sum, I see no early change in the PRC's policy toward South Asia. The one place that will bear watching, however, is Bangladesh,where the Chinese might ferment trouble against the present rulers.

Bilateral Contacts

There were also counterpart talks relating to bilateral exchanges and trade, conducted on our side by a State Department representative and members of the NSC staff. I set the stage for these discussions in my first meeting with Chou where I noted the Soviet strategy of signing the maximum number of agreements with us, as well as pursuing encirclement of the PRC. It was in both sides' interest to step up U.S.-PRC contacts in order to show increasing mutual stakes in our relationship (and in their case to lessen their isolation).

At the counterpart meetings our side stated that sustained momentum in exchanges and trade, in the spirit and substance of the Shanghai Communique, would serve both countries' interest; we were not interested in this for domestic political reasons or for the intrinsic economic value but rather because of the political and psychological dimension. We were flexible on mechanisms, but visibility was important because the American people had to be conditioned to dealings with the PRC for us to be able to take more fundamental steps at some future time.

The Chinese expressed appreciation for both the substance and the spirit of our presentation. They assured us they wanted steady movement, but it would have to be gradual at first because of their limitations both in experience and in competent personnel. Remaining political problems prevented use of certain types of mechanisms during our present stage of transition. Some exchange proposals which we made could be implemented in the near future but others would take longer. Exchanges in sports were easy. They were considering sending medical generalists and other scientists to the U.S., and, recalling your offer to Chou, cancer research was of particular interest. There were possibilities also in the fields of environmental control, meterology, agriculture, marine science and chemistry.

The Chinese emphasized that they wanted to avoid “accidents” in our developing relations as much as we did; thus the two governments should keep each other informed on visits of significance. They prefer to, continue direct contact with specific organizations in line with the “people-topeople” emphasis, but agreed to a helpful “sideline” role for facilitating organizations having the confidence of the U. S. Government as well as use of the Paris channel, and Washington. They assured us that their Ambassador to France, Huang Chen, who was present at social occasions, will return to Paris in July after French Foreign Minister Schuman's visit to the PRC.

While we suggested mechanisms such as joint commissions, so as to afford greater coordination of exchanges and trade-related problems, the Chinese for political reasons are unwilling during this “transitional stage” to go that far. They want to play up the people-to-people theme, but they are now more impressed with the importance of fairly close governmental supervision. I think we can expect steady, if unspectacular, progress in implementing these aspects of the Shanghai Communique.

The American Scene

At the closing session I made our standard low-key pitch on the American prisoner, Downey. I asked for clemency, especially in view of his mother's advanced age, while not disputing the justice of the case. Chou recalled your appeal and once again took note of our approach. He then sent out for word on Downey's condition, and we were later informed that he is in “Good health and good spirits; no chronic diseases.” (I am calling his family.)

Chou showed considerable interest in our domestic scene; indeed he lingered on in the last evening meeting with inquiries on various American personalities and forces. Chou was never offensive, and his curosity provided me openings to make several useful points. These included repeated assurances that you would easily win reelection; that McGovern's base was inherently limited; that other countries (including the PRC) should not meddle in our internal affairs; that we would like to see the Chinese continue their practice of not inviting opposition candidates to the PRC; that it would be helpful to keep the rhetoric down at the UN this fall; and that the conservative wings of the two U.S. political parties still represented a potent anti-communist force if they ever linked up.

Conclusion

The conversations were extremely relaxed and candid. At times Chou was asking advice in a manner that we wouldn't even expect our allies to do. The Chinese clearly put a higher priority on their national concerns, especially over the Soviet Union, and their implications for their global policy, than their ideological brotherhood with Hanoi. However, the personal and fraternal loyalties make for sensitive nerves; we will have to be careful not to challenge Peking too directly on this issue, either with our planes or our pronouncements.

It is also abundantly clear that the PRC does not make policy on sentimental grounds. They need us. But if they become convinced that we cannot deliver what they want—a resolute counter to Moscow in strength and will—they could turn brutally against us. They would make a formidable opponent.

There are danger points. Vietnam could still get out of hand. Chou noted, for example, that Chairman Mao had ordered that their protests over intrusions be kept private so as to minimize frictions. However, the next incident would be considered a “political matter” and would be publicized. In addition, the Taiwan question might not move fast enough for them, their restraint to date notwithstanding. Incidents which seem minor to us can loom large in their perspective. A case in point is the reference to both the “People's Republic of China” and the “Republic of China” on one page of your article in “U.S. News and World Report.” This smacks of a two-China policy to Peking, and Chou referred to the article on three or four separate occasions. A similar note was struck in their request that we change the Intelsat directory which now lists two Chinas.

Such concerns presumably prompted an interjection by Chou while we were cruising on a boat at the Summer Palace the last evening. Having just indicated an interest in my returning to the PRC, he suddenly stated that we would have “to make efforts” before such a visit were feasible. In response to my question that, he said that he meant we would have to do more to normalize our relations. This rather somber note frankly jarred with the mood of the overall visit. I take it as Chou's reminder, which we hardly need, that we cannot take for granted their patience on fundamental issues.

In sum, the trip was extremely useful. These direct talks with Chou are the only way really to get a feel for Chinese perspectives, intentions, and policies. Similarly, they are the only means to give him your authoritative views. We now have a better mutual appreciation of each other's global strategy as well as tactical moves. We manageed somewhat to defuse Vietnam, where our intrusions were beginning to get under their political skin. We deepened Hanoi's paranoia and isolation by the fact of my visit and the June 24 announcement which talks of the “usefulness” of these contacts and the “desirability” of continuing them. We have hopefully imparted some additional momentum to our exchange programs and trade. And by striking a businesslike, but not effusive tone, we have helped to keep the pressure on Moscow without alienating the Soviet Union or shocking Japan or panicking Taiwan.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Kissinger Office Files, Box 97, Country Files, Far East, China-Dr. Kissinger's June 1972 Visit. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. On page one President Nixon wrote “Superb job-Covers all the bases with expert Tactics.” On page 4, after Kissinger noted Chou's denial that China had been involved in the recent North Vietnamese offensive, the President wrote: “He may be telling the truth. However it was in his interest to stop the Soviet Summit if possible.” On page 8, regarding Kissinger's declaration that the U.S. would not rule out first use of nuclear weapons, the President noted: “K-The renunciation of use by Soviet & U.S. will send him up the wall.” On page 10, regarding the projected 10-15 percent Mutual and Balanced Force Reductions (MBFR), the President wrote: “a necessary limit.”

148. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, August 4, 1972, 5:15-6:45 p.m. 148. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, August 4, 1972, 5:15-6:45 p.m.1

New York, August 4, 1972, 5:15-6:45 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS:

Dr. Henry A Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

Huang Hua, PRC Ambassador to the United Nations

Shih Yen-hua, Interpreter

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

DATE & TIME: Friday, August 4, 1972 - 5:15-6:45 p.m.

PLACE: New York City

(There were some opening pleasantries, including Dr. Kissinger's favorable remarks on the Ambassador's light-weight, light grey Chinese outfit.)

Dr. Kissinger : I saw Ambassador Bush this morning. You scared him about Korea. You intimidated him. We will have to give him more backbone.

Ambassador Huang: (Immediately pulling out a piece of paper and reading from it.) Following our talk last time, I would like to express the following views regarding the primary point of the message of July 26 given by Dr. Kissinger, that is the idea that the United States and the Soviet Union sign a treaty on a mutual nuclear nonaggression.

“First, the Chinese side considers the Soviet proposal to be nakedly aimed at the establishment of nuclear world hegemony.

“Secondly, the Soviet proposal only stipulates that the Soviet Union and the United States should not use nuclear weapons against each other or their allies. This is obviously an attempt, following the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, to go a step further and monopolize nuclear weapons, maintain nuclear superiority and make nuclear threats against countries with few nuclear weapons, non-nuclear countries, and countries in which the production of nuclear weapons is barred, and force them into spheres of influence of either this or that hegemony so that the two hegemonies may have a free hand in dividing up the world and manipulating the destinies of countries of the world at will.

“It is impermissible for such an agreement to be concluded between the Soviet Union and the United States. It is likewise impermissible for such an agreement to be concluded among all the nuclear countries.”

Dr. Kissinger : “It is impermissible among all nuclear countries?”

Mrs. Shih: The same, either between the Soviet Union and the United States, or all nuclear countries.

Ambassador Huang: (Resuming his reading):

“Should an agreement be concluded, how will there be any equality between all countries of the world, big or small? This is what China categorically will not agree to. Should the Soviet Union brazenly advance this proposal, it will arouse extensive opposition and condemnation throughout the world.

“Point 3. We hope the United States will value principle jointly affirmed by China and the United States in the Shanghai Communique that it would be against the interests of the peoples of the world for any major countries to collude with another against other countries, or for major countries to divide up the world into spheres of interest, and reject the Soviet proposal.

“Point 4. The U.S. is aware of the entire position of the Chinese government on nuclear weapons. The Chinese side has consistently stood for the conclusion of an agreement on the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons through consultations by all countries and as a first step, reaching an agreement on the non-use of nuclear weapons. Not only should nuclear countries not use nuclear weapons against each other, but what is more important, nuclear countries should not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear countries. Only such an agreement will be just and can really solve the problem.

“We hope that the U.S. side will give serious consideration to this.”

Incidentally, I have two other items to discuss.

(He pulls out another piece of paper and reads):

“The Chinese side expressed the following views with regard to Dr. Kissinger's July 26 message on the Korean question.

“The so-called United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea, and the United Nations Military Command stationed in South Korea are both products created more than 20 years ago during the Cold War period. Over all these years they have served as obstacles to the realization of the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, and the majority of United Nations member states have long been unwilling to be associated with them.

“Since North and South Korea have expressed, in their July 4 joint statement, their desire to realize peaceful reunification without the interference of outside forces, it is even more unjustified for these two organizations to continue their existence.

“Now Algeria and other countries have proposed that the Korean question be put on the agenda of the coming session of the United Nations General Assembly, and this proposal has won the support of China and many other countries. This indicates the general trend in the international situation.

“As U.S. side has repeatedly stated that it is for the relaxation of tension in the Korean peninsula and that it supports increased communication between North and South Korea, it should really be in favor, or at least not be opposed to, the reasonable proposal put forward by Algeria and other countries. We hope the U.S. side will reconsider its idea of postponing discussion of the Korea question until the 28th Session of the United Nations General Assembly.

“In our view, if the U.S. side takes the idea of sailing with the tide, the discussion of the question this year will not necessarily lead to confrontation between the U.S. and other countries. Otherwise, it is indeed possible that such a situation would appear from the very beginning.”

Above is the message on the Korean question. I have two other short messages for you.

(Again reading):

“First, the Chinese side appreciates Dr. Kissinger's indication of a desire to promote contact between China and West Germany. During Mr. Schroeder's visit to China, he conducted useful talks with the Chinese side. Mr. Schroeder expressed the desire of various quarters concerned in West Germany for the establishment of diplomatic relations with China at an early date, and the Chinese side responded positvely to this. As the West Germany government has no relations with the Chiang Kai-shek clique, it is possible for China to establish diplomatic relations with West Germany.”

The second short message is that:

“During Prince Sihanouk's visit to five countries of Europe and Africa he met no accident with regard to his security. Considering the fact that the U.S. side indicated its willingness to do something for the security of the Prince during his visit in other countries, the Chinese side is glad to inform the U.S. side of this.”

That is all I have about the messages.

Dr. Kissinger : Thank you. I appreciate this very much. Let me ask first about the Korea item. You say if we agree to a debate, a confrontation can be avoided. I don't understand this.

Ambassador Huang: What is said in the message (reading):

“If the U.S. side takes the idea of sailing with the tide, the discussion of the question this year will not necessarily lead to confrontation between the U.S. and other countries.”

Dr. Kissinger : If we agree with your proposal!

Ambassador Huang: (Looking at his message) If the U.S. side takes a stand consistent with its repeated stand that it is in favor of a relaxation of tension in the Korean peninsula and increased contact, communication, between North and South Korea, if it takes this attitude—favorable or at least not opposing Algeria and the other countries—then this would not lead to a confrontation as the U.S. is worried about.

Dr. Kissinger : We are not worried that there may be a confrontation if we agree to your proposal! It would be very embarrassing to us if under Chinese leadership this year certain measures were taken which are embarrassing to our allies. This is our difficulty. (Dr. Kissinger pours a cup of tea for the Ambassador.)

Ambassador Huang: I don't see any difficulty in this question. One question is the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea, and most people have long ceased to support it. So, needless to say, its continued presence will be an obstacle to the realization of the principles stated in the joint statement of North and South Korea for the independent, peaceful reunification of Korea. And as I said last time, the United Nations Military Command is something very ridiculous.

Dr. Kissinger : We told you last time that if a debate is avoided, we would bring about the disbandment of UNCURK before the next General Assembly. So the practical result will not be extremely different from what you were saying. We do not want to be maneuvered into a position of being forced to do something that we might be prepared to do voluntarily and that one of our allies objects to very strenuously when it comes in this particular fashion.

Ambassador Huang: It is our view that it is appropriate to discuss the Korean question at the 27th Session of the General Assembly, and we hope, as stated in our message, (again reading) “that the U.S. side will reconsider its idea of postponing discussion of the Korean question until the 28th Session of the General Assembly.”

Dr. Kissinger : I understand your view, and I will let you know our decision next week. I am practically certain that we cannot reconsider it, and we think we made a reasonable proposal to you.

I'll have Ambassador Bush get in touch with you next week. The Chinese side should have some understanding for the particular difficulty that we face, this year in particular.

Now on the German question … . there are a number of things I want to talk to you about with respect to the nuclear issue, but I want to save that till the last because it will take a little longer.

I have a direct channel to the German Chancellor which does not go through the diplomatic line.

Ambassador Huang: The Chancellor?

Dr. Kissinger : Chancellor Brandt. He is the Chancellor's assistant for Foreign Policy, who has roughly the same job I do for the President. He has asked my opinion about the establishment of diplomatic relations between Peking and Bonn. He has stated as his own personal opinion that he thinks there is no enormous hurry and that the weight of Germany's interests is in Europe.

Now I am considering what reply to give to him. We know from certain information that Bahr—that's the name of the man—is very close to the Soviet Union, and he reports almost every conversation to the Soviet contact that he has. So I have to be somewhat careful in my reply. But as I told you I may be in Germany early in September and I can talk to Brandt directly.

As for us, we are in favor of diplomatic relations between the Federal Republic and the People's Republic. The question is whether you want to establish those before the general elections which are in December—December 3, he tells me in his cable; December 3, it hasn't been announced yet—and to what extent you want to deal with this group.

Ambassador Huang: We haven't gotten specific instructions.

Dr. Kissinger : Of course. I will give him a non-commital reply until I hear from you.

Ambassador Huang: The message indicates (looking at it) that during Mr. Schroeder's visit to China he indicated the desire of various quarters of West Germany for the establishment of diplomatic relations at an early date and the Chinese side responded positively.

Dr. Kissinger : The question now is the definition of “early date.” I am prepared, if you want, to indicate to the Germans that you are prepared to do this, but perhaps you will let me know. I will have to do this through a channel other than him.

Mrs. Shih: What?

Dr. Kissinger : Through someone other than Bahr because Bahr will report it immediately to the Soviet Union. But if you have any views, you let me know, and I will wait for a reply.

Ambassador Huang: And from the fact that West Germany doesn't have any relations with the Chiang kai-shek clique we can see that there will be less difficulty than with other countries which have diplomatic relations with Chiang kai-shek.

Dr. Kissinger : Well it is primarily a tactical question, whether you want to wait until December 3 or whether you want the preliminary steps to be taken now, and whether you will want to concentrate on dealing with Schroeder and his friends, or whether you will also want to open communications with the other party. I will reply only in a general way and simply say that I have always found you very honorable to deal with, without indicating anything on the timing. And I will say I will be in touch with him later when I have had a chance to think about it.

Ambassador Huang: Well, Doctor, when are you going to Europe?

Dr. Kissinger : I am planning to go in the first week in September.

Ambassador Huang Well, we can report your views to Peking.

Dr. Kissinger : Of course, I go now occasionally for Vietnamese discussions, and it's easy to go to Bonn from there.

Now let me talk to you about the nuclear issue. First of all, we agree with the general analysis you have presented, although we, of course, cannot accept the motives you have ascribed to us. (Ambassador Huang corrects Mrs. Shih on the word “ascribe.”) Because if those were our motives we wouldn't consult with you.

Let me give you our analysis of the situation and of the strategy we intend to pursue, and then we can talk about this. Our analysis is that there is a deliberate Soviet policy to isolate you, and that the many agreements the Soviet Union has made in the last two years and the patience they have shown in the face of setbacks in the West, can only be explained to us in terms of aggressive intent in the East. (Ambassador Huang questions Mrs. Shih on something.) This is our analysis. We believe the period of greatest danger in this respect is likely to come in the period 1974-76. We believe also that it is against our interests to permit the establishment of an hegemony in Eurasia dominated from Moscow. And therefore, it is in our interest to resist this without any formal agreement [with the PRC] simply out of our own necessity.

Now the problem is how to accomplish this. We cannot artifically maintain tensions in the West when our allies pursue the policies they do, and when we have no direct interest in tensions in the West.

Ambassador Huang: You mean you don't have a direct interest in the West?

Dr. Kissinger : In tension in the West. We have no interest in maintaining tension in the West, but we have an interest in maintaining our position in the West. And if we remain in office, we shall not reduce our forces in Europe unilaterally, and as I told the Prime Minister, even by agreement we will not reduce them by much more than 10 percent.

But what we have to try to accomplish before that time period that I mentioned to you is to establish enough of a relationship with you so that it is plausible that an attack on you involves a substantial American interest. And you would make a great mistake if you thought that we had primarily commercial interests, because with this Administration at least, that's of a third order of interest. Our basic strategy is what I mentioned to you. In order to have a plausible basis and in order avoid giving the Soviet Union the pretense of claiming that they are being encircled, we want to do enough with the Soviet Union to maintain a formal symmetry. (Ambassador Huang checks Mrs. Shih's translation, then smiles and indicates that Dr. Kissinger should continue. )

It is a very complicated policy, but it is a very complicated situation. And we will not participate in any agreements that have the objective tendency of isolating you, or can be directed at you. But what we are looking for is to find some formulation that deprives this proposal of its substantive content but gives it some general abstract qualities, that gives it no operational significance. We have not yet replied, so I am telling you our thinking.

For example—I want to tell you this is an internal paper which we are considering now—we are playing with the idea of a proposal that in the first paragraph, when they say there is an obligation not to use nuclear weapons against each other, we might say we agree to do the utmost to create conditions in international relations in which nuclear weapons are not used by anybody. And then have a second paragraph which says that in order for this condition to be realized, there cannot be either a threat or the use of force by one side against the other, by one side against the allies of the other, or by either side against a third country. And furthermore, that neither side will encourage the threat or use of force by any of its allies or by any other third country.

We have not submitted this, and we are debating it. This makes it very general. It isn't confined to nuclear countries and it isn't an obligation. If you have any views, we would welcome them. And I said, we have not responded and we will certainly not accept the proposal I mentioned to you.

Ambassador Huang: The Chinese side's attitude is very clearly stated in the first message (looking at the message), that is, the Chinese side hopes the U.S. side will give serious consideration to the Chinese side's proposal that an agreement on the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons will be reached through the consultation of all countries. (Repeating) … through the consultation of all countries.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand your point.

Ambassador Huang: (Looking at the message) As a first step, an agreement should be reached on the non-use of nuclear weapons by nuclear countries against each other and by nuclear countries against non-nuclear countries. We would consider that only such an agreement is correct and would really solve the problem.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand this point and it is not inconsistent with our views.

Ambassador Huang: Do you think the Soviet side will accept such a proposal? What is the possibility?

Dr. Kissinger : (Pausing) Will they accept such an agreement?

Mrs. Shih: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger : You made it before.

Ambassador Huang: At the session of the General Assemply last year, we reaffirmed our statement on this question and asked Mr. Malik to reply, and he didn't. In the past, the Soviet side had proposed a similar view, similar proposals.

Dr. Kissinger : I can't judge. I doubt it, but I can't be sure.

You can be certain that you will be informed of every step that is taken in this matter before it is taken.

Ambassador Huang: And does the U.S. side agree to our proposal?

Dr. Kissinger : (Pausing): We are trying to avoid a situation where the Soviet Union can threaten our allies with conventional forces, and we are then prohibited from using nuclear weapons in defense of Western Europe.

Ambassador Huang: Because the Chinese proposal for the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons is not an isolated step. It is proposed as a first step.

Dr. Kissinger : This is our principal concern, the Soviet military concentration in Europe which none of our allies are capable of resisting themselves.

Ambassador Huang Well, I hope when the U.S. side has considered this question, you will let us know.

Dr. Kissinger : You can be certain. We will not make any move which you are not aware of and have not had a chance to make a comment on. You can assure the Prime Minister now that we will not accept the Soviet proposal. Ambassador Huang: I will report this to the Premier.

Dr. Kissinger : I wanted to mention two other things to you. I have also with respect to the British the same confidential channel that I have with respect to the Germans. I met last week with Sir Burke Trend who is the British Cabinet Secretary.

Ambassador Huang: Burt?

Dr. Kissinger : Burke. B-u-r-k-e Trend. I gave him most of the same analysis that I have given to you about the Soviet intentions, and about our interest in preventing the situation from arising. He told me that the British Foreign Secretary will visit Peking in October.

Ambassador Huang: October.

Dr. Kissinger : And we will invite him to Washington before he goes so that we can continue the conversation; we have reason to believe that the general British approach is sympathetic. You have to do a little missionary work about their Indian friends with them. He gave us a lot of trouble last year on India-Pakistan.

A second thing I wanted to tell you … .

Ambassador Huang (Interrupting) Just a matter for clarification. You said that you have an interest in avoiding this situation. Was this sentence directed against the Soviet's proposal? You said “avoid this situation.”

Dr. Kissinger : We are interested in trying to avoid a situation of Soviet aggressive actions in East Asia. We also discussed the Soviet proposal with them, but we have not yet received their reaction. We discussed this in somewhat less detail than with you. But those are the only two countries that I have discussed it with.

As you know, I had another meeting with the North Vietnamese … .

Ambassador Huang (Interrupting) I had another question—sorry.

Dr. Kissinger : You have another question?

Ambassador Huang: Would you elaborate on your view that the greatest danger is the period 1974-76?

Dr. Kissinger : It is my impression that it will take until then, or maybe just before then, to complete the pacification of the West, the European Security Conference and maybe some more progress in disarmament, and the shift of military forces.

Ambassador Huang: So when the European Security Conference and disarmament will make some progress … .

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, and when it has established a basically peaceful intent or reputation has been established, and their military buildup is completed. One reason is that there are new nuclear weapons introduced which will not be completed until 1974.

Mrs. Shih: You mean nuclear weapons introduced … ?

Dr. Kissinger : In the strategic forces. They are more directed against us.

Ambassador Huang: Directed against you?

Dr. Kissinger : Some. I don't want you to think you are in a monopoly position in receiving all the attention. The strategic forces to keep us … are directed mostly against us, some against you, but they are mostly against us.

Ambassador Huang: I thank you for the clarification.

Dr. Kissinger : I don't want to mislead you. This is our interpretation in the White House. Not everybody agrees with it. If you get a change of Administrations they would take a less cataclysmic view of the probable evolution.

Mrs. Shih: What?

Dr. Kissinger : Our opponent in the campaign takes a different view as you probably know.

* * * * *

As you know, we had another meeting with the North Vietnamese this week. We made a particular proposal which I introduced with a special opening statement. I thought the Prime Minister for his information would like to read it.

It is our view that the only thing that could hold up a solution now is their attempt to play on our domestic politics. We are prepared to settle on a reasonable and just basis. I think you will find some points that were made to us were taken very seriously.

(He hands over the proposal and opening statement at Tabs A and B respectively.) This is simply for your information. We are not asking for any particular … . (Pointing to the documents) This is the statement I made when I presented it. This was the formal proposal by us. It follows the outline of their seven points.

* * * * *

Ambassador Huang: That finishes our work?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

(There were then some closing pleasantries while the Ambassador waited for his car. Dr. Kissinger mentioned that he received many requests from people wishing to make movies in China, such as documentaries or landscape films. For example, Bob Hope, a good friend of the Administration, had just asked for help with his request to shoot background shots of China for a show. Dr. Kissinger inquired whether these should be sent to Ottawa with a copy to Ambassador Huang in New York, or how else to handle these matters. He said that he would not get involved in these cases very often, but occasionally just to indicate to the Chinese that it would be nice if certain people got a personal response. It did not mean that the U.S. Government or he necessarily endorsed the initiatives, and the response could be negative. Ambassador Huang said that in Mr. Hope's case, he could either write to him directly or write to Ottawa and send a copy to him.

There was some other light conversation until the Ambassador's car arrived. He and Mrs. Shih then departed.)

[Tab A]

1. Regarding the withdrawal of U.S. and other foreign forces allied with the Government of South Vietnam:

There will be a total withdrawal from South Vietnam of all U.S. troops, military advisors and military personnel and those of other forces allied with the Government of South Vietnam within four months of the signature of this general agreement. Weapons and war materials belonging to those forces will also be withdrawn and bases under U.S. control will be dismantled.

2. There will be a general cease-fire throughout Indochina, to begin when this general agreement is signed. The cease-fire will include cessation of United States acts of force against North Vietnam, the mining of North Vietnamese ports and harbors, and an end to all U.S. air and other military activities in South Vietnam. As part of the cease-fire, there will be no further infiltration of outside forces into any of the countries of Indochina, and the introduction into Indochina of reinforcements in the form of arms, munitions and other war material will be prohibited. It is understood, however, that war material, arms and munitions which have been destroyed, damaged, worn out or used up after the cessation of hostilities may be replaced on the basis of piece-for-piece of the same type and with similar characteristics.

3. The release of all military men and innocent civilians captured throughout Indochina will be carried out in parallel with the troop withdrawals mentioned in Point 1. Both sides will present a complete list of military men and innocent civilians held throughout Indochina on the day this general agreement is signed. The release will begin on the same day as troop withdrawals and will be completed when they are completed.

4. Regarding the political problem in South Vietnam:

The political future of South Vietnam will be left for the South Vietnamese people to decide for themselves, free from outside interference.

For its part, the United States declares that it respects the South Vietnamese people's night to self-determination; it will remain completely neutral with respect to the political process in South Vietnam; it will abide by the outcome of any political process shaped by the South Vietnamese people themselves; and it is prepared to define its military and economic assistance relationship with any government that exists in South Vietnam.

There will be a free and democratic Presidential election in South Vietnam no later than six months from the date of final agreement on the details of a political solution. The election may be held earlier if that is agreed among the parties. This election will be organized and run by an independent body representing all political forces in South Vietnam which will assume its responsibilities on the date of final agreement on the details of a political solution. This body will, among other responsibilities, determine the qualification of candidates. All political forces in South Vietnam can participate in the election and present candidates. There will be international supervision of this election.

Before the Presidential election takes place, the incumbent President and Vice President of South Vietnam will resign. The Chairman of the Senate, as caretaker head of the government, will assume administrative responsibilities except for those pertaining to the election, which will remain with the independent election body.

The right of all political forces to participate freely and peacefully in every aspect of the political process will be guaranteed. In addition to the Presidential election, all political forces will be eligible for appointment or election to positions in the executive, legislative and judicial branches of government.

In keeping with the provisions of Article 14 (C) of the 1954 Geneva Accords the Vietnamese parties will undertake to refrain from any reprisals or discrimination against persons or organizations on account of their activities during the hostilities and to guarantee democratic liberties.

5. After the new President has been elected, the political forces in South Vietnam will meet with a view to revising the Constitution within one year and agreeing on steps to implement it.

6. The details of a political solution based on the principles of Points 4 and 5 above will be negotiated between the South Vietnamese parties within three months of the signature of this general agreement.

7. Regarding the peaceful reunification of Vietnam:

Reunification of Vietnam will be achieved step by step by peaceful means, on the basis of discussions and agreements between North and South Vietnam without constraint and annexation from either party, and without foreign interference.

Pending reunification, and in keeping with the provisions of the 1954 Geneva Agreements on Vietnam, North and South Vietnam will refrain from Joining any military alliance with foreign countries, and from allowing any foreign country to have military bases, troops and military personnel on their soil.

Pending reunification, North and South Vietnam will develop and maintain close relations in all fields.

8. Regarding the foreign policy of peace and neutrality of Indochina:

The countries of Indochina shall pursue a foreign policy of peace, independence and neutrality, establish relations with all countries regardless of their political and social regime, maintain economic and cultural relations with all countries, and participate in programs of regional economic cooperation.

9. Both sides will respect the 1954 Geneva Agreements on Indochina and those of 1961 on Laos. There will be no foreign intervention in the Indochinese countries and the Indochinese peoples will be left to settle their own affairs by themselves.

10. The problems existing among the Indochinese countries will be settled by the Indochinese parties on the basis of mutual respect for independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in each other's affairs. Among the problems that will be settled is the implementation of the principle that all armed forces of the countries of Indochina must remain within their national frontiers.

11. There will be international supervision of the military aspects of this agreement, including the cease-fire and its provisions, the release of prisoners of war and innocent civilians, the withdrawal of outside forces from Indochina, and the implementation of the principle that all armed forces of the countries of Indochina must remain within their national frontiers.

12. There will be an international guarantee for the fundamental national rights of the Indochinese peoples, the status of all the countries of Indochina, and lasting peace in the region.

Both sides express their willingness to participate in an international conference for this and other appropriate purposes.

[Tab B]

Mr. Special Adviser, Mr. Minister —

When we adjourned on July 19 we agreed that both sides would study the record and formulate new concrete proposals. We agreed as well at that meeting that we should both make an effort to find a solution, meet each other part way, and put our proposals side-by-side, with the attitude of finding a solution.

We approach this session in this spirit. We have closely reviewed your remarks at our last meeting, as well as all your earlier statements and proposals. The President has authorized me to introduce a concrete new plan. I look forward to hearing the new proposals you have promised. We can then compare the two sides positions to reconcile them.

The time has come to replace rhetoric with reasonableness, to move from debating points and propaganda to a joint search for a settlement. Two weeks ago, the Special Adviser said that in negotiations “you cannot win everything you put forward, as we cannot win everything we put forward.” If that approach can be translated into action, here, we can rapidly reach a settlement. It will be our approach.

As I said last time, I am here to meet in a spirit of conciliation and good will, prepared to forego unilateral demands, ready to look understandingly at your point of view. If you choose to negotiate in the same spirit you will find us both forthcoming and reliable. The Special Adviser asked last time whether you could be sure that we will keep the agreements that we may make. I want to tell you as solemnly as I am able that you can. We will maintain every agreement we make with you, not only in letter but also in spirit. We will abide by the consequences of whatever process we jointly start here.

Furthermore, we are prepared to give the same guarantee to your allies as to you. We are willing to link our important relations in Moscow and Peking to our good faith in Indochina. You would thus have as guarantee not only our word to you but the force of American interest in its global diplomacy. Let me explain, incidentally; we have not discussed this with your allies.

Let me explain in uncomplicated language. If you do not believe our word to you, we are prepared to give the same promises to your allies or any other country you trust. Therefore if we break our promise to you we will also be breaking our promise to them. It is an assurance to you, we do not insist on it. We have not discussed it with your allies. No other country has seen this text.

In addition, we are prepared to enter into specific understandings with you on how to interpret certain aspects of an agreement. These, too, will be meticulously observed and can be, if you wish, conveyed to your allies.

Now then, to our proposals. We have looked once again at everything you have said, especially regarding the political question. We agree to recognize that military and political issues should be solved together. We have made a serious effort to bridge our differences. For this is the basic barrier to a settlement. We have, as well, added new elements to meet specific points you have raised on other issues. As a demonstration of our good will, we have accepted the basic structure of your Two-Point Elaboration and the Seven-Point Proposal. To speed agreement, we have even adopted much of your language.

Now I shall read the plan, and then I shall explain what it means.

“Point One, regarding the withdrawal of U.S. and other foreign forces allied with the Government of South Vietnam.

“There will be a total withdrawal from South Vietnam of all U.S. troops, military advisers and military personnel and those of other forces allied with the Government of South Vietnam within four months of the signature of this general agreement. Weapons and war materials belonging to those forces will also be withdrawn and bases under U.S. control will be dismantled.

We will give you a text when we are finished.

“Two, there will be a general cease-fire throughout Indochina, to begin when this general agreement is signed. The cease-fire will include cessation of United States acts of force against North Vietnam, the mining of North Vietnamese ports and harbors, and an end to all U.S. air and other military activities in South Vietnam. As part of the cease-fire, there will be no further infiltration of outside forces into any of the countries of Indochina, and the introduction into Indochina of reinforcements in the form of arms, munitions and other war material will be prohibited. It is understood, however, that war material, arms and munitions which have been destroyed, damaged, worn out or used up after the cessation of hostilities may be replaced on the basis of piece-for-piece of the same type and with similar characteristics.

“Three, the release of all military men and innocent civilians captured throughout Indochina will be carried out in parallel with the troop withdrawals mentioned in Point 1. Both sides will present a complete list of military men and innocent civilians held throughout Indochina on the day this general agreement is signed. The release will begin on the same day as troop withdrawals and will be completed when they are completed.

“Fourth, regarding the political problem in South Vietnam:

“The political future of South Vietnam will be left for the South Vietnamese people to decide for themselves, free from outside interference.

“For its part, the United States declares that it respects the South Vietnamese people's right to self-determination; it will remain completely neutral with respect to the political process in South Vietnam; it will abide by the outcome of any political process shaped by the South Vietnamese people themselves; and it is prepared to define its military and economic assistance relationship with any government that exists in South Vietnam.

“There will be a free and democratic Presidential election in South Vietnam no later than six months from the date of final agreement on the details of a political solution. The election may be held earlier if that is agreed among the parties. This election will be organized and run by an independent body representing all political forces in South Vietnam which will assume its responsibilities on the date of final agreement on the details of a political solution. This body will, among other responsibilities, determine the qualification of candidates. All political forces in South Vietnam can participate in the election and present candidates. There will be international supervision of this election.

“Before the Presidential election takes place, the incumbent President and Vice President of South Vietnam will resign. The Chairman of the Senate, as caretaker head of the government, will assume administrative responsibilities except for those pertaining to the election, which will remain with the independent election body.

“The right of all political forces to participate freely and peacefully in every aspect of the political process will be guaranteed. In addition to the Presidential election, all political forces will be eligible for appointment or election to positions in the executive, legislative and judicial branches of government.

“In keeping with the provisions of Article 14(C) of the 1954 Geneva Accords the Vietnamese parties will undertake to refrain from any reprisals or discrimination against persons or organizations on account of their activities during the hostilities and to guarantee democratic liberties.

“Five, after the new President has been elected, the political forces in South Vietnam will meet with a view to revising the Constitution within one year and agreeing on steps to implement it.

“Point Six: The details of a political solution based on the principles of Points 4 and 5 above will be negotiated between the South Vietnamese parties within three months of the signature of this general agreement.

“Point Seven: Regarding the peaceful reunification of Vietnam: Reunification of Vietnam will be achieved step by step by peaceful means on the basis of discussions and agreements between North and South Vietnam without constraint and annexation from either party, and without foreign interference.

“Pending reunification, and in keeping with the provisions of the 1954 Geneva Agreements on Vietnam, North and South Vietnam will refrain from joining any military alliance with foreign countries, and from allowing any foreign country to have military bases, troops and military personnel on their soil.

“Pending reunification, North and South Vietnam will develop and maintain close relations in all fields.

“Eight, regarding the foreign policy of peace and neutrality of Indochina:

“The countries of Indochina shall pursue a foreign policy of peace indepedence and neutrality, establish relations with all countries regardless of their political and social regime, maintain economic and cultural relations with all countries, and participate in programs of regional economic cooperation.

“Nine, both sides will respect the 1954 Geneva Agreements on Indochina and those of 1962 on Laos. There will be no foreign intervention in the Indochinese countries and the Indochinese peoples will be left to settle their own affairs by themselves.

“Ten, the problems existing among the Indochinese countries will be settled by the Indochinese parties on the basis of mutual respect for independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in each other's affairs. Among the problems that will be settled is the implementation of the principle that all armed forces of the countries of Indochina must remain within their national frontiers.

“Eleven, there will be international supervision of the military aspects of this agreement, including the cease-fire and its provisions, the release of prisoners of war and innocent civilians, the withdrawal of outside forces from Indochina, and the implementation of the principle that all armed forces of the countries of Indochina must remain within their national frontiers.

“Twelve, there will be an international guarantee for the fundamental national rights of the Indochinese peoples, the status of all the countries of Indochina, and lasting peace in the region.

“Both sides express their willingness to participate in an international conference for this and other appropriate purposes.”

Now let me explain what we mean by this plan. Let us look seriously and in good faith at what we have done. We have cast our plan in terms of the Seven-Point Plan and Two-Point Elaboration. We have accepted the basic principles of your proposals, although there are differences with regard to timing and procedure. Let me go through these proposals, point by point.

With respect to Point One, on the military questions: — Your side has asked for the complete withdrawal of allied forces and their equipment and the dismantling of U.S. bases. We have agreed that we will do this.

— You have asked for an early deadline. We have shortened the timetable for complete withdrawal of our forces to four months. Were we to agree by September 1st, the last American soldier will have left South Vietnam by the end of this year.

With respect to Point Two, on the political questions: You will notice that we have accepted many of its principles and that we have agreed to consider it together with the military questions.

First, on the overall process. Your position as expressed in the Seven Points and the Two-Point Elaboration is that the present government must change and then the new government should develop a new constitutional structure. We accept this general outline as to procedure, and also the two-stage approach it represents. We have made a conscientious effort to leave the decisions to the South Vietnamese people. We solemnly declare that we will abide by the results of the process we are proposing. The only thing we will not do is to prescribe that outcome in Paris. We will not insist on a particular government; but we will not impose it either.

More specifically: — You have asked that we resepct South Vietnamese self-determination and that the political process be free of American interference. We have agreed to this in our readiness to make a series of commitments about the political future of South Vietnam once an agreement is signed.

— We have proposed elections to choose a new President. And we have specified that this election be organized and run by an independent electoral commission made up of all political forces and that it be internationally supervised.

— You have asked that President Thieu resign. He has agreed to do so and we have reason to believe that the deadline for his resignation prior to new elections is flexible.

— You have asked that democratic liberties be guaranteed. We have agreed to your specific point that democratic liberties, as defined in the 1954 Geneva Accords, be assured in South Vietnam. In addition, we have proposed that all forces be eligible for election or appointment to all branches of government and that they participate in every aspect of the political process freely and securely.

— You have asked that a new government of South Vietnam bring about a new constitution. We have agreed that after the new elections the political forces in South Vietnam should meet to revise the Constitution within one year and agree on steps to implement it.

— In addition to the merit of these proposals individually, you will no doubt consider the impact of the publication of this agreement and principles on the political process and on the expectations of the people of South Vietnam.

We have thus addressed every aspect of your political proposals. We have agreed to your basic approach and many of its details. There are some remaining differences to which I will turn in a minute.

With respect to the other points in the [PRG] Seven-Point proposal: We have met every one in substance, and in many instances we have incorporated the specific language.

— Point Three, the disposition of Vietnamese armed forces, is subsumed under our Point Ten.

— Point Four, the reunification of Vietnam and the relations between North and South, is covered by our Point Seven.

— Point Five is covered by our Point Eight.

— Point Six on reparations we cannot accept, but we maintain our position of last summer regarding our willingness to consider a reconstruction program for all of Indochina.

Our other points (nine, ten, and eleven) represent areas of essential agreement last summer when they were based on your nine points.

Finally, we have met your concern that the intent of these proposals could be defeated through delaying tactics in the implementing process by placing a three-month time limit on the negotiation to work out the details of the political process. This time limit would enable us to help guarantee that the intent of these proposals is carried out because our withdrawals would not be completed until a month after these negotiations are completed also. At the same time one could not affect the political process with our forces since they would have left at least five months before the elections.

Let me explain. We agree on these principles; after these principles, it will take three months to work out the details of the process, it will take four months to withdraw all our forces. Our forces will be withdrawn one month after the details are worked out. The elections will be six months after the details are worked out, or five months after the forces are withdrawn. But the elections can be earlier.

Let me point out the new elements in our plan as compared to our January 27th and our May 8th proposals:

[Withdrawals] The deadline for total withdrawal of all U.S. and allied forces from South Vietnam is reduced to four months, instead of the six months in our Eight-Point proposal. Assuming the final details of a political settlement are worked out within three months of the general agreement and a new election held six months later, all US and allied forces would be out of South Vietnam five months before the elections. This contrasts with our January 25th plan where U.S. withdrawals would be completed by the date of the election.

Prisoners. Unlike the President's May 8th proposal, prisoner release would take place after the cessation of acts of force and mining against the DRV rather than making these conditional upon completion of prisoner release.

Political Issues. Our political proposals offer major new elements expressly designed to meet concerns that you have expressed in your message of May 18 and at our last meeting.

First, we have reaffirmed that President Thieu and Vice President Huong will resign before the holding of presidential elections. Our new plan deliberately does not specify the time limit. We are prepared to have an understanding with you that we will support an extension of the period beyond the one month provided in our proposal of January 25.

Second, the election will take place several months after the last American soldier has left Vietnam, in contrast to our earlier plans.

Third, we have specified that in addition to the Presidential election, all political forces would be eligible for appointment or election to positions in all branches of government—executive, legislative and judicial. No political force will be excluded from participation in any part of the political process, at any level.

Fourth, we have added an explicit statement about guarantees on the rights of all political forces to participate freely and peacefully in the political process. This clause meets your concern that forces aligned with your side, and others, opposed to the present Saigon Administration, might be hindered or prevented from political activities.

Fifth, in response to your direct request at our last meeting, we have included a specific reference to Article 14(c) of the Geneva Accord and the guarantee of democratic liberties.

Finally, we have added the provision that after a new President has been elected, the political forces in South Vietnam will meet in order to revise the Constitution within one year and agree to implement it. This accepts the outline of this aspect of your side's second point elaboration. Thus, your side will not only have the chance for power in the Presidential election; they will also have the opportunity to negotiate with the new government on revisions of the Constitution. The political process, in other words, is extended beyond one office or one event.

These would be formal agreements which we would be prepared to sign. The Special Adviser last time mentioned unsigned agreements as well. I am not sure to what he was referring. But we would be prepared to reach and observe certain private understandings in addition to formal agreements.

First, we would be prepared to use our influence, all our influence, with the Government of South Vietnam to implement the details of this agreement.

Second, as I have indicated, we have reason to believe that President Thieu—as his personal contribution to a guaranteed and lasting peace—might consider the deadline for his resignation negotiable. We envisage, for example, that he might agree to a two-month rather than one-month interval before new elections. In any event, we will support such an understanding with him and Vice President Huong. Let me remind you that last summer you said that President Thieu's resignation was the only real requirement for a settlement, after which all other problems could be solved easily. If this was a serious proposal, the opportunity now exists.

Third, in conjunction with an overall agreement, we are willing to make certain understandings with regard to the future levels of US military and economic aid to South Vietnam.

Fourth, as I have pointed out, we will be prepared to reaffirm privately to your major allies every agreement and understanding we make with you. Thus if we were to violate any agreements, we would be breaking faith not only with you but also with countries whose relations are very important to us.

Fifth, we are prepared to listen seriously to any proposals you may wish to make with regard to future understandings.

Our proposals are a deliberate, conscientious attempt to give the people of South Vietnam an opportunity to shape their own future. We have structured them within the framework your side has put forward. But we have refused to impose a particular solution. We cannot so weaken the political forces opposed to the NLF that the resulting political process will be a sham. We will cooperate honestly in constructing a truly free political process. We will not participate in a thinly veiled subterfuge for imposing one particular solution.

I tell you solemnly that we will carry out these agreements without any afterthought to undo its unfolding. We are prepared to live with its consequences. We have proposed a plan that irrevocably removes the American military presence, stops the conflict and the suffering, and lays out a concrete political process to give the people of South Vietnam a free choice, and a deadline to achieve it. This plan would be guaranteed by our agreement with you; by our commitment to your major allies; by other international forces; and by the geopolitical realities of the 1970s.

The need on both sides for a peaceful resolution has never been clearer. Recent events have demonstrated that no one can “win everything” on the other fronts of this conflict either. We have no wish to impose a military solution and no illusion that it could be purchased cheaply. We have no intention of inflicting needless destruction. We do not want to humiliate you. We consider your independence an essential element of long-term Southeast Asian policy. We are ready to take risks to terminate the fighting now, end our involvement, and set the stage for political competition among the Vietnamese alone.

We have made our basic decision to settle this conflict if you will meet us part way.

You have a similar decision to make. You can join us now in a serious effort to reach a negotiated settlement that takes account of both sides' concerns. This requires concrete proposals and movement from both sides, and a willingness to leave some matters to a political evolution.

Your other choice would be to wait upon events, listening to what we have to say without budging from your essential positions. You would thus be hoping for one of two things to happen: Either we accept all of your demands, which will not happen, or a new President is elected in November who will accept all of your demands.

The waiting course would be a serious mistake. You should not be misled by temporary Congressional votes—as you know, they do not address political questions at all.

As for looking towards our elections, you will make your own judgment about the prospects of the opposition. I will not discuss our domestic politics with you. It is clear, however, that if our election turns into a national referendum on Vietnam, you will be gambling for high stakes. This Administration's position can only be greatly bolstered by such an outcome.

Over recent years, you often have decided to wait, and the objective result has been a worsening of your overall position. Even if the opposition were to win, could they really execute what they now promise as candidates, or if they attempt it will it make a decisive difference by January 20, 1973? Over time, the South Vietnamese government and military posture will continue to grow stronger, and our influence on any settlement will decrease.

You have often accused us of missing opportunities. But you too have often waited too long. The basic mistake in the summer of 1971 was not this or that agreement, but your basic decision to start the negotiations much too late to influence the election. By July [1971] when we first talked seriously it was much too late. Do not make that same mistake again.

I therefore hope you will give serious consideration to what has been presented. It is not presented on a take-it-or-leave-it basis; we are prepared to hear counterproposals. We have, however, included just about every element that we think can contribute to a fair and open political process for all forces. The only thing we have not done is to guarantee your side's victory in advance.

I welcome your comments. And I look forward to hearing your own concrete proposals. At our last meeting you spoke eloquently about US-Vietnamese cooperation at Viet Bac at the end of World War II and about the prospect of a “new page” in our' relations at the end of this war. We share these sentiments. I want to repeat again today that the United States has no greater goal than to end this conflict in a manner that will respect the interests of all parties and will heal the wounds that have been inflicted. Our two countries do not present any long term threat to one another. There is every reason to rekindle the cooperation that existed at the end of a previous war.

So let us now end this war. Let us both devote our energies today, and in the coming weeks, to find a just settlement that will allow us to turn a new page in relations between our two countries and our two peoples. That is our attitude.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Presumably drafted by Lord. Brackets in the source text. The precise location of the meeting is not indicated.

149. Letter from President Nixon to Chinese Premier Chou En-lai, Washington, June 28, 1972 149. Letter from President Nixon to Chinese Premier Chou En-lai, Washington, June 28, 19721

Washington, June 28, 1972

June 28, 1972

Dear Mr. Premier -

I wish to take this opportunity to express my appreciation for the courtesies you extended to Dr. Kissigner on his recent visit to Peking. He reported to me at great length on this talks with you and I was pleased to note that the candor and the constructive attitude which have characterized our discussion in the past are continuing at this time.

I trust we can continue to work together toward the goal of normalizing relations between our two countries.

Mrs. Nixon and I have the most pleasant memories of our visit to Peking.

She joins me in extending our warmest personal regards to Madam Chou and to you.

Sincerely,

Richard Nixon

1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical Files, China, Chron, May-June 1972. No classification marking.

150. Memorandum for the Record, New York, August 30, 1972, 5-5:55 p.m. 150. Memorandum for the Record, New York, August 30, 1972, 5-5:55 p.m.1

New York, August 30, 1972, 5-5:55 p.m.

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

August 31, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

Following is a report of a meeting with Mrs. Shih at the Chinese Mission in New York on August 30, 1972.

I entered the Chinese Mission at 1700 hours, where I was greeted by Mrs. Shih and escorted to a room on the second floor. Mrs. Shih served tea and a twenty-minute disucssion on non-substantial matters followed.

After approximately twenty-five minutes, Mrs. Shih mentioned that the Ambassador was unavoidably detained and would not be able to join us. I then presented the note (Tab A) to Mrs. Shih, who read it and said she understood it, had no questions and would pass it to the Ambassador as soon as possible.

Mrs. Shih then guided the conversation back to generalities and served a second pot of tea.

I departed the Mission at 1755 and telephoned Colonel Kennedy to advise him that the note had been delivered.

V. James Fazio

Deputy Director

Situation Room

Attached for the information of the Chinese side is a copy of the further report, which the U.S. side mentioned on August 28, 1972, concerning the August 22, 1972 incident.

The U.S. side expresses once again its sincere regret for the loss of life resulting from this matter. It will do its utmost to prevent recurrence, but wishes to point out that the activities involved run the risk of inadvertent and regrettable incidents.

SUBJECT: PRC Protest Over the Sinking of a Small Waterborne Logistic Craft on 22 August 1972

1. An investigation has been conducted of a PRC protest over the sinking of an alleged PRC lifeboat in the vicinity of Hon Ngu Island on 22 August 1972. The investigation included personal interview of the pilots by the Commanding Officer, Oriskany, photos of Hung Chi 151 on 25 August 1972 and comments from Commanding Officer USS Truxton whose ship was controlling the two A-7 aircraft involved. The principal elements disclosed by this investigation were: a. The movements and nature of the craft attacked coincided with the movements and nature of many other waterborne logistic craft noted in the past. These craft have been attacked and destroyed because they are engaged in transporting supplies from merchant ships at Hon Ngu anchorage into the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.

b. The location of the boat at the time of the bombing Was approximately 1500 feet from the nearest merchant ship. An A-7 flight, requested permission from the USS Truxton to attack the boat. Truxton authorized expending ordnance against the boat only after the pilots twice checked for presence of flag and reported back there was no flag. Although the PRC alleges the boat was a “lifeboat,” the aircrews report several boxes or crates were observed in the boat. Based on this observation, it was concluded that supplies were being carried by the North Vietnamese from the northern merchant ship. The boat was sunk with one 500 lb. bomb dropped from an A-7.

c. 25 August photography reveals that Hung Chi is missing one of the two small boats normally carried aft. Photography on 19 August had both boats in place. It may be surmised from this information and from the correlation of boat sizes, that the boat which was sunk could have been from the Hung Chi 151.

d. According to the PRC, the boat was sunk at 18°47'56”; 105°45'12”; the A-7 flight reported the position as 18°47'45”, 105045'. The two positions differ only 1100' in their north-south orientation. It is noted that this position is approximately one-third of the distance from shore line to Hon Ngu Island—another indication to the aircrew that the boat was carrying supplies.

2. To summarize: The boat appeared to be carrying supplies; it was near shore according to both PRC and aircrew reports; it was not flying a flag; two low level identification passes were made to ascertain the boat's mission. The attack was initiated in accordance with the formally proclaimed intention of the United States to prevent the delivery of seaborne supplies to the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Drafted by Fazio on August 31.

151. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, August 14, 1972, 3:30-4:10 p.m. 151. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, August 14, 1972, 3:30-4:10 p.m.1

New York, August 14, 1972, 3:30-4:10 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS:

Ambassador Huang Hua

Mrs. Shih, Interpreter

Mr. Kuo

Cdr. Jonathan T. Howe, NSC Staff

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

DATE, TIME & PLACE: August 14, 1972, 3:30-4:10 p.m., New York

After a brief exchange of pleasantries, Ambassador Huang remarked that just as Commander Howe was calling Mrs. Shih for an appointment he was thinking of calling Dr. Kissinger for a meeting. Commander Howe stated that Dr. Kissinger hoped to meet with the Ambassador in the near future and the reason why he could not do it this week would become more obvious when the Ambassador had been made aware of the contents of the U.S. note. The Ambassador probably realized that Dr. Kissinger was in Paris today. Commander Howe then read the note at Tab A remarking that although he knew it was not necessary he wanted to point out that not only the first item but the second item was also sensitive. Dr. Kissinger's travel would of course be announced at the appropriate time. When Commander Howe had handed over the note at Tab A, the Ambassador responded the he would convey the information to Prime Minister Chou En-lai.

The Ambassador them remarked that he knew Dr. Kissinger had been busy recently and he wished to convey a message to Dr. Kissinger. He indicated that there were three items in the message and then conveyed the following, reading from prepared notes.

1. First, in his message of August 4 the Chinese side gave its own analysis of the Soviet proposal that the Soviet Union and the United States sign a treaty on mutual nuclear nonaggression with no intention to ascribe Soviet motivation to the United. States. We furthermore express the hope that the United States will value the principle jointly affirmed by China and the United States (in the Shanghai communique) and reject the Soviet proposal. Dr. Kissinger said that you did not accept the proposal. Based on its understanding, the Chinese side cannot agree to the formula the U.S. is considering and doubts whether it can avoid being exploited by the Soviet Union because the Soviet Union can exactly use the pretext of “creating a condition” to dish up all kinds of proposals to serve nuclear monopoly and nuclear superiority.

We wish to say frankly that the Chinese side is not so worried about the Soviet attempt to isolate China. On the contrary, there are signs indicating that the Soviet Union is trying to create through its anti-China propaganda a false sense of security in Europe. This is worthy of attention and has probably long been noticed by Dr. Kissinger.

2. Mr. Gerhard Schroeder came to China as Chairman of the Foreign Political Committee of the Bundestag. His main interest lay in the discussion of establishing diplomatic relations but he was not commissioned to negotiate. Mr.. Schroeder maintained that a question of establishing diplomatic relations between China and West Germany should be above parties in West Germany and he used the German word “uber parteilich.” The Chinese side expressed appreciation of this.

The Chinese and West Germany governments have initially contacted each other. Both sides believe that it would be desirable to establish diplomatic relations as early as possible and that there should be no obstacles. The two sides will soon enter into negotiations. If Dr. Kissinger wishes to promote this, he should naturally be welcome.

3. Following formation of his Cabinet, Prime Minister Tanaka of Japan expressed the desire to increase efforts to realize the normalization of diplomatic relations between China and Japan. Proceeding from its consistent stand the Chinese side responded positively. The Chinese side has stated that Prime Minister Tanaka is welcome to visit China. The Chinese side understands the importance of Japanese/U.S. relations to both Japan and the United States, and it will not embarrass the United States government in the process of negotiating the restoration of diplomatic relations between China and Japan.

Without referring to his notes the Ambassador then commented that Premier Chou En-lai had received the original copy of the letter of thanks sent on June 28 by President Nixon. The Prime Minister considers this a friendly gesture and wishes to convey his greetings to the President.

Commander Howe indicated that the Prime Minister's greetings would indeed be conveyed to the President who undoubtedly would be most appreciative. The three substantive matters which the Ambassador had conveyed would be brought to Dr. Kissinger's attention. When Dr. Kissinger returned from his trip we would be in touch to arrange a mutually convenient time to get together.

In the closing pleasantries it was noted that Mr. Kuo would be accompanying the Ambassador and Mrs. Shih to all future meetings. Mr. Kuo indicated that he had been present during both the July and October 1971 American visits, but had been at the UN since the Chinese delegation first arrived.

1. The U.S. side has considered carefully the Chinese comments, conveyed on August 4, 1972, concerning the Soviet proposal for an agreement on nuclear weapons. Enclosed for the confidential information of the Chinese side is a copy of the text of the recent Soviet proposal. The U.S. side will not accept this proposal. It will fully inform the Chinese side of the U.S. response which will certainly reflect all the considerations raised by the Chinese.

2. The U.S. side wishes to inform the Chinese side that Dr. Kissinger will travel to Saigon following his August 14, 1972 secret meeting with the North Vietnamese in Paris. The purpose of this trip is to review once more the negotiating positions in an effort to make rapid progress toward a just settlement of the Vietnam war. The U.S. side wishes to reaffirm its view that a prolongation of the conflict serves the interest of no country.

3. On his return trip from Saigon, Dr. Kissinger is considering stopping briefly in Japan. His talks in Tokyo would be related solely to the upcoming meeting in Hawaii between Prime Minister Tanaka and the President and would not concern other matters. Dr. Kissinger wants the Prime Minister to know that the U.S. has no objection to the normalization of relations between Japan and the People's Republic of China and will interpose no obstacles or delays.

TREATY between the USSR and the USA on the non-use of nuclear weapons

Guided by the aims of strengthening world peace and international security, Being aware that a nuclear war would have devastating consequences for all mankind, Proceeding from the desire to create conditions in which the danger of an outbreak of nuclear war would be reduced and ultimately eliminated, The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America have agreed as follows:

Article I

The Soviet Union and the United States of America undertake not to use nuclear weapons against each other.

Accordingly the Soviet Union and the United States will build their relations so that they should not contradict the obligation assumed by the sides under this Article.

Article II

The Soviet Union and the United States shall prevent such a situation when, as a result of actions by third states, they would find themselves involved in a collision with the use of nuclear weapons.

In case of a military conflict involving states—not parties to this Treaty, the Soviet Union and the United States shall apply all efforts to prevent an outbreak of nuclear war.

Article III

Nothing contained in this Treaty shall affect the obligations undertaken by the sides before other states, or any obligations under the United Nations Charter. The Treaty shall not affect the right of individual or collective self-defense.

Article IV

This Treaty is of unlimited duration.

Article V

The Treaty is subject to ratification in conformity with the constitutional procedures of each of the sides, and shall enter into force on the date of exchange of instruments of ratification.

The Treaty shall be registered in conformity with Article 102 of the United Nations Charter.

Done at the city of—————- —————— 1972, in two copies, each in the Russian and the English languages, which are equally authentic.

For the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

For the United States of America

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The precise location of the meeting is not indicated. Attached at Tab A are the U.S. note and a copy of the Soviet-proposed treaty on the non-use of nuclear weapons.

152. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, August 28, 1972, 5-5:30 p.m. 152. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, August 28, 1972, 5-5:30 p.m.1

New York, August 28, 1972, 5-5:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS:

Ambassador Huang Hua Mrs. Shih, Interpreter

Mr. Richard T. Kennedy, NSC Staff

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

DATE AND TIME: Monday, August 28, 1972, 5:00 - 5:30 p.m.

PLACE: New York

After a brief exchange of pleasantries, Mr. Kennedy noted that he had both a written message and an oral message to convey. He then read the written message at Tab A. He then indicated that the US side would be receiving a further report on this incident by August 29, 1972, and would communicate it to the Chinese side. Ambassador Hua asked if all that had been read was contained in the note which Mr. Kennedy handed to him to which Mr. Kennedy replied affirmatively. The Ambassador indicated that he would transmit the message to his government. He invited Mr. Kennedy then to make the oral statement.

Mr. Kennedy then read the oral statement at Tab B. The Ambassador said that he would transmit the oral message to the Prime Minister. He then made the following statement speaking without notes:

We transmitted through this channel the PRC position on this incident. It is as stated in our message. The lifeboat belonged to the Chinese; it did not carry cargo; and it was flying the flag of the PRC. This position was clearly stated in the message given to the US side in the statement of the Foreign Minister and the speech made by the spokesman of the Ministry of Information.

We hope that the US side will be dealing seriously with this matter and that it will secure against recurrences of similar incidents. The Chinese Government reserves the right to request compensation for losses.

I hope that you will let us know of your final report of the investigations. As was stated in our message the last time, the Chinese side has made repeated representations to the US side but still incidents recur. That is why the Chinese side could not but make public the facts of this incident. The US side has made many representations as to guarantees of steps to assure against such incidents but still incidents have recurred. The Chinese Government therefore could not but protest to the US side. The statement by the US Command in Saigon was totally in denial of this incident. In short, the message, the statement of the Foreign Minister and the speech of the Government's spokesman have made the Chinese side's position very clear. We will not dwell on it further here. I hope the US side will investigage the incident seriously. I will transmit the messages you have given me to our government.

Mr. Kennedy assured the Ambassador that as the note indicated, the US side takes these matters and representations of the Chinese side concerning them very seriously indeed and investigates them very thoroughly. He stated that the Ambassador's statement would be conveyed to Dr. Kissinger. The Ambassador expressed appreciation and said that he would await the further report but that meanwhile the written and oral messages which Mr. Kennedy had given him would be transmitted.

Following closing pleasantries, the Ambassador indicated that he would look forward to receiving the further report of the incident and expressed appreciation for Mr. Kennedy's bringing the messages to him.

The U.S. side has carefully studied the Chinese message of August 25, 1972.

With respect to the comments concerning representations by the Chinese side through this channel, the U.S. side would like to point out once again the seriousness with which it has treated every Chinese message. The U.S. side has appreciated the use of the private channel for this type of information. It is, of course, up to the Chinese side to decide when to publicize these matters and to what extent public controversy between the U.S. and the PRC is desirable.

The U.S. has meticulously investigated every incident that has been brought to its attention and reported the results of its investigations to the Chinese side. Despite the fact that these results often have not corresponded to the allegations, the U.S. side has consistently expressed regret for any inadvertent transgression or damage that may have occurred.

In addition, the U.S. side has taken the strictest precaution to insure that border violations do not occur. The Chinese side has been informed of many concrete steps taken by the U.S. side to prevent incidents.

With regard to the August 22, 1972 incident, the U.S. side regrets the loss of life. It will continue to do everything possible to prevent the recurrence of such incidents. It must be pointed out once again, however, that events arising out of efforts in waters near North Vietnam to contravene the U.S. measures to prevent the supply of war materials are of a distinctly different nature than alleged violations of the Chinese border.

The U.S. side's initial investigation of the August 22, 1972 incident has produced the following report: — No flag was observed.

— The craft was involved in the movement of cargo.

— Only after the above facts were established did the attack take place.

In light of the Chinese Foreign Ministry statement of August 27, 1972, the U.S. will make a new and detailed investigation of this matter and report any further information that may become available. The U.S. side wants the Chinese side to know that events such as d escribed in the Chinese statements will not be permitted to occur.

The United States has been making maximum efforts to bring the Indochina war to an early conclusion on a basis just to all parties. No nation can have an interest in seeing the conflict prolonged and all can benefit from its rapid conclusion. For its part, the U.S. side will continue to do its utmost to reach a negotiated settlement in Paris in a constructive and generous spirit.

ORAL MESSAGE

I have been asked to convey to you the following message for the Prime Minister in addition to our written note.

“There comes a time in international events when the long view must be taken. The United States side questions whether it is in the Chinese interest to see the Indochina conflict seriously complicate the position of the present United States Administration in light of all that it has done and is prepared to do in a global context. There are more fundamental considerations involved given this Administration's constant awareness of the dangers of modern imperialism.

“Accordingly, the United States side hopes that the Prime Minister would carefully consider the problem of Indochina in a broader framework. The United States will continue its earnest search for a rapid conclusion of the war on a just basis for all parties. It is clear at this point that other countries, too, have a responsibility to help speed the end of the conflict whose continuation only serves to distort the international situation.”

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The precise location of the meeting is not indicated. See Document 150 for memoranda describing the bombing incident.

153. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Laird to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 16, 1972 153. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Laird to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 16, 19721

Washington, July 16, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR:

Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

SUBJECT:

Alleged Violations of PRC Air Space and Alleged Bombing of PRC Fishing Boats

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

WASHINGTON D.C. 20301

You requested a report by July 12, 1972, on the alleged violation of PRC Air Space on July 5, 1972, and the alleged bombing of two PRC fishing boats on June 20, 1972.

The alleged incidents have been investigated by CINCPAC and the component commanders. As in previous cases, no evidence has been found so far to support either allegation.

I have attached the report of the investigation submitted to me by the Acting Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff.

The restrictive measures I have implemented to control air strikes in the vicinity of the PRC Buffer Zone will make it possible to reconstruct each flight operating near the Buffer Zone. In this way I expect to add to the credibility of any future investigations if additional protests are made by the PRC. But, more importantly, I expect these measures will eliminate future PRC complaints.

If additional facts are established regarding these two Incidents, you will be informed immediately.

Attachment

[First Attachment]

The Joint Chiefs of Staff

Washington, D.C.

12 July 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

SUBJECT: Alleged Border Violations and Bombings

1. Reference is made to:

a. PRC allegations concerning the sinking of two fishing boats on 20 June 1972 and border violations and bombings on 5 July 1972.

b. Your memorandum, subject: “PRC Allegations,” dated 11 July 1972, which expressed concern over the continued PRC allegations and the need for positive control over all air strikes in the vicinity of the PRC.

2. CINCPAC and component commanders have investigated the allegations and have found no evidence to support their validity. However, one aircraft was reported as being near but south of the PRC border on 5 July 1972. The pilot cleared the area when directed to do so. The details of the incident and results of the examination of the PRC allegations in order of date are as follows:

a. Fishing Boats. Although a final report from COMSEVENTHFLEET has not yet been received, the only known possible involvement in the alleged attack against two fishing boats at 1700H, 20 June 1972, was a strike against two 80-foot waterborne logistics craft (WBLCs) in the vicinity of 20° 42' N/107° 08' E, at 1630H, 20 June 1972, approximately 39 NM southwest of Cu Xu Island. All evidence confirms that the vessels were in fact WBLCs and not fishing craft. During a surveillance mission, two A-7 aircraft flew north toward Cam Pha remaining west of the larger island along 107° 20' E longitude. Two motorized vessels were noted on a westerly heading, each with a good-sized wake. Pilots' first surveillance pass was at 3500-4000 feet above sea level. Several other vessels in the area had fishing nets/associated fishing gear on deck but these specific vessels had clean decks with two stacks of wooden boxed cargo (amidship and forward) and a stack of filled burlap bags on the fantail. Pilots made three more surveillance passes over the vessels at about 1,000 feet above sea level. Pilots then continued on with coastal surveillance mission flying from Cam Pha area south to Vinh area and then returned. Pilots again surveilled vessels at about 1,000 feet above sea level to confirm vessels laden with cargo. Two stacks of supplies previously observed were each estimated approximately five feet high, ten to fifteen feet wide, twenty feet long. On the basis of this evidence, which differentiated these vessels from other craft in area rigged for fishing, the WBLCs were then attacked with bombs. No strafing was conducted. No personnel were seen in the water or aboard the vessels before or after the attack and no strafing was conducted.

b. Border Violations. On 5 July 1972, according to the PRC, US aircraft allegedly intruded in three groups of four aircraft each into Chinese air space. They allegedly dropped one bomb, launched two guided missiles and jettisoned two fuel tanks.

(1) The US Navy ship providing advisory control to approximately twenty-five CAP aircraft, reported the track of one aircraft near but south of the PRC border at 1l35H. The pilot was vectored to 180° and away from the PRC border.

c. Bombing/Missile/Reserve Fuel Tanks. There was no evidence of bombings or missiles being launched on 5 July 1972 which would have reached the alleged points of impact in or near the PRC border.

(1) A search of OPREP BDA revealed only one strike north of 21° N and east of 106° 30' E. This strike was a flight of four A-7 and one F-4 aircraft against four large WBLCs at 21° 02' N and 107° 47' E in the vicinity of coastal islands. One WBLC was destroyed and one was sunk.

(2) One AGM-78 (STANDARD ARM) and six AGM-45 (SHRIKE) missiles were launched according to OPREP messages. An analysis of all known firings found only one possible candidate, an AGM-45 (SHRIKE) launched by an F-lO5 [text not declassified] The estimated flight path, direction of firing toward the PRC border and range would have placed the impact point some 11 NM south of the border.

(3) One flight (2 F-4D and 3 F-4E aircraft) observed the launch of three SA-2 missiles at 1132H against another flight. Based upon the location of the observing flight, the location of the launch site, the time (1135H) of the one radar track near the PRC border, and the maximum optimum impact range of 20. 5 NM, the SA-Zs could have struck the alleged missile impact area.

(4) On occasion, fuel tanks are jettisoned to engage MIG aircraft or to avoid SAM firings. However, there is no evidence on the alleged dropping or lobbing of fuel tanks across the PRC border on 5 July 1972.

3. As indicated in previous memoranda on this subject, every precaution is being taken to avoid inadvertent intrusion into the PRC air space and to guard against delivery of ordnance against unauthorized targets.

4. Additional strengthening of control procedures to further reduce the possibility of aircraft inadvertently violating the PRC border was instituted on 11 July 1972.

5. I believe that all commanders in the field recognize the seriousness of the PRC allegations and the need to exercise every precaution. I can assure you that if additional strengthening control procedures can be found, they will be instituted without delay.

BRUCE PALMER, JR.

General, United States Army

Acting Chairman, Joint Chief of Staff

[Second Attachment]

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

WASHINGTON D.C. 20301

July 11, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR: Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

SUBJECT: PRC Allegations of Border Violations and Bombings by US Aircraft

In response to your memorandum of June 30, 1972 concerning PRC allegations of border violations and bombings by US aircraft, I am attaching a report submitted to me by the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff.

This report indicates that US aircraft neither penetrated nor bombed PRC territory. Nevertheless, as reported to you in a separate memorandum today, I have instituted additional restrictive measures for our air strikes near the PRC Buffer Zone, which will further assure that our aircraft do not violate the PRC border.

Attachment

[Third Attachment]

THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301

CM-2011-72

9 July 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Subject: PRC Allegations of Border Violations arid Bombings by US Aircraft (TS)

1. (TS) Reference is made to your memorandum of 30 June 1972, subject: “Allegations of US Aircraft Intrusions into China,” which requested the reopening of the investigation of this incident.

2. (TS) In their allegation the PRC charge that two US aircraft intruded into PRC air space at 0056H arid 0058H (local time) on 10 June in the area of Ping Hsiang, Kwang Si Province. They further charge that during the second alleged intrusion, bombs were dropped on PRC structures in the village of Aikou.

3. (TS) A previous investigation of these allegations indicated that we could find no clear proof that US aircraft had in fact violated PRC air space or bombed PRC territory. It was concluded that the possibility of US ordnance being dropped in China was remote arid that all indications were that US aircraft operating in the area at that time had remained in North Vietnam. However, in response to additional evidence subsequently set forth by the PRC, a second investigation of the alleged intrusion and bombing has been conducted. There is still no positive proof of the validity of the PRC charges.

4. (TS) In reexamining this allegation, an analysis of all available information (including reports of planned strikes, reports of strikes flown, computer printouts of SEAsia air operations, a partial trace of ordnance lot numbers, photo interpretation of post strike photography, and field commanders' assessments) for the period 9-11 June 1972 has been conducted. This analysis has established that Seventh Air Force had no aircraft operating above 210 North latitude in North Vietnam within four hours of either side of the time period in question. However, [text not declassified].

5. (TS) Six A-7 aircraft were launched from the USS KITTY HAWK between 100017H and 100024H with the mission of conducting [text not declassified].

6. (TS) All aircraft received a navigational update prior to crossing the NVN coast with all systems indicating [text not declassified]. (See Enclosure)

7. (TS) The first four aircraft arrived in the target area at approximately 0047H, 0052H, 0054H and 0058H respectively. This put them within 15 nautical miles of the alleged violation within minutes of the time the intrusion is said to have occurred. The remaining two aircraft arrived at approximately 0116H and Oll8H, some 18 to 20 minutes after the alleged incident.

8. (TS) The lead aircraft observed many vehicles with their lights on moving on Route 1A. He attacked these vehicles and caused several fires which were seen by all subsequent pilots. The lead aircraft also drew AAA fire, probably from mobile units with the convoy, which was seen by the second and third pilots while the fourth pilot observed AAA fire directed against the number three aircraft. The vehicles on the road continued to flash their lights on periodically and this, coupled with the fires along the road caused by the first strike, made it possible to see the vehicles and follow the line of the highway out of the target area.

9. (TS) The number four pilot reported that he attacked the northernmost target struck. The point at which he reports having dropped his ordnance is approximately 13 nautical miles from the area of the alleged incident. Considering the accuracy of the navigational systems, the good visibility and the well-distinguished checkpoints, an error of this magnitude appears unlikely.

10. (TS) One MIG was reported in the area for about 10 minutes. Its lights were seen by two US pilots at approximately 0100H. One MIG took off from Phuoc Yen at 0100H headed north and returned prior to 0120H when a second MIG took off to the north. There is no evidence of more than one MIG airborne at any one time in the area of interest.

11. (TS) The ingress and egress of all aircraft was monitored by an E-2 Airborne Early Warning aircraft which also confirmed their position prior to crossing the coast on their ingress route. While not holding all aircraft continuously, the E-2 did not observe any border violations and, upon request from the Tactical Air Control Center aboard the USS LONG BEACH, recalled all aircraft from the target area. The last two aircraft completed their strikes at OllOH before heading home.

12. (TS) There is a marked geographic similarity between the Lang Son and Ping Hsiang areas and, though the two cities are some 15 nautical miles apart, it is conceivable that a navigational error and resultant misidentification could have occurred. Further, there could have been an inadvertent ordnance release. However, such a unique set of circumstances seems most unlikely. Further, a review of all naval tactical data system tapes does not reflect any tracks crossing the PRC border.

13. (TS) The 1t numbers of the two MK-20 bombs identified by the Chinese as having been dropped in the vicinity of the village of Aikou have been traced as far as possible. These lots, 34C-71 and 48-C-71, were handled by NAV MAC SUBIC during 1971 and 1972. However, it could not be determined that bombs from these lots were or were not in fact delivered to the USS KITTY HAWK.

14. (TS) In addition to the foregoing, the following apparent discrepancies merit consideration.

a. The MK-20 (ROCKEYE II) dispenser (cluster) bomb contains 247 MK-118 MOD O antitank/anti-personnel bombs in a bomb-shaped canister. Thus, if two MK-20s were inadvertently released near Aikou, 494 MK-118 bombs should have fallen in the area. When a 20 is released from 5,500 feet or less, which is the usual dive bombing release altitude, the normal dispersal pattern covers an area of 1,000 feet or less in diameter. However, this coverage pattern would increase to approximately 2,500 feet in diameter when the weapon is released from 8,000 feet in level flight. The MK-118 bombs would be scattered over an extremely large unpredictable area if released over 10,000 feet. Further, depending on several aircraft flight variables, such as climbing, banking, speed, etc., the MK-118s could travel more than three nautical miles in an inadvertent release situation. Thus, it seems more likely that the few MK-118s which were reported to have fallen on the village of Aikou were as a result of an inadvertent high-altitude MK-20 release over North Vietnam rather than as a result of a release during a direct fly-over of the PRC village as alleged.

b. Improbability of US pilots flying on a northerly heading knowing their close proximity to the CHICOM border.

15. (TS) In summary, there were six US Navy aircraft within 15 nautical miles of the area of the alleged violation within minutes of the time in question. However, all were flown by experienced pilots, carefully selected for this mission, flying fully-systems-capable aircraft under good weather conditions. The only plausible explanation for the few MK-118 bombs to have been dropped in the vicinity of the PRC village of Aikou, if in fact the PRC facts are accurate, is that one of the aircraft had a high altitude inadvertent release. This could have resulted in two MK-20 cluster bombs being dropped in the vicinity of the PRC border scattering the MK-118 bombs over a wide area, a few of which were found in Aikou. Since the MK-118 bomblets in possession of the Chinese were “duds” and did not explode it is obvious that they were not released with the intent to strike a target.

[Map]

[Fourth Attachment]

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301

July 13, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

SUBJECT: PRC Merchant Ship Firing Incidents

In response to your request for information relating to subject incidents, the following is provided:

1. 090800Z June 1972. Two A-7 aircraft from CORAL SEA conducting lighter interdiction/airborne recce in vicinity Hon Nieu anchorage made two passes parallel to centerline of an anchored PRC mership. First low pass was at O7l5Z with one aircraft on each side of ship at 1500 yards range. The second similar type low pass at 0800Z was at range 300 yards and the aircraft passing between the ship and Hon Nieu Island observed muzzle flashes from the forward gun mount on the ship. No damage to US aircraft.

2. 261208Z June 1972. One of two CORAL SEA aircraft assigned to Hon Nieu anchorage surveillance made a wings level pass at 2000 feet altitude crossing the western end of Hon Nieu Island to observe the three merchant ships at anchor. The westernmost PRC ship opened fire and muzzle flashes, tracers and bursts were observed. On the second pass the two aircraft, in trail, again passed over the western tip of Hon Nieu at least 1/2 mile from the PRC merships and again tracking fire and bursts above the lead aircraft were noted by both pilots. No damage to US aircraft.

3. 010600Z July 1972. Section of 2 A-7 aircraft from SARATOGA had located two waterborne logistic craft (WBLC) about three-quarters of a mile from nearest of three PRC merships anchored at Hon Nieu and commenced strafing attacks. On third strafing run, aircraft passing astern of PRC mership at 2000 foot altitude with a closest point of approach 3/4 mile, observed numerous tracers coming from the stern of the PRC ship. No damage to US aircraft.

4. 102005Z July 1972. A pilot from the HANCOCK [text not declassified] flying a visual search pass at 3000 feet altitude, 3000 feet from the PRC mershlp observed small arms firing at his aircraft. No damage to US aircrft, and the pilot reported the firing originated from the PRC membership.

Daniel J. Murphy
RADM, U.S. Navy
Military Assistant

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Umbra; Handle Via Comint Channels Only. The accompanying three memoranda include a July 12 memorandum from Bruce Palmer to Laird entitled “Alleged Border Violations and Bombings; a July 9 Joint Chiefs of Staff memorandum entitled “PRC Allegations of Border Violations and Bombings by US Aircraft,” which Laird transmitted to Kissinger under a July 11 covering memorandum; and a July 13 memorandum from Daniel J. Murphy to Haig entitled “PRC Merchant Ship Firing Incidents.”

154. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, September 6, 1972, 7:20-7:45 p.m. 154. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, September 6, 1972, 7:20-7:45 p.m.1

New York, September 6, 1972, 7:20-7:45 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS:

Ambassador Huang Hua, PRC Ambassador to the UN

Mrs. Shih Yen-hua, Interpreter

Peter W. Rodman, NSC Staff

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

September 6, 1972

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

DATE AND TIME: Wednesday, September 6, 1972, 7:20-7:45 p.m.

PLACE: PRC Mission to the UN, New York City

The Ambassador said he had two messages for me. I started to take out a note pad, but he said there was no need. He handed me the two messages [a long reply to our communications of August 28 and 30, at Tab A, and a short inquiry about Senator Mansfield's proposed visit, Tab B] and asked me to read them through. I did so, and said I would see that these were reported to Dr. Kissinger immediately. The Ambassador said he had nothing additional to convey.

The meeting was as cordial as ever. He asked about Dr. Kissinger's travel plans, and I mentioned that he would be leaving Saturday morning for Munich instead of Friday morning as originally planned and would be seeing German leaders but not attending the Olympics. I said I understood an appointment had been set up for Friday between Dr. Kissinger and the Ambassador. I commented that Dr. Kissinger very much wanted to see the Ambassador before he left on his trip. The Ambassador understood it would be at the former location, and I said yes, that was my understanding. The Ambassador said, “Dr. Kissinger is delaying his departure in order to come here?” I simply repeated that Dr. Kissinger very much wanted to see the Ambassador before he left.

We had one cup of tea, and I thanked the Ambassador for his hospitality but said I didn't want to keep him any longer.

Attachments

Handed to Rodman by Ambassador Huang, 9/6/72

The Chinese side has the following comments with regard to the three U.S. messages of August 28 and 30, 1972: 1. From the U.S. messages it seems that the U.S. side thinks it has the right to blockade and bomb the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam and attack vessels or vehicles of all kinds transporting supplies to Viet Nam. This stand cannot possibly be accepted by China. Such actions of the U.S. side are an encroachment upon the sovereignty of other countries and a violation of the freedom of international trade and navigation, and run counter to the principles jointly affirmed by both sides in the Sino-U.S. Joint Communique. It must be pointed out that, like violations of the Chinese border, attacks on Chinese ships cannot be tolerated. Chinese ships are transporting supplies to the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam; this is China's sovereign right and no other country has the right to intervene.

2. None of the elements that were described as leading to the August 22 incident in two of the U.S. messages conform to the actual facts. We recognize that the U.S. Government has made investigations on all the incidents raised in the charges and protests lodged by us. But the answers have generally been words of regret from above but allegations from below that there was cause for raising the matters but no conclusive evidence after investigations. Anyway, as the U.S. side on many occasions stated that incidents such as those raised by China would not be permitted to reoccur, in every case involving infringement of China's sovereignty and harm or loss of Chinese lives, it was not until the evidence was found to be truly reliable through repeated verifications that we advanced charges against the U.S. side. For instance, from 0804 hours, July 15, 1972 (local time), one U.S. aircraft intruded for three minutes into the Changcheng area, Hainan Island, China. Having ascertained that it was really a tanker aircraft and that the weather was bad, we lodged no protest with the U.S. side. During his meeting with Ambassador Huang on July 26, Dr. Kissinger also attested the fact that this incident indeed occurred. And at the same meeting, Dr. Kissinger mentioned incidents of Chinese ships firing at U.S. aircraft. We had given strict orders that no firing was permissible unless attacked or bombed. Precisely because of this, and because the August 22 case had been found so serious through verification, we could not but have recourse to an open protest. It is regrettable that in the investigation report delivered on August 30, the U.S. side continues to allege that the boat was a logistic craft rather than a lifeboat. We hereby point out: a. That the lifeboat was flying the national flag of the People's Republic of China was a fact. The flag should logically have been identified since the U.S. side admitted in its message that the U.S. aircraft made two low level identification passes before the bombing. The said flag (66cm x 44cm) as well as parts of the bombed boat have now been recovered from the water. Such factual evidence cannot be denied.

b. The lifeboat was not carrying any cargo, it only had one box (34cm x 33cm x 12.5cm) of film reels which were to be shown to the seamen. Obviously, this can hardly be taken as proof that the boat was a “logistic craft”.

c. When the boat was bombed, it was moving between the two Chinese merchant ships (Hongqi Nos. 160 and 151), at a distance of 1,970 meters from the shore. The location alleged by the U.S. side was inaccurate. For the U.S. side to surmise that the boat was a “logistic craft” on the basis of the alleged location of the boat between the shore line and Hon Ngu Island, the inshore area being mined, is indeed far-fetched.

The U.S. side has now admitted that photography on August 19 and 25 prove that the Chinese merchant ship “Hongqi 151” originally carried two lifeboats, of which one has been missing since the bombing. Yet, the U.S. side has tried to create an excuse by asserting that there was no flag so as to shirk responsibility. The Chinese side cannot but express deep regret at this.

3. The U.S. side is clear about the Chinese Government's stand on the Indochina question. The Chinese side has on more than one occasion stated that so long as the war continues, no matter in what form, China will firmly support and assist the Indochinese people in their war of resistance to the end. The Chinese side has said frankly many times that the U.S. persistence in its bombing and mining of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam and in the “Vietnamization” of the war would definitely be of no help to an early ending of the conflict. On the contrary, it will only drag on the conflict and tie the U.S. Government itself down in an unfavourable position. The Chinese side hopes that on the question of Indochina, the U.S. Government would consider the problem in a broader framework and take the long view, give vigilant consideration to the existence of the other outside force, and withdraw at an early date all armed forces of the United States and its followers from Indochina and first of all from Viet Nam, and let the three Indochinese peoples solve their own problems by themselves. The Chinese side has on many questions made allowance for the circumstances the U.S. Government is in now. However, the responsibility for the expansion of the conlict in Indochina does not lie with our side. We have no alternative but to adhere to principles.

On another subject, will it not affect your bi-partisan relationship if Mansfield comes alone for a visit? Samdech Sihanouk has expressed that Mansfield's speech in the Senate is not acceptable. Please tell us explicitly whether there is any other intention in Mansfield's proposed visit, so that a reply may be considered.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Tabs A and B are attached. A typed notation on the message at Tab A reads: “Handed to Rodman by Ambassador Huang, 9/6/72.”

155. Note From the Government of the United States to the Government of the People's Republic of China, Washington, undated 155. Note From the Government of the United States to the Government of the People's Republic of China, Washington, undated1

Washington, undated

9/13/72

SOVIET NOTE

We would like to inform you confidentially about tho subject we will be introducing as our main political subject at the forthcoming 27th session of the UN General Assembly. We are doing this for the first time—and this in itself is indicative of the advance made in relations between the USSR and the USA since last May's meeting in Moscow. We are naming this item “On the non-use of force in international relations and on the prohibition for all time of the use of nuclear weapons”.

In our view, the discussion of this item at the Assembly session will be useful both for the broad interests of peace and in terms of Soviet-American relations per se. Our proposal envisages that the affirmation of the principle of the non-use of force in international relations must inseparably include also the prohibition for all time of the use of nuclear weapons. The fusing of those two elements constitutes the very core and the principal idea of our proposal.

The idea of the non-use of force, of reducing the risk of nuclear war is contained in joint Soviet-American documents, particularly in the “Basic Principle's of Mutual Relations between the USSR and the USA”. We believe it would now be useful to bring that idea into the sphere of the United Nations. In the past the General Assembly has repeatedly addressed itself to the question of the non-use of force in international relations. The UN also dealt separately with the subject of prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons. But it is quite evident that renunciation of the use of force must cover the prohibition of all types of weapons, both conventional and nuclear. Such an approach is prompted by the entire course of development of post-war international relations. Our proposal to merge the prohibition of the use of nuclear and of conventional weapons into a single whole corresponds to the principle of the equal security of states and the inadmissibility of military advantages. This approach, we believe, is in line with the interests of all peoples, including the Soviet and American peoples.

In advancing our proposal, we are taking into account, among other things, the following aspect which is very important for the USSR and the USA. We are completing our discussion of the delicate issue of the non-use of nuclear weapons between our countries. If the forthcoming General Assembly adopts a resolution along the lines we intend to propose, that will create a good political background for our joint action. In other words, it will correspond to the task of preparing public opinion for this action, to which President Nixon attaches significance.

As for the resolution itself, we see it as short but substantial and definite. Its substance would be that the General Assembly would solemnly declare on behalf of the member states of the UN, in conformity with the UN Charter, their renunciation of the use or threat of force in internationz relations and the prohibition for all time of the use of nuclear weapons. Furthermore, the resolution should include a recommendation to the Security Council to take a decision, as soon as possible, which would make the aforesaid statement by the General Assembly binding in accordance with Article 25 of the UN Charter. Let me recall that under Article 25 members of the UN agree to accept and carry out the decisions of the Security Council.

It goes without saying that the adoption of such a decision by the UN will in no way imply the renunciation of the right to individual or collective self-defence in case of aggression provided for in the UN Charter.

We would like to count on the support of our proposal by the United States and hope that the delegations of our two countries to the General Assembly session will act in cooperation so that the draft resolution is supported by the largest possible number of states.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. No classification marking. Kissinger furnished the note to Huang during a September 19 meeting, at which Rodman and Shih Yen-hua were also present. The meeting's memorandum of conversation is printed as Document 253, Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII. The texts of additional notes are published as Documents 156, 157 and 158.

156. Note From the Government of the Soviet Union to the Government of the United States, Moscow, September 13, 1972 156. Note From the Government of the Soviet Union to the Government of the United States, Moscow, September 13, 19721

Moscow, September 13, 1972

Prevention of Nuclear War

1. The President has considered our discussions on this subject.

2. We believe that any discussion of this subject must take the following points into account: — We believe it important to avoid any formulation that carried an implication of a condominium by our two countries;

— We believe it important that an agreement between our two countries should not carry any implication that we were ruling out only nuclear war between ourselves but were leaving open the option of nuclear war against third countries;

— We think it important that in concentrating on the prevention of nuclear war we should not at the same time appear to be legitimizing the initiation of war by conventional means;

— We think it important that past agreements, whether alliances or other types of obligations, designed to safeguard peace and security should not be put into question.

1 National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. No classification marking. A handwritten note indicates that representatives of the Soviet Government delivered the note to U.S. officials on September 13, 1972. Kissinger referenced this message during his September 19 meeting with Huang Hua; see Document 253, Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII.

157. Statement for the North Vietnamese and Ten Point Negotiating Paper, Washington, undated 157. Statement for the North Vietnamese and Ten Point Negotiating Paper, Washington, undated1

Washington, undated

I wanted to tell the Special Adviser and the Minister that at the end of our previous meeting, he said that we are now entering serious negotiations. I want him to know that this is our view as well.

The Special Adviser also said that the two sides must find a middle ground between our positions in order to reach a settlement. That, too, is our view.

This is why for the last month we have reviewed each other's proposals and our own positions with great seriousness and purposefulness and why I went to South Vietnam officially to discuss the negotiations.

In your propaganda you have pictured all this activity as a meaningless charade. But you should know, that these actions represent a major effort by the United States to move toward an early settlement of the war. And I hope you have enough sources in Saigon to confirm that fact. Since you must know the real situation, we find it inconsistent with your protestations of good will that your spokesmen continue to distort our efforts and attack our negotiators.

So the first step that must be taken 'here is that each of us show a serious awareness of the other's real problems and that there is a mutual search for the “middle ground” between our two positions. The time is ripe for an overall solution. But I must also tell you that the time is short.

We have a new proposal today and I would like to give you its background.

I presented your plan of August 1st in Saigon. You will not be astonished to hear that these plans were not greeted with complete enthusiasm and that we were criticized even for presenting them. We had some extremely difficult exchanges.

Clearly the political issue is the basic problem we face in these negotiations. Saigon sees in your plans a device for installing a Communist government. Even if we do not agree with every point of Saigon's criticism, we do believe that its objective consequence would be to guarantee the predominance of your supporters.

Your side, on the other hand, rejects an automatic reconfirmation of the present government in Saigon.

Faced with this problem, we have sought to find a middle ground, to shape a solution that is just to both sides. Our new plan seeks to remove any unfair advantage for the incumbents without at the same time guaranteeing a Victory for any other force.

In order to speed agreed positions with Saigon we have in certain instances used neutral formulations. We want you to know that we will interpret them in the sense of our discussions here and use all our influence in other forums which may open after we agree in principle. I will indicate these interpretations to you after I have presented the plan. We will stand by all that we have told you previously as well as the new elements we now introduce formally and those we give you as informal interpretations. But I must repeat—no progress is possible unless we grant each other's good faith and recognize that this is an objectively difficult problem.

Here then is our new proposal. It presents great difficulties for our friends—but we are confident that if you and we agree, it can be implemented.

(Dr. Kissinger then read the attached proposal.)

Let me comment on this plan in relation to our August 14 proposals. Let me review points and give you additional comments and interpretations.

In point 2 you will notice we have reduced the time for our withdrawal from four months to three months.

In point 5 we have substituted the word “fairness” for “equality” for the sake of agreement of our associates. However, if in order to obtain agreement the word “equality” should be a decisive one, I will tell you now we are prepared to return to it. If we can settle everything else, I think we can settle that point.

Now let me come to two important sets of interpretation. One concerns point 9, ceasefire. The other concerns point 4, the political plan. First, with respect to point 9, ceasefire. At our last session the Special Adviser said that the relation of a ceasefire to a political settlement is one of the two major remaining differences. You asserted that a ceasefire before' resolution of the political questions effectively separates political from military issues. Thus, your position has been that a ceasefire should come only after all problems have been settled and after an overall agreement is signed.

Your approach to this issue is a good example of your constant attempt to have the best of both worlds. You want to keep on fighting and extend your military influence. On the other hand, you claim in advance that a settlement should yield you political dominance of areas where your forces have not extended their control.

You demand our total withdrawal from Vietnam. However, when we offer to do it, you insist that our forces stay on until we have first helped to bring about your preferred political structure.

You complained for example in the August 31 article of the Nhan Dan Commentator about the failure to recognize the PRG. But you reject a ceasefire which would lead to a de facto recognition of the PRG. The article claimed that a ceasefire now would leave the large South Vietnamese army in the field to control elections. But there was no mention of the large North Vietnamese army that would also be in the field and - according to you at our last meeting - under PRG command. In a ceasefire-in-place the two standing forces would balance out and would help ensure an equitable political process.

In May, July, and August of this year we have made a range of proposals on ceasefire. We offered an immediate ceasefire. We offered a temporary ceasefire. Failing that, we offered a mutual reduction of hostilities. You have rejected all these initiatives.

We have also proposed that a ceasefire could take place after agreement in principle and while the details were being worked out. This, too, you have rejected.

We still believe that our approach is practical and just. An early ceasefire would do the following: — Create a political reality and thus is the best means of linking political and military issues - just the opposite of what you maintain.

— Produce a de facto control situation in the country, reflecting the real balance of forces.

— Serve humanitarian ends.

However, in order to speed a comprehensive agreement the President has decided to accept your position on this issue. I am authorized to tell you that we are now prepared to agree—if a settlement depends on it—that a ceasefire should take place after an overall agreement is signed. We shall interpret point 9 to mean that a ceasefire shall occur only at the end of the negotiating process. We have thus fully met your point that a comprehensive solution should precede cessation of hostilities.

Now let me turn to Point 4, the political issue. We agree that this has emerged as the key element.

We can agree to a solution that leaves the political evolution of South Vietnam to the free decision of its people. We specifically address your assertion that any political process within the present framework is bound to be controlled by the incumbents and will reconfirm the present power structure. Thus we have proposed a solution that removes any inequitable advantages for the current government, excludes no political force, and assures an equal chance for all forces.

Specifically, the test of popular opinion will be run by a committee composed of the elements you proposed. We have thus accepted your tripartite principle even though there is no popular mandate for such representation. And we will apply it as well to the body that will review the Constitution. In the government formed after the election we envisage a tripartite representation as well - but in proportion to the votes achieved rather than arbitrarily fixing equal shares in advance of such a vote. The distinction we make is that we are prepared to give you a veto over the control arrangements on which the fairness of the electoral outcome depends, but we will not in advance determine the outcome of the popular will.

To make this approach more concrete we are willing to give you our interpretation of some of the provisions of our proposal.

We will interpret the composition of the Committee of National Reconciliation in the tripartite sense of equal proportions that you have advanced. In other words our formulation is composed of the formula you gave us.

With respect to the Constitution these are unilateral interpretations.

Two, with respect to the Constitution, we believe, that revisions will be needed after peace is made. We believe that the Committee of National Reconciliation should play a major role in the revision, and we are prepared to interpret paragraph 4 in that sense and to use our influence in that direction. So the Committee will not end its work with the election.

It is as you described it, and it will continue after the election to work on the revisions of the Constitution. But this last point is our interpretation and will have to be an understanding between you and us. The various branches of government referred to in point 4(e) refer to the executive, legislative and judicial branches, all three.

We believe that the date for the resignation of the incumbents - specified as one month before the election in our January plan - is negotiable. If this question proves important for overall agreement, we will use our influence in this direction.

We believe that these plans and these interpretations would shape a political process that is fair to all parties.

We have sought the middle ground with a concrete and reasonable proposal:

Let me summarize.

We have provided that the political structure in South Vietnam be tested by the popular will. The incumbent President would resign. There would be new popular elections. The Constitution would be subject to revision. And the South Vietnamese would also be free to decide on any other political process to form a new government.

We have accepted the principle of three main political forces and tripartite organizations for all control bodies. Thus the Committee of National Reconciliation, which would have the two crucial functions of running the elections and helping in the review of the Constitution, would be composed of representatives of the GVN, NLF and other independent political tendencies. This prevents the government from dominating the political process and guarantees all forces equality in the control and supervisory forums.

We have assured representation for your side and other forces in the future government. The various forces would gain seats in proportion to the number of votes they received in the Presidential election. Thus this government, too, would have representatives of the three forces you specify. The only thing we have not done is to guarantee the number of seats for any of the forces. That we leave to the people of South Vietnam.

We have provided for a process of several stages. Rather than freezing the political structure after one event, there would be a continuing evolution with all forces having an effective voice.

We agree that the details of this political settlement be resolved before there is a ceasefire.

We accept your position on the implementation of various aspects of an agreement. As you know, our view has been that certain aspects of a settlement, such as withdrawals and the release of prisoners, could be carried out while other details were still being worked on. While we continue to object strongly to your holding our prisoners as hostage, we are prepared to change our position on the sequence issue as well. To show our good will and to remove your fear that we might renege on an agreement in principle, we now agree that implementation of the withdrawal and prisoner provisions would not begin until all negotiations are completed and overall agreement is reached.

In addition to these new elements, we have retained our previous offers, such as U.S. neutrality toward the political process; eligibility for all political forces in all branches of government; and guarantees under Article 14 (c) of the 1954 Geneva Agreements on which you have specifically insisted.

Furthermore, we have moved up the Presidential election to five, rather than six, months after the agreement.

Mr. Minister and Mr. Special Adviser, I mentioned earlier the recent editorial in your press and also the speech by your Prime Minister. I have read both with the greatest care.

The article asks rhetorically whether the incumbent's resignation and an election would ever take place. You have our ironclad assurances on this point which we are willing to reaffirm to whatever countries you wish.

It asks whether elections could possibly be fair. We have specified that they will be controlled by a tripartite body.

It challenges the present constitution. We have provided for its review and revision to bring it into harmony with the conditions of peace.

It points out the presence of the South Vietnamese army. But your own forces would exert their influence as well, and a ceasefire would bring about a de facto division of jurisdictions.

It argues for recognition of the PRG. This is assured de facto in a ceasefire and de jure in the key organizations and the future government.

It complains about our using the designation “NLF” instead of “PRG.” This is not a real issue. A standstill ceasefire would gain more acceptance for the “PRG” than any words we employ here. If we are serious, we should not waste our time on legal quibbles. The solution is that our side use the terminology we prefer, that your side use the terminology you prefer, and that both sides sign both documents.

We have made a genuine and maximum effort to take account of your concerns.

This does not mean that we are making our proposals as a takeit-or-leave-it ultimatum. If you are prepared to consider our plan, we are ready to explore modifications within its framework. But for you to wait for new major concessions will cause you once again to miss the opportune time for a settlement. And for us to suggest that such major concessions were possible would be to mislead you both on what we are willing to do and even more on what we are able to deliver.

We are vividly aware of the difficulties we have gone through in order to table this proposal today. We are also conscious of what is required of us to give you these additional interpretations. Against this background, it would be extremely unfortunate if you subjected us once again to your standard charge that we have offered nothing new. You must choose between making debating points and making real progress. You must decide whether to waste the next two months haggling over legal fine print or to use this period to agree on a course and to implement it energetically in the other forums. And time is getting short.

We want to end this war rapidly. Not only to stop the suffering, but to provide justice for both sides. Not only to cease hostilities, but to turn energies to the tasks of peace and reconciliation. Clearly our two countries and our two peoples share an overriding interest in a peace that comes soon and a peace that will last.

If you see things the same way, you will find us dedicated partners in the quest for peace.

1. The United States respects the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Vietnam, as recognized by the 1954 Geneva Agreements on Vietnam.

2. The total withdrawal from South Vietnam of all troops, military advisers, and military personnel, armaments and war material belonging to the United States, and those of other foreign countries allied with the Government of the Republic of Vietnam, and the dismantlement of all U.S. military bases in South Vietnam will be completed within three months after the signing of the overall agreement.

After overall agreement is reached, the U.S. is prepared to define its level of military aid with any government that exists in South Vietnam in direct relation to other external military aid introduced into Indochina.

3. The release of all military men and innocent civilians captured throughout Indochina will be carried out simultaneously with and completed on the same day as the aforesaid troop withdrawal. The parties will exchange complete lists of the military men and innocent civilians captured throughout Indochina on the day of the signing of the overall agreement.

4. The South Vietnamese people's right to self-determination, free from any outside interference, will be respected.

a) The South Vietnamese people will decide the political future of South Vietnam through genuinely free and democratic Presidential elections, review of the Constitution, and any other political processes they agree upon which will reflect the aspirations and will for peace, independence, democracy, and national reconciliation of the entire people.

Electoral procedures will guarantee freedom and equality during the campaign and balloting for all citizens, irrespective of their political tendencies or place of residence.

A Presidential election will be held within five months of an overall agreement.

The Presidential election will be organized and supervised by a Committee of National Reconciliation which will assume its responsibilities on the date of overall agreement. This body will decide electoral procedures, determine the qualification of candidates, ensure the fairness of voting and verify the election results.

The composition of the Committee will be as follows: — Representatives of the Republic of Vietnam to be designated by the Government of the Republic of Vietnam;

— Representatives of the NLF to be designated by the NLF;

— Representatives of other political and religious tendencies in South Vietnam designated by mutual agreement betwen the Government of the Republic of Vietnam and the NLF.

There will be international supervision of this election.

b) Before the Presidential election, the incumbent President and Vice President a South Vietnam will resign. The Chairman of the Senate will assume the responsibilities of a caretaker head of government except for those responsibilities pertaining to the Presidential elections, which will remain with the Committee of National Reconciliation.

c) When he assumes office, the new President will form a new government in which all political forces will be represented in proportion to the number of popular votes they received in the Presidential election.

d) After the Presidential election, the Constitution will be reviewed for its consistency with the conditions of peace, with a view to restoring a spirit of national reconciliation throughout the country.

e) The right of all political forces to participate freely and peacefully in every aspect of the political process will be guaranteed. In addition to the Presidential election, all political forces will be eligible for appointment or election to positions in various branches of government.

f) In keeping with the provisions of Article 14 (C) of the 1954 Geneva Accords, the Vietnamese parties will undertake to refrain from any reprisals or discrimination against persons or organizations on account of their activities during the hostilities and to guarantee democratic liberties.

g) For its part, the United States declares that it respects the South Vietnamese right to self-determination; it will remain completely neutral with respect to the political process in South Vietnam; and it will abide by the outcome of any political process shaped by the South Vietnamese people themselves.

5. The question of Vietnamese armed forces in South Vietnam will be settled by the Vietnamese parties themselves in a spirit of national reconciliation. fairness. and mutual respect, without foreign interference and with a view to lessening the burdens of the people.

6. The re-unification of Vietnam will be achieved step by step, through peaceful means on the basis of discussions and agreements between North and South Vietnam, without coercion or annexation from either side and without foreign interference. The time for re-unification will be agreed upon after a suitable interval following the signing of an overall agreement.

Pending re-unification, North and South Vietnam will promptly start negotiations toward the reestablishment of normal relations in various fields on the basis of mutual respect.

In keeping with the provisions of the 1954 Geneva Agreements on Vietnam. while Vietnam is still temporarily divided, North and South Vietnam will refrain from joining any military alliance with foreign countries, and from allowing foreign countries to maintain military bases, troops and military personnel on their respective territories.

7. The Geneva Agreements of 1954 on Indochina and those of 1962 on Laos will be respected by all parties. The people of each Indochinese country will settle their own internal affairs without foreign interference.

The problems existing between the Indochinese countries will be settled by the Indochinese parties on the basis of respect for each other's independence, sovereignty territorial integrity and noninterference in each other's internal affairs. Among the problems that will be settled is the implementation of the principle that all armed forces of the countries of Indochina must remain within their national frontiers.

8. The countries of Indochina shall pursue a foreign policy of peace and independence. They will observe the military provisions of the Geneva. Agreements of 1954 and 1962, establish relations with all countries regardless of their political and social regimes. maintain economic and cultural relations with all countries, and participate in programs of regional economic cooperation.

9. At a time mutually agreed upon a general ceasefire will be observed throughout Indochina under international control and supervision.

As part of the ceasefire the U.S. will stop all its acts of force throughout Indochina by ground air, and naval forces. wherever they may be based and end the ruining of North Vietnamese ports and harbors.

As part of the ceasefire, there will be no further infiltration of outside forces into any of the countries of Indochina, and the introduction into Indochina of reinforcements in the form of arms munitions and other war material will be prohibited. It is understood, however, that war material. arms and munitions which have been destroyed, damaged, worn out or used up after the cessation of hostilities may be replaced on the basis of piece-for-piece of the same type and with similar characteristics.

10. a) There will be international control and supervision of the provisions under points 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 9 of this agreement. The composition, tasks, and organization of the international control and supervision commission and the subjects to be controlled and supervised will be agreed upon by the belligerent parties prior to the ceasefire.

b) There will be an international guarantee for the respect of the ceasefire, of the Indochinese people's fundamental national rights, for the status of Indochina and for the preservation of lasting peace in this region. The countries participating in the international guarantee and the form of guarantee will be agreed upon by the belligerent parties.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. No classification marking. Kissinger furnished these texts to Huang Hua at their September 19 meeting; see Document 253, Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII.

158. Draft Resolution on the Unification of Korea Prepared by the Government of the People's Republic of China, Beijing, undated 158. Draft Resolution on the Unification of Korea Prepared by the Government of the People's Republic of China, Beijing, undated1

Beijing, undated

DRAFT RESOLUTION

Creation of favourable conditions to accelerate the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea

The General Assembly,

Noting that the peaceful reunification of Korea has still not been achieved, although 27 years have already elapsed since the division of Korea and 19 years since the establishment of the armistice in Korea,

Warmly welcoming the recent joint statement in which North and South Korea have agreed: (a) On the three principles on which reunification should be based, namely: (i.) The reunification of the country must be achieved on the basis of full independence, without recourse to foreign troops and without foreign interference,

(ii.) The reunification of the country must be achieved by peaceful means,

(iii.) Great national unity must be promoted,

(b) To reduce tension, prevent all military conflicts and engage in multilateral exchanges,

(c) To establish and put into operation a co-ordination committee for the purpose of solving the problem of reunification,

Considering that it is in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter to encourage to the utmost the solution of the question of the reunification of Korea by the Korean people themselves, on the basis of full independence and by peaceful means, in conformity with the principles of national self-determination,

1. Decides to suspend the activities of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea;

2. Considers that the right to use the United Nations flag, a right which has been conferred on the foreign troops stationed in South Korea, should be annulled;

3. Expresses the hope that North and South Korea will successfully pursue the political negotiations already under way in order to conclude a peace agreement, to bring about a reduction in armaments and, finally, to achieve as quickly as possible the independent and peaceful reunification of the country;

4. Considers that all foreign troops stationed in South Korea should be withdrawn so that more thorough measures may be taken with a view to securing a durable peace in Korea and expediting independent and peaceful reunification;

5. Appeals to all the countries of the world to refrain from military intervention in Korea and from interference in any form whatsoever in its internal affairs.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. No classification marking. Huang Hua presented the draft resolution to Kissinger at their September 19 meeting; see Document 253, Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII.

159. Memorandum for the Record, New York, September 25, 1972, 7-7:20 p.m. 159. Memorandum for the Record, New York, September 25, 1972, 7-7:20 p.m.1

New York, September 25, 1972, 7-7:20 p.m.

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

September 26, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

Following is a report of a meeting with Mrs. Shih at the Chinese Mission in New York on September 25, 1972.

I entered the Chinese Mission at approximately 7:00 p.m., where I was greeted by Mrs. Shih and escorted to a room on the second floor. Mrs. Shih served tea and exchanged pleasantries.

Mrs. Shih informed me that the Ambassador would not be able to attend since they just returned from the UN where they heard Secretary Rogers' speech. I asked what she thought of the speech; Mrs. Shih said although we have our differences, she thought the speech was well organized and to the point. Mrs. Shih then asked if Mr. Lord was traveling. I said he was, without mentioning where or when.

Mrs. Shih then presented the note (attached) and asked me to read it. After reading it, I said there were no questions and that I would deliver it as soon as possible.

Mrs. Shih then turned the conversation back to generalities and asked when General Haig was leaving and if his replacement had been named. I replied General Haig would leave before the end of the year and his replacement has not been named.

After additional pleasantries, I departed the Mission at 7:20 p.m. and telephoned General Haig with a gist of the note.

* * * *

For what it's worth, the following is additional background on Mrs. Shih: — She has a 3 1/2 year old daughter who is staying with her sister in Shanghai.

— Her husband is with the Mission in New York. He speaks fluent French, some Spanish, and a little English. Mrs. Shih said her French was only fair since the members of the French Mission with whom she deals prefer to speak English.

V. James Fazio

Situation Room

The Chinese side expresses the following' views on the Soviet proposal concerning non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons, which Dr. Kissinger inquired about during the September 19 meeting: 1. The Soviet proposal is a hoax aimed at hoodwinking public opinion and masking its policy of nuclear monopoly and nuclear threat.

2. The Chinese side has always stood for strict differentiation between the aggressor and the victim of aggression, and opposed sweeping generalization on the nonuse of force. In international relations, it is imperative for states to first of all commit themselves to respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all states, non-aggression against other states, non-interference in the internal affairs of other states, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence; only on this basis can there be any talk of renunciation of the use or threat of force in resolving international disputes. This has already been affirmed in the Sino-U.S. Joint Communique. In its proposal, the Soviet Union advocates without stating any conditions that in a nuclear age mankind has no other way than peaceful coexistence of states, advertises indiscriminate nonuse of force, and preaches as a claptrap the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. Its purpose is essentially to get the people of all countries to meekly submit to its nuclear-supported expansionism. This is utterly unacceptable.

3. China has long stood for the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons and for reaching, as the first step, an agreement on the non-use of nuclear weapons. In appearance, the Soviet proposal calls for permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons, yet it eludes the question of destruction of nuclear weapons. That is to say, they want to keep nuclear weapons permanently in their hands and improve and develop them continuously. That is a cheap diplomatic trick, to which China will never agree.

4. The Chinese side has noted that the U.S. side does not agree to the Soviet proposal out of its own considerations. The Chinese side wishes to inform the U.S. side that the Chinese Delegation will expose and refute that proposal during the debate at the current session of the U.N. General Assembly.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN. Drafted by Fazio on September 25.

160. Telegram 3725/SECTO 65 From the United States Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State, New York, October 6, 1972, 2222Z 160. Telegram 3725/SECTO 65 From the United States Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State, New York, October 6, 1972, 2222Z1

New York, October 6, 1972, 2222Z

TO:SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3835

SUBJECT:

SECRETARY'S DINNER FOR PRC VFM Ch'iao OCTOBER

CONTROL: 2012Q

RECD: 6 OCT '72

8:54P

O 062222Z OCT 72 ZFF4

FM: USMISSION USUN NY

BT

USUN 3725

SECTO 65

1. THE SECRETARY GAVE SMALL INFORMAL DINNER FOR VICE FOREIGN MINISTER Ch'iao Kuan-hua AT HIS NEW YORK APARTMENT EVENING OCTOBER 5. AMBASSADOR BUSH AND AMBASSADOR Huang HUA PARTICIPATED. INTERPRETER SHEN JO-YUN AND EA/ACA DIRECTOR Jenkins ALSO PRESENT. OCCASION WAS PRIMARILY SOCIAL, WAS RELAXED AND EXTREMELY CONVIVIAL. SUBSTANTIVE ISSUES DISCUSSED ONLY IN GENERAL TERMS, PUNCTUATED BY HUMOROUS ASIDES OFTEN RELATED TO ALLEGED GEOGRAPHICAL ALLEGIANCES AND QUOTE PROVINCIALISMS UNQUOTE OF THOSE PRESENT. THE SECRETARY EXPRESSED THE HOPE THAT THE VICE INISTER WOULD TRAVEL TO OTHER PARTS OF THE UNITED STATES, INASMUCH AS NEW YORK WAS NOT CONSIDERED TO BE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE NATION. Ch'iao SAID HE LOOKED FORWARD TO DOING THIS AS SOON AS THE SITUATION MADE IT APPROPRIATE. Ch'iao WAS ASSURED THAT THERE WOULD BE NO PROBLEM IN HIS TRAVELS SO FAR AS THE UNITED STATES SIDE WAS CONCERNED.

2. IN RESPONSE TO A QUESTION FROM AMBASSADOR BUSH, Ch'iao SAID THE CHINESE THEMSELVES DID NOT KNOW WHAT THE POPULATION OF CHINA WAS TODAY BUT THE FIGURE 800 MILLION HAD OFTEN BEEN USED. HE SAID THEY WERE MAKING EARNEST ATTEMPTS AT POPULATION CONTROL. SOME PROGRESS HAD BEEN MADE IN THE LARGE CITIES BUT MOST OF THE POPULATION LIVED IN THE COUNTRYSIDE AND BETTER HYGIENE AND VASTLY INCREASED MEDICAL FACILITIES HAD EXACERBATED THE PROBLEM BY SIGNIFICANTLY REDUCING THE MORTALITY RATE.

3. BOTH SIDES EXPRESSED PLEASURE THAT PROVISIONS OF THE SHANGHAI COMMUNIQUE WERE BEING IMPLEMENTED IN A HIGHLY SATISFACTORY MANNER AND AT AN APPROPRIATE RATE OF PROGRESS. THE SECRETARY NOTED THAT THE MARKED IMPROVEMENT IN SINO-US RELATIONS HAD MET WITH VIRTUALLY UNIVERSAL APPROVAL IN OUR COUNTRY. Ch'iao READILY AGREED THAT THIS WAS THE CASE. AMBASSADOR BUSH EXPRESSED APPRECIATION FOR THE MANNER IN WHICH THE CHINESE. AND THE US UN MISSIONS HAD WORKED TOGETHER WITH SERIOUSNESS OF PURPOSE. HE SAID THAT WE NATURALLY HAD OUR DIFFERENCES WHICH WE FREELY EXPRESSED, BUT THAT WE WERE BUILDING VERY SATISFACTORILY ON THE COMMON GROUND WHICH WE HAD FOUND.

4. THE SECRETARY OBSERVED THAT THE RECENT VISIT OF PRIME MINISTER Tanaka TO PEKING SEEMED TO HAVE GONE VERY WELL. HE THOUGHT THERE WAS GENERAL SATISFACTION IN OUR COUNTRY THAT THIS WAS SO. THE VICE MINISTER SAID THAT CHINA AND JAPAN HAD A LONG HISTORY OF ASSOCIATION AND THAT MUCH COMMON GROUND WAS FOUND IN THE RECENT SUMMIT MEETING. NATURALLY, THERE WERE DIFFERENCES BUT REAL PROGRESS HAD BEEN MADE.

5. THE SECRETARY IN CONGRATULATING THE VICE MINISTER ON HIS LINGUISTIC PROWESS REMINDED HIM THAT IN PEKING WE HAD AGREED THAT EACH SIDE COULD PROFIT FROM HELP FROM THE OTHER. IN LANGUAGE STUDY, WITH PARTICULAR EMPHASIS UPON CONTEMPORARY USAGE. Ch'iao WAS TOLD THAT WE WERE COLLECTING MATERIALS WHICH WE HOPED THE CHINESE WOULD FIND USEFUL IN THIS FIELD.

6. AMBASSADOR BUSH ASKED HOW THE CHINESE VIEWED THE AMERICAN PARTICIPATION IN THE SPRING CANTON TRADE FAIR. FOR OUR PART, WE THOUGHT IT VERY SATISFACTORY. Ch'iao AGREED AND SAID THAT MORE AMERICANS WOULD BE INVITED TO THE FALL TRADE FAIR. BOTH SIDES EXPRESSED SATISFACTION AT THE MANNER IN WHICH TRADE WAS DEVELOPING AND LOOKED FORWARD TO FURTHER PROGRESS.

7. THE SECRETARY MENTIONED SEVERAL POINTS OF SIMILARITY BETWEEN OUR TWO COUNTRIES AND PEOPLES. THE VICE MINISTER SAID THAT HE FOUND OUR HABIT OF QUOTE KIDDING OURSELVES UNQUOTE ESPECIALLY ATTRACTIVE, AND EVIDENCE OF SOCIAL HEALTH. HE CONGRATULATED THE U.S. SIDE FOR HAVING INTRODUCED INTO THE SHANGHAI COMMUNIQUE THE CONCEPT THAT NO NATION IS INFALLIBLE. HE THOUGH THAT BOTH CHINA AND AMERICA WERE CONSTANTLY TRYING TO BRING ABOUT IMPROVEMENT IN MANY FIELDS. THIS PREVENTED COMPLACENCY WHICH WOULD START ANY NATION ON A DOWNWARD PATH.

8. AMBASSADOR BUSH EXPRESSED APPRECIATION FOR SIMILARITIES IN CHINESE AND AMERICAN OBJECTIVES WITH RESPECT TO THE PROBLEM OF TERRORISM, ALTHOUGH WE HAD A FEW DIFFERENCES PERHAPS IN OUR METHODOLOGY. Ch'iao DID NOT PURSUE THE SUBJECT.

9. Ch'iao, INTRODUCING THE ONLY SUBJECT SPECIFICALLY RAISED BY THE CHINESE, ASKED THE SECRETARY TO GIVE QUOTE NON-POLITICAL UNQUOTE OPINIONS OF CONCORDE AIRCRAFT. THE SECRETARY SAID WE HAD NO REASON TO CRITICIZE IT. ITS CONFIGURATION WAS PLEASING .AND WE BELIEVED ITS TECHNOLOGY WAS SOUND, BUT WE HAD SOME DOUBTS AS TO ITS COST EFFECTIVENESS SINCE IT IS VERY EXPENSIVE. IT MIGHT BE FEASIBLE FOR LONG HAULS. WE THOUGHT THE SONIC BOOM PROBLEM WAS MANAGEABLE AND WE HAD PLANS OF OUR OWN TO JOIN IN THE SECOND GENERATION OF SUPERSONIC AIRCRAFT.

10. NEITHER VIETNAM NOR TAIWAN WAS MENTIONED.

11. TENOR OF ENTIRE EVENING WAS QUOTE SO FAR SO GOOD UNQUOTE IN SINO-US RELATIONS. DIFFERENCES WERE BEING FACED FORTHRIGHTLY BUT, FOR THE MOST PART, WERE BEING SET ASIDE IN FAVOR OF CONCENTRATING ON CONSTRUCTIVE POTENTIAL IN ENLARGING COMMON GROUND. IT WAS AGREED THAT SUCH CANDOR WAS BEST FOUNDATION FOR FURTHER IMPROVEMENT IN RELATIONS, WHICH BOTH SIDES CONFIDENTLY EXPECTED.

12. BOTH SIDES HAD AGREED THAT THERE WOULD BE NO COMMENT TO THE MEDIA PRIOR TO THE DINNER. THERE WAS, HOWEVER, A LEAK (OUR INFORMATION ATTRIBUTE IT TO THE CHINESE SIDE) AND THERE WAS A SMALL REPRESENTATION FROM THE PRESS ON ARRIVAL OF THE CHINESE PARTY AND SOME DOZEN WERE PRESENT ON DEPARTURE. THIS DID NOT SEEM TO DISTURB THE CHINESE AND MAY WELL HAVE ACCORDED WITH THEIR UNEXPRESSED WISHES.

13. DEPARTMENT MAY WISH TO DOWNGRADE AND GIVE BROADER DISTRIBUTION.

GDS.

ROGERS

BT

#3725

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL CHICOM-US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Homer. The meeting was held at Ch'iao's apartment in New York on October 5.

161. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 12, 1972, 3:45-4:05 p.m. 161. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 12, 1972, 3:45-4:05 p.m.1

New York, October 12, 1972, 3:45-4:05 p.m.

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

October 13, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

The following is a report of a meeting with Mrs. Shih at the Chinese Mission in New York on October 12, 1972.

I entered the Mission at 3:45 p.m. and was greeted by Mrs. Shih and escorted to the second floor. Tea was served and pleasantries exchanged.

Mrs. Shih asked when Dr. Kissinger would be returning, and I told her he should be back by the time I returned. Mrs. Shih then presented the note (attached) and asked if there were any questions. I said the note was clear and I would pass it on as soon as possible.

In the course of conversation, Mrs. Shih mentioned that a Chinese medical delegation was due to arrive in New York today (Thursday) and then proceed to Washington on Friday.

I left the Mission at 4:05 p.m. and telephoned the gist of the message to Col. Kennedy.

FYI: The plain clothesmen outside the Mission are becoming increasingly aggressive in requiring identification. I danced away from this one but in the future, Mrs. Shih should be at the door at the appropriate time to assist entry.

V. James Fazio

Deputy Director

Situation Room

1. The Chinese side agrees in principle to the idea put forward by Dr. Kissinger on October 3 about the U.S. side sending a mission to China to discuss the prospects of the normalization of Sino-U.S. relations. Premier Chou En-lai welcomes Dr. Kissinger to come personally again on this mission to China. The specific date of the visit can be discussed and decided upon through this channel after being suggested by the U.S. side.

2. The U.S. side is aware of the position of the Chinese side on the Viet Nam question. The Chinese side hopes that the U.S. and Vietnamese sides will be able to reach an agreement on the settlement of the Viet Nam question.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Fazio on October 13. Attached is the Chinese message, upon which is written: “Handed to Fazio by Mrs. Shih 10/12/72.”

162. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 8, 1972, 1:45-2:15 p.m. 162. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 8, 1972, 1:45-2:15 p.m.1

New York, October 8, 1972, 1:45-2:15 p.m.

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

October 9, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

Following is a report of a meeting with Mrs. Shih at the Chinese Mission in New York on October 8, 1972.

I entered the Chinese Mission at approximately 1:45 p.m. and was greeted by Mrs. Shih and escorted to the second floor. Mrs. Shih served tea and exchanged pleasantries.

Mrs. Shih said the Ambassador would not be present since he was involved with the Vice Foreign Minister's visit. I presented the package (attached) and asked Mrs. Shih to read it, should there be any questions.

Mrs. Shih gave it a quick perusal, commenting she had read both proposals earlier. However, she read the last paragraph of the next-to-last page several times. She said there were no questions and promised to deliver the package as soon as possible.

The conversation turned to generalities and I commented that the Mission now had both police and plainclothes guards at their door. (On previous occasions, a cruiser was parked in the area, but no one was at the door.) Mrs. Shih commented that “Chiang Kai-shek” elements had demonstrated last week at the Mission. (Demonstration against PRC-Japan relations) They threw eggs and broke windows, but nobody was injured.

I departed the Mission at 2:15 p.m. with Mrs. Shih's greetings to all.

V. James Fazio
Deputy Director
Situation Room

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Fazio on October 9. A notation on the memorandum reads: “China exchange.”

163. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 25, 1972, 4:30-4:55 p.m. 163. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 25, 1972, 4:30-4:55 p.m.1

New York, October 25, 1972, 4:30-4:55 p.m.

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

October 26, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

Following is a report of a meeting with Mrs. Shih at the Chinese Mission in New York on October 25, 1972.

I entered the Chinese Mission at 4:30 p.m., was met by Mrs. Shih and escorted to the second floor. Tea was served and pleasantries exchanged.

Mrs. Shih presented the note (Tab A) which I read and said I would deliver as soon as possible. I then presented Mrs. Shih with our note (Tab B). Mrs. Shih read it very carefully, said she had no questions and would pass it to the Ambassador.

I then delivered the oral message from HAK inviting the Vice Foreign Minister and the Ambassador to dinner on November 1. I emphasized to Mrs. Shih that the date was for planning purposes only and that details and composition of the party would be passed on by Winston Lord. Mrs. Shih took notes and said she would relay the invitation.

General conversation followed and I departed the Mission at 4:55 p.m., telephoning Winston Lord with the gist of the Chinese note.

V. James Fazio

Deputy Director

Situation Room

The U.S. side sent the attached message to the DRV side today, October 25, 1972.

The U.S. side has also clarified for the DRV side that paragraph 4(c) means that the final agreement would be arrived at in the Paris meeting proposed in paragraph 4(a) and would not be subject to subsequent change; and that the reference to two weeks in 4(c) applies to the period needed to finalize preparations for the signing and implementation of the agreement.

MESSAGE TO THE GOVERNMENT OF THE DRV ON BEHALF OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES

1. The U.S. side has studied the DRV message of October 24 with the greatest attention. It shares the regret of the DRV side that a brief delay in the original schedule has become necessary.

2. At the same time, the U.S. side is of the view that the constant repetition of unfounded charges can only exacerbate the problem. The DRV must realize the impossibility for the U.S. of signing a document which asserts the concurrence of one of the parties when this concurrence does not exist.

3. The problem which has now arisen requires statesmanship on both sides. The U.S. sides prepared to work seriously and with good will to give effect to the understandings reached with the DRV certainly before the end of November. To this end some cooperation by the DRV side is essential.

4. To show its good will, the U.S repeats its undertakings in its note of October 24 and adds some additional ones as follows: a. Special Advisor Le Duc Tho should meet Dr. Kissinger in Paris on any day of the DRV's choosing during the week of October 30 to arrive at a final text. (Dr. Kissinger will be prepared to meet Special Advisor Le Duc Tho at any other location. However, the DRV side should consider that another locale might exacerbate the situation which produced the necessity for the meeting in the first place.)

b. The U.S. wishes to reiterate its conviction that the necessary changes can all be accomplished within the framework of the existing agreement.

c. The U.S. side would make itself responsible for the document growing out of this meeting without further change within a reasonable period to be agreed—say, two weeks.

d. As soon as the document is completed in Paris and while the U.S. consults its allies, the U.S. will stop completely the bombing of the North.

e. As soon as the necessary concurrence is achieved, Dr. Kissinger will come to Hanoi to discuss the post-war situation and to initial the agreement (around November 20).

f. Dr. Kissinger will attend another meeting with Special Advisor Le Duc Tho with instructions to bring about a final settlement.

5. It should be obvious that the U.S. side is showing the most serious and earnest desire to bring about a resolution of the difficulties which have arisen. It is equally obvious that the United States can go no further. It is up to the DRV to decide whether to sacrifice all that has been achieved by a policy of public villification and private intransigence. For the DRV to insist on demands beyond the power of the U.S. to fulfill will permit no other conclusion than that it seeks a pretext for prolonging the conflict.

6. As for the U.S., the course adopted during the private meetings in October represents settled U.S. policy. The U.S. is determined to end the war in the nearest future, and it will work with the greatest energy to remove the obstacles that have arisen in any event before the end of November.

For planning purposes, Dr. Kissinger is pleased to invite Vice Foreign Minister Ch'iao Kuanhua and Ambassador Huang-hua to dinner on number from its mission in New York. Assuming the date is agreeable to the Chinese side, Mr. Lord will be in touch with Mrs. Shih on the details concerning timing and location.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Fazio on October 26. For the text of the note Shih Yen-hua handed to Fazio, see Document 259, Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XVII. Attached are three U.S. messages, two of which bear the handwritten notation: “Handed to Mrs. Shih by J. Fazio, 10/25/72, NYC.” The last message bears the handwritten notation: “Read to Mrs. Shih by J. Fazio, 10/25/72, NYC.”

164. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 27, 1972, 8:40-9 p.m. 164. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 27, 1972, 8:40-9 p.m.1

New York, October 27, 1972, 8:40-9 p.m.

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

Following is a report of a meeting with Mrs. Shih at the Chinese Mission in New York on October 27, 1972.

I entered the Chinese Mission at 8:40 p.m., was met by Mrs. Shih, and escorted to the second floor. Tea was served and pleasantries exchanged.

I presented the notes to Mrs. Shih (attached) which she carefully read and had no questions.

In the subsequent conversation, Mrs. Shih said that the November 1 date suggested for dinner was acceptable to the Vice Foreign Minister and the Ambassador. She asked if I knew who would be accompanying Dr. Kissinger. I said I didn't know, and took the opportunity to inform Mrs. Shih that a specific number of guests was not necessary. The Vice Foreign Minister and Ambassador were welcome to come themselves, or to include in their party any members of the Mission they desired. Mrs. Shih said she would await a call from Winston Lord to finalize the date and details.

I departed the Mission at 9:00 p.m. and telephoned Jon Howe with the details of the meeting.

V. James Fazio

Deputy Director

Situation Room

The U.S. side has studied most carefully the October 26, 1972, message from the DRVN side. As the U.S. side has already pointed out, it understands the disappointment caused by the inability to meet the schedule. At the same time, the DRVN side certainly has sufficient information to know that the U.S. side exerted maximum efforts to adhere to the timetable, The U.S. side wishes to reaffirm its belief that with a cooperative attitude and good will on both sides, all remaining obstacles can be overcome. The major problem now is to focus on the future and to end recriminations about the past. Public pressure tactics can only retard progress.

The U.S. side has proposed another meeting in Paris to expedite the conclusion of the agreement, whose essential provisions Dr. Kissinger reaffirmed in his October 26, 1972 press conference. With respect to paragraph 4 of the October 26, 1972, DRVN message, the US side recommends that Special Advisor Le Due Tho and Dr. Kissinger meet in Paris beginning on Wednesday, November 1, 1972, or any other mutually convenient date. The U.S. side wishes to point out that Dr. Kissinger will not be available between November 4 and November 9. The session would last as long as required to complete the final text, The U.S. side hopes that the North Vietnamese side would attend with the attitude of making a positive contribution to achieving a satisfactory final text and that it will cooperate in the subsequent effort to achieve the concurrence of all parties. This goal is in the common interest and would permit rapid progress towards a ceasefire.

The U.S. side reaffirms that upon agreement on a text in Paris—and while subsequent consultations are occurring it will stop completely the bombing of North Vietnam. The U.S. also agrees not to request any additional changes after agreement is reached at the next session. Dr. Kissinger and Special Advisor Le Duc Tho will also agree on a schedule which can certainly be maintained since all preliminary consultations will have been completed and plans to bring about final concurrence will have been made well in advance. The U.S. side also reaffirms that as soon as the necessary concurrence is achieved, Dr. Kissinger will come to Hanoi to discuss the post-war situation and to initial the agreement. The target date is November 20.

The U.S. side agrees with the DRVN side that an early end to the war and restoration of peace in Vietnam will usher in a new era in the relations between the United States and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN.

165. Message from the Government of the United States to the Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, New York, undated 165. Message from the Government of the United States to the Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, New York, undated1

New York, undated

MESSAGE TO THE GOVERNMENT OF THE DRV ON BEHALF OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES

1. The U.S. side has consistently sought to end the war as rapidly as possible and on a basis just to all.

2. It is for this reason that it accepted the accelerated schedule proposed by Special Advisor Le Duc Tho, even though it required extreme efforts and the risk of some delays caused by the reaction of allies who did not participate in the drafting process. If the United States had wanted a pretext for delay as the DRV alleges it could easily have protracted the negotiations on the details of the agreement.

3. The United States had always made clear that it had to consult its allies before the agreement would be considered final. The U.S. has always respected the DRV's position in that regard; the DRV cannot ignore the U.S. convictions about its principles. That principled stand will also be a guarantee for the improved relations between the U.S. and the DRV which will certainly begin in the nearest future.

4. The DRV is aware that once agreement in principle had been reached the U.S. unilaterally and without any reciprocity significantly reduced its bombing of the north.

5. The DRV cannot be ignorant of the strenuous effort made by Dr. Kissinger in Saigon—efforts complicated by the interview given simultaneously by the DRV Prime Minister who alleged an agreement had already been reached while it was still being negotiated and who publicly called irrelevant the very government and leaders whose concurrence was being sought by common agreement.

6. True to its principles and as Dr. Kissinger pointed out to Special Advisor Le Duc Tho on October 11 and to Minister Xuan Thuy on October 17, it could not guarantee acceptance of the proposed time table by Saigon. A four party agreement obviously requires the agreement of all parties.

7. Since a discussion of the past is fruitless, the United States now feels bound by its principles to request one more meeting between Special Advisor Le Duc Tho and Dr. Kissinger in Paris on any day of the DRV's choosing during the week of October 30.

8. At this meeting, it is necessary to discuss three sets of issues: a. Technical changes which do not change the substance of the agreement.

b. Some modifications in which the Vietnamese language seems to produce a different meaning than the English text, espcially with respect to paragraph 9g.

c. Some modifications which were always foreseen to take account of the possible necessity of a [unclear].

d. An additional discussion of troop dispositions outside the text of the agreement to insure its workability.

e. Efforts to make the ceasefires in Indo-China more nearly simultaneous with each other and with the coming into being of the supervisory machinery.

9. All these changes are minor compared to what has already been surmounted and many are in practice already agreed. The U.S. side will approach these discussions with the determination that they should finally conclude the negotiations. Dr. Kissinger will be instructed to stay in Paris till this is accomplished.

10. To show its good will, the U.S. gives the following undertakings: a. The U.S. declares that the text developed at the next private meeting will be final. The U.S. makes itself responsible for the fact that no additional changes will be raised. It will give this undertaking as well to the allies of the DRV.

b. A schedule will be agreed at that meeting which, now that consultations have been completed, can be considered firm.

The U.S. will, in the meantime, stop all bombardment north of the 20th parallel.

11. The U.S. is determined to end the war rapidly and to begin a new era in its relations with the DRV moving from hostility to friendship. It is up to the DRV to decide whether to use the pretext of understandable disappointments to continue a conflict which has no further objective or whether to seize this opportunity to move toward normalcy, reciprocity and cooperation.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. No classification marking. Kissinger handed the message to Huang Hua in New York on October 24. A handwritten note on the message reads “10/24/72.”

166. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, November 13, 1972, 7:30-10 p.m. 166. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, November 13, 1972, 7:30-10 p.m.1

New York, November 13, 1972, 7:30-10 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS:

Ch'iao Kuan-hua, PRC Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Huang Hua, PRC Representative to the United Nations

Chen Chu, PRC Deputy Representative to the United Nations

Mrs. Shih Yen-hua, Interpreter

Mr. Kuo, Notetaker

Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Nelson A. Rockefeller, Governor of New York

Major General Alexander M. Haig, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John Holdridge, NSC Staff

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

DATE & TIME: Monday, November 13, 1972, 7:30-l0:00 p.m.

PLACE: Century Club, New York City

(The evening's conversation went back and forth between social talk and substantive discussion. This memcon recounts all the substantive exchanges. The Chinese party arrived at 7:30 p.m. and drinks were consumed for half an hour before dinner. The Vice Minister presented Governor Rockefeller with a Chinese vase, gave a smaller one to Dr. Kissinger and another artifact to General Haig, together with tea and mao tai for all the Americans. After a few minutes of light banter the following discussion ensued before dinner.)

Vice Minister Ch'iao: We should drink a toast to General Haig upon his return. (To Dr. Kissinger) How do things stand?

Dr. Kissinger : They are as I explained last time to your Ambassador. We will meet next week as you know. We will have about four or five substantive changes and eight to ten technical points, of the kind we discussed the other evening. If DRV shows the same attitude as previously we should be able to come to agreement. Then if the North Vietnamese show some patience and understanding for our needs, in two to three weeks at the most we should be able to bring Saigon along. Everything should be done by December 10. We will not ask for any more changes after the next meeting. General Haig made some progress in Saigon. After the meeting next week I will go back to Saigon, and we will complete the discussions.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: You mean you first go to Paris and then to Saigon?

Dr. Kissinger : I will be honest. The mistake I made last time was to go to Saigon with a very brief deadline. The disadvantage was that as time went on our negotiating position got weaker. It was a very embarrassing position. Therefore, we now want an interval after Paris so that next time we can prepare gradually. We may send General Haig back again. We will apply influence ahead of the time that I return to Saigon.

In Paris, if Hanoi deals with us in the same farsighted spirit, we will settle next week in principle and then return to Washington for a week. We will apply pressures from here rather than while I am in Saigon. That is the only thing that makes sense. Therefore patience and silence from Hanoi is needed. It is no good to claim victory while we are influencing Saigon. But it will be done and we will succeed. I will go to Saigon the first of December after a week in Washington. Our target date is December 8 or 9.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: (To General Haig) Was there some change in the attitude in Saigon after you went there?

General Haig: Yes. There was considerable change, considerable progress. There are still some differences on one area.

Dr. Kissinger : Really on two areas.

General Haig: Well, two.

Dr. Kissinger : The big difficulty is the presence of North Vietnamese troops in the South. If that can be solved, everything else will be easy. We understand the problem of Hanoi. They do not wish to admit their forces are in the South and then withdraw them, which is a double humiliation. But on the other hand, it is very difficult for Saigon to make peace and to recognize the right of the North Vietnamese forces to be on its territory. So we have to look for some practical solution. I indicated to the Ambassador the direction we are thinking about, that North Vietnam withdraw some forces - they don't need to tell us, we can pick it up from intelligence. Second, there is already in the agreement now a provision for demobilization of forces. Xuan Thuy referred to it in the New York Times That provision can be strengthened and made a little bit more explicit. After a ceasefire the two parties can negotiate a reduction in forces. I think the combination of those two measures would succeed in breaking the difficulties.

There is one other thing that can be done - one of those complicated formulas that we use (Vice Minister Chiao laughs heartily). We can say that all Vietnamese agree that … What we can do, for example, we can have a protocol in which we note all the things the North Vietnamese say, that the only forces in the South are South Vietnamese or South Vietnamese who went North and returned. We can acknowledge these statements and say we do not recognize the right of the North Vietnamese to go South. They don't claim to have this right. This and the other measures would satisfy Saigon.

Either Hanoi will keep the agreement, in which case it won't matter how many troops they have in the South, or Hanoi will break the agreement, in which case we have the U.S. Air Force in Thailand and will take drastic action. I assume the same factors in North Vietnam which made it make peace will work against the starting of the war again. We are prepared to see an evolution take place. We are not children. We are students of history, and know the revolution will not stop on December 10. But it is in no one's interest to see things forced, particularly at a time when we are making decisions that are going to be unpopular, so that confidence in our leadership is not shaken.

You were present when I was with the Prime Minister. Everything we said in June we reaffirm. We will not increase our demands. We will not break the ceasefire. We will not seek any military solution there. We will not stand in the way of a historical political process. I think the question of the forces in the South should be shifted to the political arena, and if this is done, all things will be possible.

I think the Vice Minister understands everything I say in English.

Governor Rockefeller: He gets two shots at what you are saying.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Not exactly.

Dr. Kissinger : One major point—we will use our strength gained through the elections to end the war, not to prosecute it. The Prime Minister should understand we want to end the war so that we can turn to the bigger things that we have discussed.

(At this point Dr. Kissinger suggested that they go into dinner and the party moved to the round table in the same room where a lengthy cordial dinner ensued for a couple of hours. Most of the dinner was taken up with substantive discussion which is recorded below. There were also brief interludes of lighter conversation.)

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Although we had some heated discussions [in the PRC] there was always a good feeling.

Governor Rockefeller: Dr. Kissinger returned with a deep respect and affection for his counterparts.

Dr. Kissinger : It was important work. We have established a good relationship with China, and we have every intention of accelerating it in the new Administration.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: We all stated the facts.

Governor Rockefeller: You can't go wrong with the facts, even at the local level. I am a provincial leader.

Dr. Kissinger : The Ambassador [Huang] taught me a lesson [in July 1971] when we were negotiating the communique about the President's visit to the PRC. I have not told him this yet. My only experience had been with your northern ally.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: My old friend.

Dr. Kissinger : We tried the same method we used with them, which the Communists usually follow, i.e., to present very extreme demands. I suggested that each side present its maximum position - we present ours, you present yours - and then we would start negotiating. Ambassador Huang said, no, that is not the way to do it. He believed that each side should state what it honestly must have and then the two sides could find words easily. This is what we did. This is how it happened. You know the Russians would prefer to have a worse agreement with some concessions from the other side than to have a better agreement. They insist on extreme demands.

Governor Rockefeller: Is this technique for public consumption or for self-gratification?

Dr. Kissinger : With the Chinese, for example, you would start out with $750 million and end up with $725 million. With the Russians if you started out with 800 million they would settle for $776 million, but they would take it as a victory because they got you down 25 million dollars worth.

Governor Rockefeller: Mr. Vice Minister, it's a sign of inward insecurity.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: With respect to the negotiations on the boundary question with the Soviet Union.

Governor Rockefeller: Which system is used - the Russian or the Chinese?

Vice Minister Ch'iao: (to Dr. Kissinger) You had some successful negotiations with them. I have not.

Dr. Kissinger : They're not as afraid of me as they are of you.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: As Dr. Kissinger knows, the negotiations on the borders have gone on for over three years, and I was directly engaged for two years. The negotiations started in 1969 after agreement was reached between the two Prime Ministers in Peking on the principles. What are the present state of the borders between China and the Soviet Union which were established in mid, or the latter part of the, 19th century? China and Czarist Russia concluded a series of unequal treaties. At that time China was in a very weak position. In the unequal treaties there were simply no surveys. They just used pencils and drew lines on the map. That was the way the boundaries were decided. Accordingly, in these unequal treaties problems arose because in certain sections of the treaties they did not stipulate very clearly the borders between China and Russia in these disputed areas. The Soviet side say these belong to them, and we say that they belong to us.

Dr. Kissinger : You do not challenge the treaties themselves?

Vice Minister Ch'iao: No. All propaganda to the contrary is groundless. Some people say the Chinese want to abrogate the unequal treaties and recover all the land seized by Russia. These are groundless and not the position of the Chinese.

Governor Rockefeller: That's very interesting.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: So in 1969, Mr. Kosygin, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union, came to Peking and Premier Chou En-lai talked to him on the boundary question. He said the problems between the two countries should be settled and that negotiations should be held, first, free from any threat and, secondly, proceeding from the basis of taking the SinoRussian treaties on the border as the basis, while at the same time [recognizing that] some disputed areas along the Sino-Russian border exist. From this basic point should proceed negotiations of the question. At that time I was present. Chairman Kosygin then asked, what are the disputed areas? Premier Chou En-lai gave him an explanation of what I said just now. He said, now I understand. Some places you claim are yours, and some we claim are ours. The Premier told him that his understanding was correct. Premier Chou En-lai said, in order for the Sino-Soviet negotiations on the border questions to be conducted free from any threat and through peaceful negotiations, that: there should be three points with regard to the provisions of the agreement. First, one should maintain the status quo of the border. This is a very clear point and needs no explanation. Second, the two sides should avert armed conflict. The third point is that for the disputed areas, which they claim and we claim, the armed forces of both sides must be withdrawn and disengaged. Premier Kosygin said he was in full accord.

Dr. Kissinger : I don't know your experience but our troubles usually start at that point.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Exactly. That's where the trouble starts. So the problem follows. There was agreement at that time. Premier Kosygin said that we should write down the points on paper. Premier Chou En-lai said that could be done, and Premier Kosygin asked how many days it would take to put it down on paper. Premier Chou En-lai asked him how many days he wanted. Premier Kosygin said one week. Chou En-ial said all right and within one week we gave them a paper.

When the paper was given to them, they said that these questions should be discussed when negotiations start on the boundary question. We agreed and the negotiations on the boundary question started, and I played a most unhappy role. I was in the negotiations for two years and now the negotiations are going on for more than three years. And I washed my hands of it last year.

And recently on the question of the non-use of force or threat of force, including conventional weapons, missiles, and nuclear weapons, we thought negotiations should be conducted free from any threat of force. So we put forward the proposition that both sides should refrain from doing so. This is in the provisional agreement that we proposed, one of the provisions in the provisional agreement. Because, if between China and the Soviet Union there is any chance of armed conflict, the main problem is with the border question.

Governor Rockefeller: Right.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: And the greatest danger is these disputed areas. The two sides maintain armed forces in these areas, so the forces of the two sides should disengage.

Three years have passed in the negotiations, and no results have been achieved. What I'm going to tell you is something new, that is, recently, in early November, the Soviet Union all of a sudden changed its attitude.

Governor Rockefeller: Very interesting.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: They proposed that we should leave aside other questions and only talk about the non-use of force, of conventional and nuclear weapons and keep this issue separate from the boundary question. On the one hand, they are not recognizing that there are disputed areas of the Sino-Soviet border. On the other band, they are fundamentally opposed to withdrawing their forces from the disputed areas. But it is very clear why they fear so much the disputed areas—once they recognize that there are disputed areas along the Sino-Soviet border, there will be a chain reaction concerning other boundaries.

Dr. Kissinger : From their other allies.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: They try to lasso us by abstract provisions which have nothing to do with reality, such as the non-use of force.

Dr. Kissinger : If you accept this point, it has a relationship to other strategy of theirs which may come along in the next two or three years. It seems to fit into the general strategy of the proposals they are making to us.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Please listen to me. We refused in November.

Dr. Kissinger : You just refused.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Yes. I wanted you to know this piece of information. If anybody tells you that China and the Soviet Union have reached agreement on the non-use of force, including nuclear and conventional weapons, that is unfounded. It is nonsense. You should not believe them. You know our character and what we say is honest.

Dr. Kissinger : We have always been able to rely on your word. I hope you can always rely on our word. Any information we receive from the Soviet Union on its relations with you, we will check with you. It would be useful if you check with us anything on our relations with them that you get from them. We will generally give the information. If you haven't heard from us, the chances are it is not true. We will reach no understandings with the Soviet Union without your knowing about it. This is a fixed principle of this Administration.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: And I believe since your visit to China relations between our two countries have been according to this principle. We may have difficulties. We may have very heated discussions, for example, in Hangchow—I don't know whether you remember or not.

Dr. Kissinger : You took a half-hour interval to prepare a speech, but you had provocation.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: No. As we have always done, I wanted to tell you this information.

Dr. Kissinger : I appreciate this very much because, no doubt, we will hear a more complex version in the not too distant future.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: So I wanted to tell you in advance.

Dr. Kissinger : In this connection, we will be under considerable pressure in the next month on the nuclear treaty, of which we gave you the text, but we will proceed with the strategy that we have told you about, of avoiding any commitment to it. We will do it in a complex way without ever actually refusing it. But you can be certain that we will not accept it, and we will keep you informed about any new proposal we receive.

Of course, I want to discuss this whole subject with the Prime Minister when I see him in January.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: I would publish all their thoughts so that they will be discredited before the world. Dr. Kissinger: You have a good intelligence system. You know when I leave my office. You will recall Bangladesh.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: The New York Times did not take my word.

Governor Rockefeller: You should take the New York Times the whole organization, with you.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Do you have any specific requests with respect to your visit to China next January?

Dr. Kissinger : First, I thought I would come around January 6, if this is convenient for you. I thought we might discuss first of all the evolution in our bilateral relations. I am assuming we will have finished the war in Vietnam so that we can then make a schedule for normalization of our relationships. Then I might put before the Prime Minister and you our views on how we envision the next four years and listen to any advice you choose to give us, particularly concerning the problem I discussed with the Ambassador. It is not inconceivable that the maximum dangers of the hegemonial designs that we discussed, and both pledged to oppose in the Shanghai Communique, could arise from 1974 onward. We are determined to oppose this, not out of any consideration for others but for consideration for ourselves.

But this is a complex problem for us, and so I thought we might have a very frank exchange on the general subject—which, of course, we hope will not arise in practice.

And then we might have our usual exchanges on Indochina. I think it is important that after peace is made there should be a period of tranquility for some years. This is particularly true for Cambodia, where you have a special interest. I frankly think that your interests and ours are similar. You want a neutral, independent Cambodia not dominated by any one country, and this is what we want too. There is no American interest there. We don't care how this is done so long as the evolution is gradual. But unsatisfactory arrangements could affect other relationships. It is very difficult for us to end the war and then have a renewal of war elsewhere because then we are accused of a bad deal that hampers us elsewhere. Our objectives are not dissimilar, if I understand them, and we are not wedded to any particular orientation.

Then we can continue to discuss Europe. Incidentally, I believe the Prime Minister's discussions with European Foreign Ministers (I have seen reports of these) have been very useful from our point of view. I have said that you are the toughest European country (laughter).

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Talking about this question, the question of Cambodia, I will very bluntly ask you one question. Are you prepared to talk to Prince Sihanouk?

Dr. Kissinger : While I am there?

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Anyway, do you have any ideas of talking with him?

Dr. Kissinger : I will speak very candidly. If we can have a period of quiet then there would inevitably have to be some discussions with Prince Sihanouk.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: We are assuming… our hope is that there will be quiet in Vietnam. Of course, there are many questions. When you go to China in January, if you do have the idea of talking to Prince Sihanouk, I can arrange it.

Dr. Kissinger : I have not considered it for that period. But I will be very glad to talk to the Prime Minister about Cambodia. I can tell you now on a confidential basis it would be possible to arrive at an understanding with the Prime Minister that does justice to the concerns of Prince Sihanouk. If the war continues in Cambodia, then we have to maintain in our present position. But what we want in Cambodia, to be very blunt, is to reduce the influence of India and the Soviet Union, and to preserve it from becoming an appendage of Hanoi. Whoever can best preserve it as an independent neutral country, is consistent with our policy, and we believe consistent with yours.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: I think that the three Indochinese countries must be independent, but at the same time must have friendly relations among themselves.

Dr. Kissinger : There are three countries, but four states for the time being. Vice Minister Ch'iao: Of course, the present status is three countries and four sides. But in the historical process, the South and North of Vietnam will inevitably go toward reunification.

Dr. Kissinger : We will not oppose this, and we are not opposed to friendly relations among these countries.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: I think Dr. Kissinger is aware that there was once a summit meeting of the Indochinese peoples, and they published documents, and the documents set forth their principles.

Dr. Kissinger : You left some literature about it in my study in the guest house along with some pictures (Vice Minister Ch'iao: laughs).

Vice Minister Ch'iao: You reminded me—I was going to give you some documents on the SinoSoviet question. But you must be very busy.

Dr. Kissinger : I will read them.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: We had some very happy times, with Dr. Kissinger, but we had an experience with our old friend which was very unhappy. In Hangchow we had a big quarrel.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, until 5 a.m. There was an agreement the night before, and I wanted to change it. I must say seriously, that we had an agreement the night before and for purely internal American reasons we had to request many changes. They were trivial. This made it extremely hard to explain why we needed another session. It was a great tribute to the Prime Minister and the Vice Foreign Minister that they agreed to reopen the question after a half-hour speech during which what was said was basically correct. We spent until S a. m. for internal American reasons of no interest to China, and not on essential problems. It showed very great generosity on the part of the Chinese. They had already had a meeting of their governing body to approve the wording. Nothing affected the essence; only something in one paragraph. I must say we deeply appreciated this, and it was very important in gaining concurrence among all our people for the communique.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Thank you very much. My theory is that we all reason things out. We must make major accommodation within a framework of principle. I can't impose my ideas on you, nor can you impose your ideas on me. Dr. Kissinger: There was also human understanding, which was very important.

Governor Rockefeller: And respect.

Dr. Kissinger : What always impresses me in dealing with the Chinese is that your word counts.

Governor Rockefeller: Maybe the day will come when your northern neighbor will wish it had settled the border dispute during those two years.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Nobody can tell.

Dr. Kissinger : Joseph Alsop is going to China and will seek an interview with the Prime Minister. If you could pay some attention to him, it would be very useful.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Mr. Galbraith said what you told me he would say.

Dr. Kissinger I want to tell you that I appreciate very much your seeing him.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: And we found he had very clear ideas on the India-Pakistan crisis.

Dr. Kissinger : All wrong.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Really? At the time of the Security Council debate on the entry of Bangladesh, I told Galbraith that we were not opposed to Bangladesh. I said that we thought the people of Bangladesh were good and that we had no prejudice against its leader, but the main thing was to implement the UN resolutions. Galbraith said he was in complete agreement with me, and wondered why Bangladesh was in such a hurry. He said that China was outside the UN for 24 years—it was really 22 years - and that they also should be able to wait 24 years.

Dr. Kissinger : He was very impressed with his meeting with you. He called me when he got back. Vice Minister Ch'iao: I was very much impressed by his views. I thought he was reasoning things out, but you know better. He is your old friend.

Dr. Kissinger : He is a very intelligent and decent man, very influential among American intellectuals, and I thought it was important that you see him. He had a very good impression of the Vice Foreign Minister.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: We feel we can make friends with those who are honest.

Dr. Kissinger : The Prime Minister made quite an impression on Foreign Secretary Home with respect to problems where he needed to have an impression on him, including India-Pakistan and Bangladesh.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: We talked about the same questions, not only with Home, but Schumann. We are realistic; we are not windbags.

Dr. Kissinger : That is rare among Foreign Ministers these days. In this sense you had a very good influence on the Europeans.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Tomorrow I leave for Britain, and I will probably have a chance to see Lord Home.

Dr. Kissinger : lam sure. If necessary, I will talk with him about this some more.

Dr. Kissinger : In many European countries—this is not true of Home—the left wing is influenced by Moscow. It is very useful to hear from Peking a different assessment of international affairs. Because you are very realistic and not windbags. This is very helpful. I talked to Schumann, Scheel and Home after you. I believe with. respect to Europe in this his torical period our interests are practically identical.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Yes, indeed.

(Dr. Kissinger then got up to propose a toast, which follows):

“This is a very informal occasion, but is also a very notable occasion because I think it is the first opportunity that we in Washington have had to entertain on a social occasion senior officials from the People's Republic of China. When we look back on the last four years, the most important event in a very dramatic four years has been the first visit to China. It has brought an entirely new perspective to all of us.

“If I may say so, although you are a communist country we greatly respect people who deal with events in terms of objective circumstances and we recognize that you are people who have fought for your ideal in a way that trivial people would not do. You are also people who very strongly defend principle, and we can rely on your word. We deal with you in frankness, openness and mutual trust. We have many shared objectives, some of which were reflected in the Shanghai Communique, and some of which were as discussed tonight at the dinner table. We both oppose hegemony. We both are dedicated to the independence of nations. And we both are dedicated to the principles discussed so much during the visit to China, and which appeared in the Shanghai Communique.

“On our side, a week after the President's election, I assure you that the normalization of relations with the People's Republic of China is not a tactical development but a profound historical necessity which we will pursue with greater vigor during the new Administration. We will do this because we believe in it. The principles of the Shanghai Communique will be embellished in the next Administration, and we will make the transition in our relations from adversaries to friendship—a friendship which already exists at the human level between our peoples and our governments.

“I propose a toast to the Chinese and American people, to the Vice Foreign Minister, and to an accelerated improvement in our relations.”

(Vice Minister Ch'iao then rose to make his own toast.)

Vice Minister Ch'iao: In the past two years, in the improvement of relations between China and the U.S. all people will remember one person without a name—who is here tonight, “Mr. Doctor”—who has made outstanding contributions. And we also hope that in the relations between our two countries we will continue t o overcome various obstacles and difficulties and head toward accelerated normalization.

At this time here I would like to express congratulations on the reelection of President Nixon.

I think all agree—I agree with the views of our many friends and our friend whose name I forgot. Therefore, I propose a toast to the man whose name I forgot, to Mr. Governor, and to all our friends and the great people ;of our two countries and our great friendship. (Sits down.)

At the banquet in Shanghai, the President said something that our northern friend attacked us about.

It was just a sentence, and was nothing very serious in the first place. He said that when the Chinese and American peoples were united, they would be invincible in the world. They (the northern friends) said from this that China and the U.S. were united against the Soviet Union.

Dr. Kissinger : They said it to us, too.

Governor Rockefeller: They attacked you because it is true.

Dr. Kissinger : On the statement that “this was the week that changed the world” they attacked us. We meant both sentences. It changed the world and it is in our interest to stay together with you.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: This sentence is correct in the first place.

Dr. Kissinger : Both are correct.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: It would indicate the changed situation in the world. And if our two people unite, why not?

Dr. Kissinger : It is not directed against anyone but it is a peaceful intent.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: I have told many friends that we are very patient in our negotiations with our Soviet friends. Why should we oppose the Soviet Union? It is not true. We are not opposed, although we are not in agreement with their policy.

Dr. Kissinger : It is an amazing thing. We make many agreements with the Soviet Union. We always tell you, but there are no complaints. You are not opposed.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: We are not that kind of people, with absolutely subjective views. We know that different countries have different views and different ways. of acting. We don't demand that all the people in the world act as we do.

Dr. Kissinger : You are very self-confident.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Our self-confidence comes from the fact that we have no expansionist intention nor any ulterior motive. We only defend our rights.

Dr. Kissinger : It is important that we both oppose expansionism by others.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: We also oppose the hegemony of any country. We jointly oppose the hegemony of any country. We related the same position to Mr. Tanaka and Mr. Ohira. On the question of Japan, I don't know what you feel. We told you our attitude.

Dr. Kissinger : First, we appreciate the fair way you kept us informed about your moves. Second, we have no objection to the normalization of relations between Japan and the People's Republic. I think we have a common interest in not exciting Japan's nationalistic ambitions too much, because even if at first it turns against one of us, at the first change it could turn against the other.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: It was the same with Germany, the Nazis. Nazi Germany first opposed one country and then the other.

Dr. Kissinger : So, if we can keep that principle which we have established in mind, we think that Sino-Japanese relations can be very useful.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: We will firmly carry out this policy. The last time Ohira was in the United States, he first talked to you, and then he talked to me.

Dr. Kissinger : When be was in New York City.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: In a reception I said that we very much hoped that Japan would maintain friendly relations with all of her neighbors, with the U.S. and the Soy-let Union and China and other countries.

Governor Rockefeller: Good.

Dr. Kissinger : The danger with Japan is the one the Prime Minister mentioned to me at our last meeting. If it is too full of pride in its achievements it might become very nationalistic. But if countries like you and we encourage it in a moderate direction, we can control that. We have noticed you have not discouraged them from maintaining military relations with us, and you will notice we have not discouraged them from maintaining economic and political relations with you.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: We are very clear about this point and I think both of us must make efforts, particularly you, to prevent Japan from embarking on the old track of expansionism and aggression.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, you can be sure.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: We talked with Tanaka and Ohira about this question, because the results of embarking on the old road would be dangerous and not in the interest of Japan itself.

Dr. Kissinger : We should keep ourselves generally informed.

Vice Minister Chiao: Mr. Doctor, you have greater influence in Japan than China does, so you have greater responsibility. I speak honestly.

Dr. Kissinger : You are right. But if we compete with each other and encourage Japan then neither has any influence. We will encourage Japan in a moderate direction and keep you generally informed. I think it would be helpful if we kept each other informed. Our interests are mutual.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Please rest assured that we will inform you of the general spirit of what we talk about with Japan.

Dr. Kissinger : You have been very correct.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Because a revival of Japanese militarism would not be good for Japan, nor to the interests of China or yourself. Either they would attack you or us and in the end be defeated.

Dr. Kissinger : Right.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: We draw profound lessons from history. We have less to say than you, except in culture. Our attitude is more influential in economic and political problems, the U.S. in military ones.

Dr. Kissinger : Right. On political and military matters, the U.S. has more influence, but in the long range cultural sense, you have more.

Vice Minister Chiao: Correct. But that is caused by history.

Dr. Kissinger : And by Japanese greed.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: That is a problem.

Governor Rockefeller: I suggest that as an observation on Japan, that Japanese economic cooperation with China, and Japanese economic cooperation with other countries should be balanced, so that there is not a one-sided influence.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: I agree. We don't talk behind the backs of the Japanese. We also tell the Japanese that. What Mr. Governor has said is correct, but it is impossible for Japan to be excessively linked with China economically unless China becomes a colony of Japan. I tell you in confidence we will not repeat fifty years of history.

Governor Rockefeller: I understand.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Some Japanese friends who are sober-minded also understand this. Governor Rockefeller That's good. Vice Minister Ch'iao: Another subject I would like to talk about is Vietnam. You understand our position. We will not get involved in this question, but we earnestly hope that you will settle it in a very good way. We have our own positions and many questions, but today we will not debate. We can talk about it in Peking.

Indeed this is a very important question. If the Vietnam question cannot be solved, then the Indochina question cannot be solved, and this will be a very difficult problem in the relations between our two countries. This is the overall significance.

Dr. Kissinger : I agree. I hope when I am in Peking we will have a signed agreement. I will not ask you to give me a reply, but when Le Duc Tho comes to Paris be will undoubtedly stop in Peking. The great thing about the Prime Minister's conversations with me and the President was that be could distinguish between what is essential from the trivial, and he remained objective. The North Vietnamese have one difficulty—they are a small country and they do not have your largeness of spirit—they cant keep the larger view and not get bogged down in detail. If be comes to Paris with this largeness of spirit, I am certain we can reach a fair solution. If there is a period of quiet so normal forces can begin to assert themselves, then I believe that Indochina will disappear as an issue between our two countries. This is our highest objective.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: I am going to tell you my personal opinion. You said that the Vietnamese side and the American side have made many mistakes. You know and we know that we are not in agreement with you on those questions. I will not debate it here. But recently Saigon has made many, many statements and has put forward positions which make the whole situation insoluble. That's what I'm worried about. That is my personal opinion. I think that after over more than one year of contact between us we have identical positions on many questions. Anyway, we must think of a way out.

I think you still remember before when you were embarking on the plane, Prime Minister Cbou En-Lai said to the President that Vietnam is a small country and the U.S. should assume a high profile.

Dr. Kissinger : I understood the Prime Minister.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: A high vantage point. I think a country like yours can make some concessions. Maybe you can't accept this. I speak what I think. I don't want to humiliate you. I have no intention.

Dr. Kissinger : No, no, we are speaking as friends.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: For example, the question of the presence of North Vietnamese troops in the South. If you make too big an issue of it, Hanoi cannot possibly accept, and your views will fundamentally be untenable. I think Prime Minister Chou En-Lal stated to you that we indeed understand the feeling of the Vietnamese people, and you should show some statesmanship to such a fighting and courageous small country. For example, you talk about the propaganda from Hanoi. You should not blame them on this and take what they say to heart. Anyway, we should think of a way out of this question, though it is a small question, if it is not solved, then others cannot be solved.

Dr. Kissinger : I agree. First we must make an effort to find a way out. We are looking at this in a statesmanlike way, and we are not supporting all of Saigon's points. On the other band, we cannot totally ignore a country in which we have fought and where we are still fighting. It is not unreasonable that they make requests. We are willing to be generous, but we will not back all their demands. We can see from the radio that they are not satisfied. Nobody can respect us if we overthrow a country we have supported. If people see us as being totally cynical, then in other difficult situations there is a problem. We will not make an excessive issue of the North Vietnamese troops. They must make some concession, but we do not ask them to make all. They do not have to make all the concessions; we will make some too and approach them half way, but they must do something. Your influence could be very helpful. I know you have your principles, as we have ours. I have experienced yours, usually after midnight (laughter).

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Mr. “X” (laughter), I am not Le Duc Tho. I do not represent Le Duc Tho. It would be a good thing to settle this question.

Dr. Kissinger : My own estimate is that by the time I come to Peking, if Hanoi shows any reasonableness, this will be settled.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: I won't discuss this with you. I will only say one word. I studied philosophy.

Dr. Kissinger : So did I.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: So we're in the same line. One should not lose the whole world just to gain South Vietnam. Perhaps the Governor will not agree with me, but you're too much involved in South Vietnam.

Governor Rockefeller: I don't think we will lose the whole world.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: There are many causes. I talked philosophy with you last year. The results of the India-Pakistan question were that you were too much involved. You may not agree,, and treat me as a professor treats a student.

Dr. Kissinger : I agree that there is something in what you say, but if we are humiliated in Indochina we will not be able to do anything anywhere else. The Governor is more experienced than I am, and knows this.

Governor Rockefeller: Just as a politician.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: You are modest.

Governor Rockefeller: As an observer rather than a politician, we have been through a period of politics for North Vietnam, South Vietnam and the U.S., partly having to do with the elections. Now we can say that the time has come to get together and settle.

Vice Minister Chiao: Because now you are in the position to settle the question.

Governor Rockefeller: Now we are in a position to settle.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: That is not to say that we hope that somebody is humiliated. Nobody should be humiliated.

Dr. Kissinger : On that basis we can certainly settle within a month. My honest judgment is that it is 80 - 85 percent settled, and it would be a great tragedy if the remaining differences were to stop an agreement.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: I'm a little worried about the question of North Vietnamese troops in South Vietnam. If you act like the propaganda in Saigon it will be difficult.

Dr. Kissinger : I will tell you informally that we will not go nearly so far as the propaganda in Saigon, but Hanoi must cooperate and give us something. Then we can go to Saigon and say this is all we can get. But if Hanoi does nothing then there is a problem. I can assure you that we will not go nearly so far as Saigon.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: I told you now that I am not Le Duc Tho.

Dr. Kissinger : We need a face-saving formula. You know how much importance we Westerners attach to face.

Vice Minister Ch'iao: Just like Orientals! You have talked with us one year and more, and you know that the Chinese are frank and honest.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, and they always keep their word.

(The Chinese soon took their leave in a most cordial fashion.)

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Presumably drafted by either Holdridge or Lord. Ellipses and brackets in the source text. The meeting was held at the Century Club. Also in attendance on the U.S. side were Governor Nelson Rockefeller (R-New York) and Haig.

167. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 31, 1972, 3:30-3:55 p.m. 167. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 31, 1972, 3:30-3:55 p.m.1

New York, October 31, 1972, 3:30-3:55 p.m.

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

Following is a report of a meeting with Mrs. Shih at the Chinese Mission in New York on October 31, 1972.

I entered the Chinese Mission at 3:30 p.m., was greeted by Mrs. Shih, and escorted to the second floor. Tea was served and pleasantries exchanged.

Mrs. Shih presented the note (attached) and asked that it be forwarded to Dr. Kissinger. I read the note and had no questions. Mrs. Shih then said she had an oral message to pass to Dr. Kissinger.

“The Vice Foreign Minister and the Ambassador appreciate Dr. Kissinger kind invitation to dinner. However, they are sorry that they cannot accept it. Since the invitation came on short notice, the Vice Foreign Minister had made other plans. Perhaps we can discuss another date later.”

After making this presentation, Mrs. Shih immediately turned the conversation to general amenities.

I departed the Mission at 3:55 p.m. and telephoned Winston Lord with a gist of the note and the oral message.

V. James Fazio
Deputy Director
Situation Room

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held at the PRC Mission at the UN.

168. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 16, 1972, 2:30-3:10 p.m. 168. Memorandum for the Record, New York, October 16, 1972, 2:30-3:10 p.m.1

New York, October 16, 1972, 2:30-3:10 p.m.

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

October 17, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

The following is a report of a meeting with Mrs. Shih at the Chinese Mission in New York on October 16, 1972.

I entered the Mission at 2:30 p.m. and was greeted by Mrs. Shih and escorted to the second floor. Tea was served and pleasantries exchanged.

I handed the message (attached) to Mrs. Shih and told her Dr. Kissinger asked that it be conveyed to the Ambassador as soon as possible. Mrs. Shih read the message and said she had no questions.

In the general conversation that followed, Mrs. Shih made the following comments: — She was pleased to see the President had received the Chinese medical delegation.

— She commented on the photos in Life magazine of Chinese Mission personnel. (This was done in a light vein.)

— I noticed workmen in the area and Mrs. Shih said they were installing a closed-circuit TV.

— I departed the Mission at 3:10 p.m. with Mrs. Shih's greetings to all.

V. James Fazio
Deputy Director
Situation Room

The U.S. side considers that an agreement is near in its negotiations with the Democratic Republic of Vietnam with respect to the conflict in Southeast Asia. One of the remaining issues in the effort to achieve a negotiated settlement of the conflict relates to the question of restricting military supplies to both North and South Vietnam by outside powers. The Democratic Republic of Vietnam has insisted that there can be no international restrictions on the amount of military aid it will receive from outside powers while on the other hand there must be precisely such restrictions with regard to aid for South Vietnam.

While the U.S. side is prepared to accept limitations on American military aid to South Vietnam under the terms of the settlement, such a one-sided limitation will not be understood by the American public, on whose support the viability of any arrangements depends. Moreover, such a one-sided arrangement would violate the principle of reciprocity and equality of commitments which must be the foundation of any lasting settlement.

The question of how restrictions on military aid to North Vietnam may be formulated in the actual agreement on the settlement is less important than the actual conduct, in practice, of the countries which are the principal military suppliers of the North Vietnamese. Therefore, in assessing its willingness to undertake what are essentially unilateral written obligations on this outstanding point, the U.S. side would welcome some indication from the Government of the People's Republic of China as to what policies it will pursue in regard to United States and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.

As soon as a settlement is arrived at, Dr. Kissinger will be prepared to explore other outstanding issues of Indochina, especially the problem of Cambodia.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, June 25, 1972-Oct 17, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. A handwritten notation on the attached message reads: “Handed to Mrs. Shih by J. Fazio, Oct 16, 1972, NYC.”

169. Memorandum of Conversation, Paris, November 25, 1972, 12:35-1:30 a.m. 169. Memorandum of Conversation, Paris, November 25, 1972, 12:35-1:30 a.m.1

Paris, November 25, 1972, 12:35-1:30 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS:

Ambassador Huang Chen, PRC Ambassador to Paris

Mr. Tsao, Political Counselor, PRC Embassy

Mr. Ling, Interpreter, PRC Embassy

Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Mr. Jack P. Kubisch, U.S. Charge d'Affaires, Paris

Winston Lord, NSC Staff

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

DATE & TIME: Saturday, November 25, 1972; 12:35 a.m. 1:30 a.m.

PLACE: PRC Embassy, Paris, France

(The American party was greeted at the door by Mr. Tsao and escorted inside the Embassy where Ambassador Huang greeted Dr. Kissinger warmly. He took the American party into the living room. There was some small talk, including Ambassador Huang's and Dr. Kissinger's mutual pleasure at seeing one another again.)

Ambassador Huang: You are busy.

Dr. Kissinger : I am caught between two groups of Vietnamese fighting each other. It is a terrible fate.

Ambassador Huang: The Chinese have a saying, “galloping all the time on horseback.” (laughter)

Dr. Kissinger : That was recently translated into Italian.

Ambassador Huang: Seeing you reminds me of my old friend, General Walters.

Dr. Kissinger : He is now in Washington. I see him often.

Ambassador Huang: I also remember my old colleague, Ambassador Watson. lam glad to hear that he and Mrs. Watson will be in Paris November 27.

Mr. Kubisch: Mr. Watson is coming then and Mrs. Watson later.

Ambassador Huang: I think when Mr. Watson comes he will ask to go to China.

Dr. Kissinger : His daughter wishes to go to China as well.

Ambassador Huang: And a friend of Miss Watson's also.

Dr. Kissinger : I think the Ambassador has learned English. (Ambassador Huang indicates he has picked up some.)

Ambassador Huang: Mr. Watson is an old friend, and the Chinese People's Institute will invite them. If Miss Watson and her friend travel with Mr. and Mrs. Watson, they will be the guests of the Chinese People's Institute. If Miss Watson and her friend go alone, the trip will be arranged by the travel agency.

Dr. Kissinger : I was thinking again on going to China, as you probably know. I am serious—I am thinking of going in early January.

Ambassador Huang: You are welcome whenever you wish to go to China.

Dr. Kissinger : I look forward to it very much, but I must lose weight first because I know I gain whenever I go there.

Ambassador Huang: How much did you gain last time when I was there to welcome you?

Dr. Kissinger : Four or five pounds.

Ambassador Huang: (In French) Pas beaucoup.

Dr. Kissinger : That was because I only had five meals a day.

Ambassador Huang: I am sorry I couldn't see you from 7:00 to 8:00 tonight. I held a reception for the medical delegation which just visited your country.

Dr. Kissinger : I saw them at the White House, and the President saw them. I had an opportunity to shake their hands.

Ambassador Huang: Our medical delegation told me a lot of things about their visit to the U.S. They are very much satisfied to be received by President Nixon and some other friends. They also told me that they saw Dr. Kissinger. We are satisfied that the Chinese delegations, including the medical delegation, were warmly received by the American Government. A few days ago our acrobatic team arrived in Canada and will go on later to the United States.

Dr. Kissinger : They will come to America in December, around December 15.

Ambassador Huang: We have encouraged them to put on a performance to display their best technique to the American people.

Dr. Kissinger : I look forward to seeing them. I visited the Institute where they were training when we were in Peking in June.

Ambassador Huang: This time you will have an opportunity to see if their technique has improved.

Dr. Kissinger : I look forward to seeing them. [To Lord]: Are they coming to Washington?

Mr. Lord: They will be at the Kennedy Center in January.

Ambassador Huang: Now we are discussing with Mr. Kubisch the exposition of unearthed relics.

Dr. Kissinger : That includes the jade costumes from the Imperial City.

Ambassador Huang: There is something better than that.

Dr. Kissinger : Your collection is going to New York.

Ambassador Huang: First it is coming to Paris, and then it will go to other countries and after that it will go to the U.S.

I have learned that President Nixon and you are very much concerned with the Paris channel between our two sides.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes. We have a very great interest in it.

Ambassador Huang: We are very satisfied to see the progress between our two sides through this channel, and we hope that the channel will see further progress in the future.

Dr. Kissinger : We hope to see the Ambassador in America sometime soon. (Ambassador Huang smiles.) We consider relations with the Peoples Republic as one of the most important aspects of our foreign policy. As I told your Vice Foreign Minister, what we started in the previous Administration we will accelerate now that the President is reelected, and we expect to take large steps toward normalization of our relations. (Dr. Kissinger repeats the substance when Mr. Ling has trouble understanding.) It is our firm intention.

Ambassador Huang: Yes, I read the speech delivered by President Nixon.

Dr. Kissinger : Ambassador Malik was very happy when your Vice Minister left New York (laughter). The Minister always torments him.

Ambassador Huang: He appeared to be quite fierce last year.

Dr. Kissinger : Ambassador Malik?

Interpreter: Ambassador Malik.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes.

Ambassador Huang: I have learned that this year he is not as fierce as last year.

Dr. Kissinger : He has been intimidated.

Ambassador Huang: Why? They have so many atom bombs and so many troops. They have more than one million troops along the Chinese border. They are quite strong. Why be afraid?

Dr. Kissinger : They are very nervous.

(Mr. Tsao starts to leave the room and is called back by the Ambassador.)

Ambassador Huang: It is too late to invite you to eat some Chinese food. The Chinese custom is to entertain our guests in any event with some Chinese food. This will be more simple than a meal. (Mr. Tsao leaves.)

Dr. Kissinger : I am sorry that I could not accept your very nice invitation.

Ambassador Huang: I know you didn't have time. I hope sometime in the future you can do so.

Dr. Kissinger : I would be honored. I am told by the Minister [Kubisch] you serve the best Chinese food in Paris.

Ambassador Huang: One of the menus for the meals during President Nixon's visit to China was published here in Paris and gave a great boon to Chinese restaurants in Paris. So we intended to try our best to make the dishes according to the menu for the President. Many of our friends who come to our embassy to have a Chinese dinner have never been to China, and since they don't know the dishes in China they say we have the best food in Paris. Actually it is not so good as Peking. The other day Mr. Kubisch also said that our dishes were good. If Mr. Kubisch went to China he would say they were not so good here.

Mr. Kubisch: It is hard to believe that it would be better in Peking than here in your embassy, Mr. Ambassador. It is so delicious.

Ambassador Huang: Dr. Kissinger must know very well that the food in Peking is better than the food here.

Dr. Kissinger : I have never had a meal here, but I know the food in Peking is outstanding.

Ambassador Huang: I hope to entertain you in the future.

Dr. Kissinger : I hope there will not be too many more trips to Paris on this particular enterprise on which I am engaged, though I am always delighted to see the Ambassador.

Ambassador Huang: I am also very glad to see Dr. Kissinger. How many days longer will Dr. Kissinger stay in Paris?

Dr. Kissinger : I will decide tomorrow. I will decide tomorrow whether we can finish quickly or whether I should have to come back. When we have made a decision I will let the Minister call you just for your information. (Ambassador Huang nods).

(Warm snacks, including spring rolls, were then brought in, adding to the tea already there.)

Ambassador Huang: According to the broadcast today, we learned that today you and the Vietnamese side once again held talks.

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, I had a private talk today with Le Duc Tho, with only my Deputy, General Haig, and myself present. On the Vietnamese side were Le Duc Tho and Xuan Thuy. (Ambassador Huang then led the party in a round of gombays with mao tai.)

Ambassador Huang: I learned that President Nixon's daughter would like to go to China.

Dr. Kissinger : She would like to go next spring.

Ambassador Huang: If she would like to go, it is better to go in the spring.

Dr. Kissinger : That is her intent. I was going to talk to your Ambassador in New York about it.

We are very pleased the way this channel is working and very pleased at the efforts you are making. You and I established it. (Ambassador Huang smiles.)

Ambassador Huang: I should say that Mr. Watson and I cooperated very well. Although our cooperation did not last very long, we cooperated very well. Of course, I am cooperating very well with Mr. Kubisch now.

Dr. Kissinger : Is he behaving himself?

Ambassador Huang: He is a very good collaborator.

Dr. Kissinger : If he gives you any trouble, let me know.

Ambassador Huang: At one time Mr. Kubisch was in the Navy and I was an Army man once, and thus we are colleagues.

Dr. Kissinger : Maybe we will see a General as Ambassador here after January 1.

Ambassador Huang: That would be fine. In that case your Ambassador and I would be at the same time colleagues and Generals.

Dr. Kissinger : You would be planning military campaigns all the time.

Ambassador Huang: Frankness is one of the characteristics of Generals, of army men, so we can exchange views very frankly.

Dr. Kissinger : Absolutely. (not translated) We want this channel to develop more and more.

Ambassador Huang: We hope the same. Gombay! (The party then drinks more mao tai.)

Dr. Kissinger : If they have to carry me and the Minister into the Embassy, I won't tell them where we have been. (Ambassador Huang laughs.)

Ambassador Huang: In that case it will be spread in the papers tomorrow.

Dr. Kissinger : That would be quite serious. In Washington they are happy with anything I do as long as I am not photographed with a girl. (Ambassador Huang laughs.)

Ambassador Huang: A few days ago I saw a picture of Dr. Kissinger together with the wife of a friend. The introduction to the article made this clear.

Dr. Kissinger : That's living very dangerously. (Ambassador Huang laughs.) He [the husband] made the reservations for us at lunch.

Ambassador Huang: These are the small hours, and we are still keeping you up. Will you go on with your talks tomorrow?

Dr. Kissinger : Yes, we will go on tomorrow. I have another private meeting with Le Duc Tho in the morning, and after that we will decide whether to continue or to interrupt for a few days.

Ambassador Huang: What do you think the prospects are for this round of talks? (Mr. Tsao takes out his notebook and begins taking notes.)

Dr. Kissinger : We've settled many problems. I want to be honest with you. We would like to make peace. We have nothing to win in Vietnam. If we can normalize our relations with Peking, we can normalize our relations with Hanoi. And I think our interests—that is, the interests of Peking and Washington—are not too different. At least we want only a neutral, independent Indochina. We don't want any foreign powers that are far away establishing a military position there. But we also have our principles, and we cannot make an agreement when our allies feel that we are sacrificing all their concerns.

There is one principal problem, which is the presence of so many North Vietnamese troops in South Vietnam. They tell us that these are not North Vietnamese troops, and for reasons of their principles, we are willing to maintain what we know is a fiction. But if the North Vietnamese, outside of the agreement, would withdraw some troops, or would make some gesture that indicated they understood the problem which would enable us to preserve the principle, we think we could settle quite rapidly.

And it is difficult to imagine that having come this close to an agreement, we should fail now. But if we cannot get an agreement, we must prosecute the war. And I tell you, really in friendship, given the dangers I foresee in the world outside Vietnam it cannot be in the interests of some of our friends to pressure us to give up our principles, because we will be in many difficult situations where we will have to make difficult decisions when greater powers are involved. (Dr. Kissinger repeats the substance when Mr. Ling has trouble understanding.) In Vietnam this is the issue. We want to settle. But if the American people are told that the U.S. will do anything to have peace, then if some great power with aggressive tendencies engages in aggression, it will be very difficult to appeal to our people to resist them as we in the White House believe we should resist them.

So, we want to make a genuine peace, but we must have some recognition that we too have the respect of our allies to consider. That is the principal issue right now.

Ambassador Huang: Because we are friends, I would like to use this opportunity to say some sincere words about the Vietnam problem to Mr. Kissinger. Mr. Kissinger is surely aware of the Chinese position on the Vietnam problem. (During this presentation, Mr. Ling is clearly reading from a prepared English text, as he takes very few notes on what the Ambassador is saying, merely seeming to correct a few words on his notebook as the Ambassador speaks.)

Dr. Kissinger : Yes. (not translated)

Ambassador Huang: I should very frankly say that we very much regret that you did not sign the agreement which was scheduled in October.

Now it seems very clear that you acted that way in order to suit your own unilateral needs. During recent days, according to what we have gotten to know, the Vietnamese side has been carrying on the talks with great flexibility. Considering the situation as a whole, they have made all the concessions which they can make. Now everything is up to your side. If once again you fail to reach an agreement with them, how can you achieve trust in others? Besides such a result will only benefit someone who is contending for hegemony. I would like to repeat again that since we are friends that is all I want to say sincerely about the Vietnam problem to you.

Dr. Kissinger : I understand. I appreciate it. But let me as a friend speak equally sincerely to you. You have your own experience with us. You know we have kept every promise we have made to you, and we always believe that reliability is a very important principle. (Ambassador Huang confers with his colleagues and Mr. Kubisch repeats the word “reliability.”)

But what did we face with the Vietnamese? For four years I was negotiating with them and there was never any change in their position. They always said exactly the same thing for four years. Suddenly on October 8 they wanted to settle a war that has lasted ten years in three days. In order to show our good will, we cooperated with a procedure which was, to put it mildly, very extraordinary. We always told them that we had to consult our allies. Despite our best efforts, we did not succeed in October. If we had wanted to trap them, if we had wanted to delay the agreement, we could have delayed by arguing about specific provisions indefinitely. But we cooperated with them, and they are now trying to pressure us with this. Now they are giving us deadlines again. They first make an unreasonable demand, then they withdraw it and claim they have made a concession. And they want to trade giving up unreasonable demands for real concessions on our side. That is the difficulty.

When we dealt with you, we did so on an open basis. You never tried to take advantage of us, and I hope we never tried to take advantage of you. If they ever talk to us the way you do, we will settle in one day. It would be very easy.

But again this week they have changed some wording in paragraphs that have no concrete significance. For example, to give one example, there is a paragraph concerning the ceasefire going into effect which specifies Indochina time. Now it turns out that there is a Saigon time and a Hanoi time. Now we have agreed to use GMT. You have to admit, speaking here privately, that this is not a big concession. It is nothing about which history will be written some day. (Ambassador Huang smiles. Or maybe I am missing the significance.

And we clarified a few other sentences, so that esthetically it is a better document now. (Mr. Ling does not understand “esthetically. ) It reads better for experts who have studied grammar.

So this is the problem. I still think we can settle. But you see another problem is that there are hundreds of American journalists in town, all of whom talk to the North Vietnamese and all of whom happen to dislike the President. (Ambassador Huang smiles.) Despite their dislike, the President got elected by 61 percent of the vote. The Vietnamese must not listen to the journalists. They have listened for too long. The President always means what he says. His word counts. We can have peace this month—what is it now?—we can have peace in December. But there has to be an effort on both sides. But we have narrowed the differences this week. It's not true that it depends only on us.

I am sorry I have made such a long speech.

Ambassador Huang: This is our view, that everything depends on your side.

Dr. Kissinger : We don't completely agree.

Ambassador Huang: Of course, we know that you will not agree completely, but I tell you this as friends.

Dr. Kissinger : I appreciate the spirit in which you say this, and I hope that when I visit China in January, when the Prime Minister and I meet, we will not have to talk about Vietnam.

Ambassador Huang: (In English): Very good!

Dr. Kissinger : The Prime Minister said something to the press. I have already complained to the Vice Minister about it. When an American newspaperman asked him a question, he said he has to give a direct answer. The only man who talks a half hour without saying anything is Mr. Kissinger, he said. He was right, but I had kept that from the press. (The Chinese side appeared to misinterpret the tone, thinking Dr. Kissinger was displeased by the Prime Ministers comments.)

Ambassador Huang: We wonder if the journalists added anything to what Prime Minister Chou Enlai said.

Dr. Kissinger : It was a joke. He meant it as a joke.

Ambassador Huang: It has happened several times that some journalists going from here have twisted what the Prime Minister said here. (Mr. Tsao helps with the translation.)

Dr. Kissinger : But I took it as a compliment. He said it with affection. It was not said as criticism.

Ambassador Huang: The peaceful solution of Vietnam is the burning issue at this moment. I hope when you visit the Prime Minister next year, it will not be necessary to talk about Vietnam again.

Dr. Kissinger : I agree completely.

Ambassador Huang: It is the common desire of the people all over the world, including the American people, the Vietnamese people, and the Chinese people, that the Vietnam war come to an end.

I took part in the current general conference of UNESCO, as head of the Chinese delegation. During the conference I met your head of the delegation to the conference. (Dr. Kissinger asks Mr. Kubisch who that was, and the latter mentioned that it was a Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Cultural Affairs, together with the Ambassador.)

I congratulated the President for his reelection through the head of your delegation.

Dr. Kissinger : Thank you.

Ambassador Huang: Please once again convey my greetings to Mr. President.

Dr. Kissinger : I will do so with the greatest pleasure, and if you could convey my greetings to the Prime Minister and how much I look forward to seeing him again.

(Dr. Kissinger then gets up to leave. Ambassador Huang escorts the American party to the door in a very cordial atmosphere. Mr. Tsao mentions to Mr. Lord that “you have been very busy.” The Chinese party stands on the steps outside the Embassy and waves as the American party drives away.)

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The meeting was held at the PRC Embassy in Paris.

170. Backchannel Message From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to William Hood, Washington, December 18, 1972, 2240Z 170. Backchannel Message From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to William Hood, Washington, December 18, 1972, 2240Z1

Washington, December 18, 1972, 2240Z

FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER

TO:

WILLIAM HOOD

CO 132240Z DEC 72

CITE SW0005

DECEMBER 13, 1972

TO: WILLIAM HOOD

FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER

PLEASE DELIVER THE FOLLOWING MESSAGE TO YOUR CUSTOMER:

BEGIN TEXT: THE U.S. SIDE WISHES TO INFORM THE CHINESE SIDE THAT IT REMAINS PREPARED TO SIGN AN AGREEMENT ON VIETNAM WHICH WOULD MEET THE ASPIRATIONS OF THE WORLD'S PEOPLES. TO THIS END, IT HAS SENT A MESSAGE TO THE DRV SIDE, THE TEXT OF WHICH IS ATTACHED.

THE U.S. SIDE WISHES TO POINT OUT THAT REPETITION OF UNJUST CHARGES CAN ONLY COMPLICATE THE SITUATION. AN ANALYSIS OF THE U.S. MESSAGE CAN LEAVE NO DOUBT THAT ITS PROPOSALS DO NOT CONSTITUTE SUBSTANTIAL REVISIONS BUT RATHER THE MINIMUM CLARIFICATIONS REQUIRED. THESE POSITIONS HAVE ALREADY BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE DRV SIDE IN THE NEGOTIATIONS. SPECIFICALLY, WITH RESPECT TO THE DMZ QUESTION, THE DRV SIDE AGREED TO LANGUAGE ON NOVEMBER 23, 1972, WHICH IS ACCEPTABLE TO THE U.S. WITH RESPECT TO THE SIGNING PROCEDURE, THE DRV SIDE'S OWN PROPOSAL, AS DESCRIBED IN THE U.S. MESSAGE, WOULD PROVIDE AN ACCEPTABLE SOLUTION.

ON THE BASIS OF THE U.S. MESSAGE, THERE CAN BE A RAPID CONCLUSION OF THE NEGOTIATIONS AND RESTORATION OF PEACE. END TEXT.

AFTER CAREFUL REVIEW OF THE RECORD OF THE RECENT NEGOTIATING SESSIONS, THE U.S. SIDE HAS COME TO THE CONCLUSION THAT THE DRV SIDE WAS DELIBERATELY AND FRIVOLOUSLY DELAYING THE TALKS. THE U.S. SIDE WAS DETERMINED TO CONCLUDE THE NEGOTIATIONS RAPIDLY AND THIS CERTAINLY COULD HAVE BEEN ACCOMPLISHED IF THERE WERE RECIPROCAL GOOD WILL AND SERIOUS INTENT.

IN ORDER TO BRING THE NEGOTIATIONS TO A RAPID CONCLUSION, THE U.S. SIDE MAKES THE FOLLOWING PROPOSAL. WITH RESPECT TO THE SUBSTANCE OF THE AGREEMENT, THE TWO SIDES SHOULD RETURN TO THE TEXT AS IT EXISTED AT THE CONCLUSION OF THE SESSION OF NOVEMBER 23, 1972, EXCEPT FOR THE DELETION OF THE PHRASE “ADMINISTRATLVE STRUCTURE” IN ARTICLE 12(A) AND THE MAINTENANCE OF THE STRICTLY TECHNICAL CHANGES IN THE TEXT MUTUALLY AGREED IN THE EXPERTS MEETINGS IN DECEMBER. WITH RESPECT TO THE PROCEDURE FOR SIGNATURE, THIS SHOULD BE ON THE BASIS OF THE DRV PROPOSAL OF MONDAY, DECEMBER 11, 1972. ACCORDINGLY, THE UNITED STATES AND THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM SHOULD JOINTLY SIGN THE AGREEMENT, WHILE THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM AND THE PROVISIONAL REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH VIETNAM SHOULD SIGN SEPARATE DOCUMENTS WHICH WOULD BE IDENTICAL TO THE AGREEMENT, MINUS THE PREAMBLE, AND THUS CONTAIN ALL ITS OBLIGATIONS.

IN THE MEANTIME THERE SHOULD BE RAPID PROGRESS ON THE PROTOCOLS DESIGNED TO IMPLEMENT THE AGREEMENT. THE U.S. SIDE WISHES TO REEMPHASIZE THAT IT IS UNACCEPTABLE TO REINTRODUCE INTO THESE PROTOCOLS SUBSTANTIVE ISSUES WHICH CONFLICT WITH THE AGREEMENT ITSELF OR ATTEMPT TO REOPEN QUESTIONS ALREADY DECIDED.

ON THIS BASIS, DR. KISSINGER IS PREPARED TO MEET SPECIAL ADVISOR Le Duc Tho ON ANY DATE AFTER DECEMBER 26, 1972, TO BE CHOSEN BY THE DRV SIDE. IT MUST BE POINTED OUT THAT BECAUSE OF HIS OTHER RESPONSIBILITIES IT IS IMPOSSIBLE FOR DR. KISSINGER TO REMAIN IN PARIS FOR EXTENDED PERIODS OF TIME IN THE FUTURE. THE U.S. SIDE ALSO WANTS TO EMPHASIZE THAT THE PRESENT FRAMEWORK FOR A NEGOTIATED SETTLEMENT CANNOT BE MAINTAINED INDEFINITELY.

THE U.S. SIDE REITERATES ITS STRONG PREFERENCE FOR AN EARLY AND STABLE PEACE AND BELIEVES THAT A POSITIVE RESPONSE TO THIS MESSAGE WOULD CONSTITUTE A MAJOR BREAKTHROUGH TOWARD THAT GOAL.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive.

171. Backchannel Message From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig) to William Hood, Washington, December 22, 1972 171. Backchannel Message From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig) to William Hood, Washington, December 22, 19721

Washington, December 22, 1972

Message Delivered to North Vietnamese December 22, 1972

The U.S. side wants to take the occasion of Vice Minister Thach's remarks at the December 20 experts meeting to state the following:

The DRV Side's references to the past record concerning U.S. military actions contain distortions based on quotations taken out of context, a practice that the DRV side has resorted to with increasing frequency at recent meetings. As the DRV side well knows, the U.S. side unilaterally accepted some restrictions on its military actions so long as an agreement seemed imminent and the DRV side was negotiating in good faith. The U.S. side has repeatedly emphasized that these restrictions would be impossible to maintain if the negotiations no longer reflected a serious attitude by the DRV side. As its message of December 18, 1972 made clear, the U.S. side came to the conclusion that the DRV side was deliberately and frivolously delaying the talks during the session of December 4-13.

Both governments now confront a very grave decision. The choice is whether to slide into a continuation of the conflict or to make a serious final effort to reach a settlement at a time when agreement is so near. The U.S. side, preferring the latter course, proposes a meeting between Special Adviser Le Duc Tho and Dr. Kissinger January 3, 1973 in Paris on the basis of the U.S. message of December 18, 1972. Dr. Kissinger could set aside three days for the purpose of concluding the settlement.

If the DRV agrees to this meeting, the U.S., as a sign of its good will, will again suspend its bombing north of the 20th parallel starting as of midnight December 31 and lasting for the duration of the negotiating sessions. If an agreement is reached, this restriction will continue. The U.S. side reaffirms that it will stop all bombing and shelling against the territory of Democratic Republic of Vietnam within 48 hours of an agreement in Paris.

In the meantime the technical experts should at last start serious negotiations on the protocols associated with the agreement with a view to reaching agreement on these documents in time for a settlement during the meeting between Dr. Kissinger and Special Adviser Le Duc Tho.

BY WIRE

December 22, 1972

FROM: Haig

TO: Hood

The following two paragraphs are a replacement for the first paragraph sent earlier. The full message should include the following two paragraphs and the text of the message entitled, “Message Delivered to North Vietnamese December 22, 1972.”

Begin text:

The President would like to bring to the personal attention of the Chinese leadership the latest US proposal to the DRV. The US side wishes again to reiterate its readiness to settle rapidly and it conviction that this is a major contribution to easing tensions all over Asia.

The US side will be sending to the Chinese side later in the day the transcripts of the last two meetings between Dr. Kissinger and the North Vietnamese representatives so that the Chinese side can judge for itself who was serious in these discussions.

End text.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The time of transmission is not indicated on the backchannel message.

172. Memorandum for the Record, December 22, 1972, New York, 3:45-4:15 p.m. 172. Memorandum for the Record, December 22, 1972, New York, 3:45-4:15 p.m.1

New York, December 22, 1972, 3:45-4:15 p.m.

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

December 29, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

Following is a report of a meeting with Mrs. Shih at the Chinese Mission in New York on December 22, 1972.

I entered the Mission at 3:45 p.m., was greeted by Mrs. Shih and escorted to the second floor. Tea was served and pleasantries exchanged.

I presented the package to Mrs. Shih and explained that although Dr. Kissinger had intended to send two sets of the minutes, after reviewing the texts, he found that one was a repetition of the other. Therefore, she would receive only the December 13, 1972 transcript.

Mrs. Shih acknowledged that they were expecting two sets; however, she accepted the explanation. Mrs. Shih did not read the document, but counted the pages to make sure that it was complete.

I departed the Mission at 4:15 p.m.

V. James Fazio
Deputy Director
Situation Room

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive. Attached are a December 29 memorandum for the record by David Y. McManis, Director of the NSC Situation Room, recounting his meetings with Shih Yen-hua and a message from the Government of the United States to the Government of the People's Republic of China indicating that U.S. representatives in Paris would deliver a message to representatives of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. A handwritten notation on McManis' memorandum reads: “NOTE: USSR also received Dec. 11, 1972 & transcript on 12/23/72.” A handwritten notation on the message for the Chinese reads: “Delivered to NYC by McManis, 11:00 p.m. 12/28/72.”

173. Message From the Government of the United States to the Representatives of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, December 29, 1972 173. Message From the Government of the United States to the Representatives of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, December 29, 19721

December 29, 1972

MEMORANDUM

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

December 29, 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

On Saturday, December 23, 1972, I was directed by the Kissinger office to carry an envelope to Mrs. Shih of the PRC Mission in New York City. I met with Mrs. Shih at 10:00 a.m. and gave her the envelope. She looked at the contents but did not read them. Tea and light conversation followed for approximately 15 minutes, at which time I left and returned to Washington.

On December 28, 1972, I was again directed to carry a memorandum to Mrs. Shih at the PRC Mission in New York City. I met with her at 11:00 p.m. She read the contents and stated that there were no questions. After a brief interlude of tea and light conversation, I took my leave and went to the Sheraton Inn at LaGuardia, where I remained overnight. On the morning of December 29 I returned to Washington.

David Y. McManis

Director

Situation Room

Attached for the information of the Chinese side is a message which will be delivered by the U.S. side to the DRV representatives in Paris at 9:30 a.m. Paris time Friday, December 29, 1972.

U.S. MESSAGE TO DRV

December 29, 1972

The U.S. side has read the message of the DRV side of December 28, 1972. The U.S. accepts the following propositions: 1. Experts of the two sides will resume meetings on January 2, 1973.

2. A private meeting of Special Adviser Le Duc Tho and Minister Xuan Thuy with Dr. Kissinger will take place on January 8, 1973 in Paris.

U.S. liaison officers will be in touch with their North Vietnamese counterparts regarding specific arrangements for the meetings of experts as well as arrangements for alternating the meeting sites for the private meetings.

As indicated in its messages of December 22 and 27, 1972, the U.S. side will as a unilateral gesture cease the bombing of North Vietnam north of the 20th parallel by 7:00 p.m. Washington time on December 29, 1972.

The U.S. side wants to again affirm that it will make one final major effort to see whether a settlement within the October framework can be worked out. The U.S. side wants to point out that Dr. Kissinger will not be able to spend more than four days in Paris on this occasion. A repetition of the procedures followed in December could lead to a collapse of the talks.

The U.S. side enters these renewed negotiations with good will but urges the DRV side to study carefully the U.S. message of December 18, 1972. The decision must be made now whether it is possible to move from a period of hostility to one of normalization. This remains the U.S. goal which will be pursued with great seriousness.

In the interim it is essential that both sides show the maximum restraint in their public pronouncements.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. No classification markings.

174. Backchannel Message From William Hood to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Washington, December 29, 1972, 1711Z 174. Backchannel Message From William Hood to the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig), Washington, December 29, 1972, 1711Z1

Washington, December 29, 1972, 1711Z

TO :

GENERAL HAlG

291711Z DEC 72

CITE NEW YORK 0007

FM: HOOD

THE FOLLOWING MESSAGE WAS PICKED UP AT 1130 HOURS, 29 DECEMBER 1972.

BEGIN TEXT:

AT ABOUT 2020 HOURS ON DECEMBER 23, 1972, WHILE CARRYING OUT WANTON BOMBINGS OF THE DRV'S LANG SON AREA, WHICH ADJOINS CHINESE BORDERS, U.S. MILITARY AIRCRAFT WENT TO THE EXTENT OF FIRING A MISSILE INTO THE AREA OF TUNGHSING COUNTRY, KWANGSI PROVINCE, CHINA. THE POINT OF IMPACT WAS AT 21 DEGREES 39' 15” N, 107 DEGREES 29' 25” E. ON THE SPLINTERS ARE MARKINGS SHOWING THAT THE MISSILE WAS MADE THE U.S.A. THE CHINESE SIDE HEREBY LODGES A STRONG PROTEST WITH THE U.S. SIDE AGAINST THIS AND DEMANDS THAT IT TAKE EFFECTIVE MEASURES TO ENSURE AGAINST THE RECURRENCE OF SIMILAR INCIDENTS.

END TEXT.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Hood indicated that the message had been picked up at “1130 Hours, 29 December 1972.”

175. Backchannel Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to William Hood, December 30, 1972, 0420Z 175. Backchannel Message From the President's Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to William Hood, December 30, 1972, 0420Z1

December 30, 1972, 0420Z

FROM:GENERAL HAIG

TO:

HOOD

ZCZCSW006

300420Z

ZEM

VIA SWINGER

DECEMBER 29, 1972

TO: HOOD

FROM: GENERAL HAIG

CITE: SW0006

PLEASE DELIVER THE FOLLOWING MESSAGE AT 11:00 A.M. ON SATURDAY, DECEMBER 30, 1972:

BEGIN TEXT: THE U.S. SIDE HAS RECEIVED THE CHINESE MESSAGE CONCERNING THE IMPACT OF A U.S. MISSILE ON CHINESE TERRITORY. THE U.S. SIDE REGRETS THAT SUCH AN INCIDENT HAS OCCURRED. THE U.S. CONTINUES TO TAKE EVERY PRECAUTION TO GUARD AGAINST INCIDENTS OF THIS TYPE. A THOROUGH INVESTIGATION OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING THIS INCIDENT HAS BEEN LAUNCHED. IF IT IS DETERMINED THAT THE INCIDENT RESULTED FROM U.S. ACTIONS, APPROPRIATE MEASURES WILL BE TAKEN TO INSURE AGAINST A RECURRENCE. IN ANY EVENT, THE U.S. SIDE HOPES THAT THE NEGOTIATIONS NOW STARTING WILL MAKE THIS ISSUE MOOT. END TEXT.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 850, President's File-China Trip, China Exchanges, Oct 24, 1972-Dec 31, 1972. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only via Swinger. Haig dated the message December 29, although the message was not transmitted to Hood until December 30. It was received in the White House Situation Room at 10:01 a.m. on December 30.
